DIEV ET MON DRIOT

THE WHOLE works of W. Tyndall, John Frith, and Doct. Barnes, three worthy
Martyrs, and principal teachers of this Church of England, collected and
compiled in one Tome together, being before scattered, and now in Print here
exhibited to the Church. To the praise of God, and profit of all good
Christian Readers.

Mortui resurgent.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, and are to be sold at his shop under
Aldersgate. An. 1573.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

ARISE, FOR IT IS DAY.



A Table of the several Treatises contained in M. William Tyndals works.
A Preface to the Christian Reader. The life of Wylliam Tyndall. A protestation
of the state of the souls departed. A preface that he made before the v.
books of Moses. A prologue showing the use of the Scripture. Several
prologues that he made to the v. books of Moses. fol. 2. 7. 11. 15. 21.
Certain hard words expounded by him in the first, second, and fourth book
of Moses. fol. 5. 10. 16. A prologue upon the Prophet Jonas. 23. Prologues upon
the iiij. Evangelists. 32. Prologues upon the Epistles of S. Paul. 39.
Prologues upon the Epistles of S. Peter. 54. Prologues upon the iij. Epistles
of S. John. 55. The parable of the wicked Mammon. 59. The obedience of a
Christian man, and how Christian rulers ought to govern. 97. An exposition
upon the v. vj. vij. chapters of S. Ma. thewes Gospel. 184. An answer to Sir
Thomas Mores dialogues. 244 The practice of popish Prelates. 340. A pathway
into the holy Scripture. 377. The exposition upon the first Epistle of S. John.
387. The exposition upon M. William Tracies will. 429. A fruitful treatise
upon signs and Sacraments. 436. Two notable letters that he sent unto John
Frith. 453. The Supper of the Lord, wherein is confuted the letter of M. More
sent unto John Frith, supposed to be written by Tyndall. 457.
The Epistle or Preface to the Christian Reader.
AS we have great cause to geeue thanks to the high providence of almighty
God, for the excellent art of Printing, most happily of late found out, and
now commonly practiced every where, to the singular benefit of Christ's
Church, whereby great increase of learning and knowledge, with innumerable
commodities else have ensued, and daily do ensue to the life of man, and
especially to the fartheraunce of true Religion: so again of our part, it is
both of us all in general to be wished, and especially of them to be procured,
who occupy the trade thereof, rightly to use the same to the glory of him which
gave it, and to the end wherefore it was ordained, and not to abuse unworthily
that worthy faculty, either in thrusting into the world every unworthy trifle
that comes to hand, or having respect more to their own private gain, then
regard to the public edifiyng of Christ's Church, or necessary preferment of
Religion. For therefore I suppose this science of Printing first to be set up
and sent of God to man's use, not so much for temporal commodity to be taken,
or man's glory to be sought thereby, but rather for the spiritual and inward
supportation of soulehealth, help of Religion, restoring of true doctrine,
repayring of Christ's Church, and repressing of corrupt abuses, which had
heretofore ouerdarckened the doctrine of faith, to revive again the lost light
of knowledge to these blind times, by renewing of wholesome and ancient writers:
whose doings and teachinges otherwise had lain in oblivion, had not the
benefit of Printing brought them again to light, or us rather to light by
them. Wherefore such Printers in my mind, are not to be defrauded of their due
commendation, who in pretermitting other light triflyng pamflets of matter
vnneedful, and impertinent, little serving to purpose, less to necessity, do
employe their endeavor and workmanship chiefly to restore such fruitful
works and monumentes of ancient writers, and blessed Martyrs: who as by their
godly life, and constant death, gave testimony to the truth, in time wherein
they suffered, so by their doctrine and learning, geeue now no less light to
all ages and posterity after them.

In the number of whom, may rightly be accounted, and no less recommended to
the studious Christen Reader these three learned fathers of blessed memory,
whom the Printer of this book has diligently collected, and in one volume
together, enclosed the works I mean of William Tyndall, John Frith, and
Robart Barnes: chief ryngleaders in these latter times of this Church of
England. Wherein as we have much to praise God for such good books left to the
Church, and also for such Printers in preserving by their industry and charges
such books from perishing: so have I to exhort all studious readers, with
like diligence to embrace the benefit of God offered, and seriously to occupy
them selves in markyng and following both the valiant acts, and excellent
wrytinges of the said godly persons. Concerning the praise whereof, I shall not
need in this place to bestow much commendation: because, neither is it the
praise of men, but profit of the godly, that they do seek: nor yet the
contempt of the ungodly that they do fear. Moreover, what is to be said or
thought of them, rather by their own works, then by other men's words, by
readyng their books, then by my preface, is to be seen. In perusing whereof,
thou shall find (gentle Reader) whether thou be ignorant, what to learn, or
whether thou be learned, what to follow, and what to stick to. Briefly,
whatsoever thou art, if thou be young, of John Frith: if thou be in middle age,
of W. Tyndall: if in elder years of D. Barnes, matter is here to be found,
not only of doctrine to inform thee, of comfort to delight thee, of godly
ensample to direct thee: but also of special admiration, to make thee to
wonder at the works of the Lord, so mightily workyng in these men, so
oportunely in stirryng them up, so graciously in assisting them.

Albeit diverse other also besides these, I say not nay, as well before them as
after, through the secret operation of Gods mighty providence have been
raised up, both famous in learning, florishyng in wit, and stout in zeal,
who labouryng in the same cause, have no less valiantly and doughtely stood
in the like defense of Christ's true Religion, against blind error, pestilent
superstition, and perilous hypocrisy, namely, against the Arche enemy of
Christ and his flock, the Bishop I mean of Rome, with his tyrannical seat,
as namely here in England, John Wicklyffe, Rigge, Aston, Swynderby, W. Thorpe,
Walter Brute, L. Cobham, with the residue of that former age: And also after
them many other more fresh wits, faithful preachers, and learned writers
have sprung up by the Lord of hoastes to furnishe his field: Briefly no age
nor time has euerlacked some or other, still bayting at the beast, but
especially now in these our present days such plenty, yea whole armies the
Lord has powered upon his Church of heavenly soldiers, who not only in
number exceedyng, but in knowledge also excellyng, both by preaching and
Printing, do so garnishe the Church in every respect, that it may seem, and
so peradventure will be thought this time of ours to stand now in little need
of such books and momumentes as these of former antiquity: yet
notwithstanding, I am not of that mind so to think. For albeit, increasing of
learning of tongues, and sciences, with quicknes of wit in youth and other, does
maruailously shut up, as is to be seen, to the sufficient furnishyng of
Christ's Church: yet so it happens I can not tell how, the farther I look
back into those former times of Tyndall, Frith, and others like, more
simplicity, with true zeal, and humble modesty I see with less corruption
of affections in them, and yet with these days of ours, I find no fault. As
by reading and conferring their works together may eftsoons appear.

In opening the Scriptures, what truth, what soundnes can a man require more,
or what more is to be said, then is to be found in Tyndall. In his Prologues
upon the five books of Moses, upon Jonas, upon the Gospelles, and Epistles
of S. Paul, namely to the Romans: how perfectly does he hit the right sense,
and true meaning in every thing? In his obedience, how fruitfully teaches he
every person his duty? In his expositions, and upon the parable of the wicked
Mammon, how pithely does he persuade? how gravely does he exhort? how lovingly
does he comfort? simply without ostentation, vehement without contention.
Which two faults, as they commonly are wont to follow the most part of writers,
so how far the same were from him, and he from them, his replies and
aunsweres to Sir Thomas More, do well declare: in doctrine sound, in heart
humble, in life unrebukable, in disputation modest, in rebuking charitable, in
truth fervent, and yet no less prudent in dispensing with the same, and
bearyng with time, and with weakness of men, as much as he might, saving only
where mere necessity constrained him otherwise to do, for defense of truth
against wilful blyndnes, and subtle hypocrisy, as in the Practice of
Prelates is notorious to be seen. Briefly, such was his modesty, zeal,
charity, and painful travail, that he never sought for any thing less,
then for himself: for nothing more, then for Christ's glory, and edification
of other: for whose cause not only he bestowed his labors, but his life and
blood also. Wherefore not unrightly he might be then, as he is yet cauled, the
Apostle of England, as Paul cauleth Epaphroditus the Apostle of the
Philippians, for his singular care and affection toward them. For as the
Apostles in the primative age first planted the Church in truth of the
Gospel: so the same truth being again defaced and decayed by enemies in this
our latter time, there was none that trauayled more earnestly in restoring of
the same in this Realm of England, then did William Tyndall.

With which William Tyndall, no less may be adjoined also John Frith, and D.
Barnes, both for that they together with him in one cause, and about one time,
sustained the first brunt, in this our latter age, and gave the first onset
against the enemies: as also for the special gifts of fruitful erudition,
and plentiful knowledge wrought in them by God, and so by them left unto us in
their writings. Wherefore according to our promise in the book of Acts and
Monumentes, we thought good herein to spend a little diligence in collecting,
and setting abroad their books together, so many as could be found, to
remain as perpetual La^pes, shyning in the Church of Christ, to geeue light
to all posterity. And although the Printer, herein taking great pains, could
not paraduenture come by all (howbeit, I trust there lack not many) yet the
Lord be thanked for those which he has got and here published unto us.

And would God the like diligence had been used of our ancient forelders, in
the time of Wickliffe, Puruey, Clerk, Brute, Thorpe, Husse, Hierome, and such
other, in searching and collecting their works and writings. No doubt but many
things had remained in light, which now be left in oblivion. But by reason
the Art of Printing was not yet invented, their worthy books were the sooner
abolyshed. Such was then the wickedness of those days, and the practice of
those Prelates then so crafty, that no good book could appear, though it
were the Scripture it self in English, but it was restrained, and so
consumed. Whereby ignorance and blyndnes so prevailed among the people, till
at the last, it so pleased the goodness of our God to provide a remedy for that
mischief, by multiplying good books by the Printers pen, in such sort, as
no earthly power was able after that (though they did their best) to stop the
course thereof, were he never so myghtie, and all for the fartheraunce of
Christ's Church.

Wherefore receive (gracious Reader) the Books here collected and offered to
thy hand, and thank God, thou have them, and read them whilst thou may,
while time, life, and memory serves thee. In reading whereof the Lord grant,
thou may receive no less fruit by them, then the hearty desire of the setter
forth is to wish well unto thee. And the same Lord also grant, I beseech him,
that this my exhortation and wish so may work in all, that not only the
good, but the enemies also, which be not yet won to the word of truth,
setting aside all partiality and prejudice of opinion, would with indifferent
judgments, bestow some reading and hearing likewise of these, to taste what
they do teach, to vewe their reasons, and to try their spirit, to mark the
expositions of Tyndall, the arguments of Frith, the Articles and allegations
of Barnes. Which if they shall find agreeable to the time and antiquity of the
Apostles doctrine, and touchstone of Gods word, to use them to their
instruction: If not, then to myslike them as they find cause, after they have
first tried them, and not before. And thus not to deteine thee with longer
process, from the reading of better matter, I refer and commend thee and
thy studies gentle reader, with my hearty wish and prayer to the grace of
Christ Jesus, and direction of his holy spirit, desiryng thee likewise to do
the same for me.

John Fox.

The Martyrdom and burning of William Tyndall in Brabant, by Filford Castle.
Lord open the K. of Engla^ds eyes.



Here follows the history and discourse of the life of William Tyndall out of
the book of Acts and Monumentes Briefly extracted.
FOr so much as the life of W. Tyndall author of this treatise immediately
following, is sufficiently and at large discoursed in the book of Acts and
Monumentes, by reason whereof we shall not need greatly to intermedle with any
new repetition thereof, yet notwithstanding because as we have taken in hand to
collect and set forth his whole works together, so we thought it not
inconvenient, to collecte likewise some brief notes concerning the order of
his life and godly conversation that both his teaching, and living going
together, as the one may edify by doctrine, so the other may profit by
example. First touching the birth and parentage of this blessed Martyr in
Christ, he was borne in the edge of Wales, and brought up from a child in the
university of Oxforde, where he by long continuance grew, and increased
as well in the knowledge of tongues, and other liberal arts, as especially in
the knowledge of Scriptures, whereunto his mind was singularly addicted:
Insomuch that he liyng in Magdalene hall, read priuelye to certain students,
and fellows of Magdalene College, some percell of Divinity, instructing them
in the knowledge, and truth of the Scriptures. Whose manners also and Tyndall a
virtuous and godly man.
conversation being correspondent to the same, were such that all they which
knew him, reputed, and esteemed him to be a man of most verteous disposition,
and of a life unspotted. Thus he in the university of Oxford encreasyng more
and more in learning, and proceeding in degrees of the schools, spiyng his
time, removed from thence to the University of Cambridge, where after he had
likewise made his abode a certain space, and being now farther rypened in the
knowledge of Gods word, leaving that university also, he resorted to one M.
Welshe a knight of Gloucester sheare and was there school master to his
children, and in very good favor with his master. This gentleman, as he kept
a very good ordinary commonly at his table, there resorted unto him many times
sundry Abbottes, Deanes, Archdeacons, with other diverse Doctors, and great
beneficed men: Who there together with M. Tyndall sittyng at the same table,
did use many times to enter communication and talk of learned men as of Luther
and Erasmus, and of diverse controversies, and questions upon the scripture. At
which time M. Tyndall, as he was learned, and well practiced in Gods matters, so
he spared not to show to them simply, and plainly his judgment in matters as
he thought. And when as they at that time did vary from Tyndall in opinions,
and judgment, he would show them the book, and lay plainly before them the
open, and manifest places of the scriptures to confute their errors, and to
confirm his sayings. And thus continued they for a season, reasoning, and
contending together diverse and Wilful malice against open truth.
sundry times, till at the length they waxed weary of him, and bare a secret
grudge in their hearts against him.

Not long after this it happened that certain of these great Doctors had
invited M. Welshe, and his wife to a banquet, where they had talk at will and
pleasure, uttering their blindness, and ignorance without any resistaunce, or
gain saying. Then M. Welshe, and his wife coming home, and calling for M.
Tyndall, began to reason with him about those matters, whereof the Priests
had talked before at their banquet. M. Tyndall aunswering by Scriptures
mainteyned the truth, and reproved their false opinions. Then said the Lady
Welshe, a stout and wise woman (as Tyndall him self reports) well said she,
there was such a Doctor which may dispend a C. l. and an other CC. l. and an
other CCC. pou^des. And what, were it reason think you that we should believe
you before them? M. Tyndall gave her no answer at that time, nor also after
that (because he saw it would not avail) he talked but little in those matters.
At that time he was about the translation of a book called. Enchiridon militis
Christiani. Which being translated he delivered to his Master and lady: Who
after they bad read, and well perused the same, the doctourly Prelates were no
more so often called to the house, nether had they the Chere nor countenance
when they came, as before they had, which thing they well marking, and
perceiving, and supposing no less but it came by the means of Tyndall,
refrayned the^ selves, and at the last utterly withdrewe them selves, and came
no more there.

As this grew on, the Priests of the country clustering together, began to
grudge, and storm against Tyndall, railing at him, in houses, and other
meeting places. Of whom Tyndall him self in his first Prologue before the
first book of Moses, testifies in his own words, and reports that he
suffered much in that country by a sort of unlearned Priests, being full rude
and ignorant (says he) God knows, which have seen no more Latin then that
only which they read in their Porteasses, and Missalles (which yet many of
them can skarsely read) except it be Albertus de Secretis The authors that
Popish Pristes do study.
mulierum, in which yet, though they be never so sorely learned, they pore
day, and night, and make notes therein, and all to teach the mydwifes (as they
say) and also an other book called Lynwood, a Book of Constitutions to gather
tithes, mortuaryes, Offeringes, Customs, and other pillage, which they call
not theirs, but Gods part, the duty of holy Church, to discharge their
consciences with all. For they are bound that they shall not deminishe, but
increase all things to the uttermost of their powers which pertains to holy
Church. Thus these blind, and rude Priests flocking together to the Alehouse
(for that was their preaching place) raged and rayled against him, affirming
that his sayengs were heresy: addyng moreover unto his sayenges of their own
heads, more then ever he spoke, and so accused him secretly to yt
Chauncelour, and other of the Bishops officers.

It followed not long after this, that there was a sitting of the Bishops
Chau^celour appointed, and warning was given to the Priests to apere, amongst
whom M. Tyndall was warned to be there. And whether he had any misdoubt by
their threatenings or knowledge given him, that they would lay some things to
his charge, it is uncertain: But certain this is (as he him self declares)
that he doubted their preuy accusations, so that he by the way in going
thitherwardes, cried in his mind heartily unto God to give him strength to
stand fast in the truth of his word.

When the time came of his apperaunce before the Chau^celour, he threatened
him grievously, reuiling and rating him as though he had been a dog, and
laid to his Unjust dcaling of the Papists,
charge many things, whereof no accuser could yet be brought forth (as
commonly their manner is, not to bring forth the accuser) notwithstanding that
the Priests of the country the same time were there present. And thus M.
Tyndall after those examinations escaping out of their hands, departed home,
and returned to his Master again.

There dwelt not far of a certain Doctor that had been an old Chauncelor
before to a Bishop, who had been of old famyliar acquaintance with M.
Tyndall, and also favored him well. Unto whom M. Tyndall went and opened his
mind upon diverse questions of the Scripture: For to him he durst be bold to
disclose his heart. Unto whom the Doctor said: Do you not know that the Pope
is very Antechrist, whom the Scripture speaks of? But beeware what you say:
for if you shall be perceived to be of that opinion, it will cost you your
life: And said moreover, I have been an officer of his, but I have given it
up, and defye him, and all his works.

Not long after M. Tyndall happened to be in the company of a certain divine
recounted for a learned man, and in commoning and disputing with him, he drove
him to that issue that the said great Doctor burst out into these blasphemous
words, and said, we were better to be without Gods law, then the Popes. M.
Tyndall hearing Notorious blasphemy of a Papist.
this and being full of Godly zeal, and not bearing that blasphemous saying,
replied again and said: I defy the Pope and all his laws, and farther added,
that if God spared him life ere many years, he would cause a boy that drives
the plough to know more of the Scripture then he did.

After this the grudge of the Priests increasing still against Tyndall, they
never ceased barki^g, and rating at him, and laid many sore things to his
charge, saying y^ he was an heretic in sophistry, an heretic in logique,
and an heretic in Divinity: And said moreover unto him, that he bare
himself bold of y^ Gentlemen there in y^ country, but notwithstanding shortly
he should be otherwise talked withal. To whom M. Tyndall au^swering again
thus said: it was not the place he stuck upon: he was co^te^ted they should
bring him into any country in all England, giving him x. l. a year to live
with, and bynding him to no more but to teach children and to preach.

To be short M. Tyndall being so molested and vexed in the country by y^
Priests was constrained to leave that Country, and to seek another place: and
so coming Tyndall remoueth from M. Welshe.
to M. Welshe he desired him of his good will, that he might depart from him,
saying thus unto him: Sir I perceive I shall not be suffered to tarry long
here in this country, neither shall you be able (though you would) to keep
me out of the hands of the spiritualitie, and also what displeasure might
grow to you by keeping me God knows: for the which I should be right sorry.
So that in fine M. Tyndall with y^ good will of his Master departed, and
eftsoon came up to London, and there preached a while according as he had
done in the country before. At length he beethought him self of Cutbert
Tunstall then Bishop of London, and especially for the great commendatio^ of
Erasmus, Who in his annotations so extolleth him for his learning, thus casting
with him self, that if he might attain into his service, he were a happy
man. And so coming to Sir Henry Gilforde the kings Controller, and bringing
with him an oration of Isocrates, which he had translated out of Greek into
English he desired him to speak to the said Bishop of London for him: which
he also did, and willed Tyndall sueth to be with Tonstall Bishop of London,
but could not obtain.
him moreover to write an Epistle to the Bishop and to go him self with him:
which he did likewise, and delivered his Epistle to a servant of his named
William Hebletwhait, a man of his old acquaintance.

But God, who secretly disposed the course of things, saw y^ was not best for
Tyndals purpose, nor for the profit of his Church, and therefore gave him to
find little favor in the Bishops sight. The answer of whom was this, that
his house was full: he had more then he could well find, and advised him to
seek in London abroad where he said he could lack no service etc. And so he
remained in London the space almost of a year, beholding and marking with him
self the course of the world and especially ye Demeanor of the preachers, how
they boasted them selves, and set up their authority and kingdom: Beholding
also the pomp of the Prelates, with other things that greatly misliked him.
Insomuch, as he understood not only to be no room in ye Bishops house for
him to translate the new Testament: but also that there was no place to do it
in all England. And therefore fynding no place for his purpose within the
Realm, and having some aid and provision, by Gods providence ministered unto
him by Humfrev Mommouth Merchaunt, who after was both Shirife and Alderman of
London, and by certain other good men, he took his leave of the Realm, and
departed into Germany. Where the good man being inflamed with a tender care and
zeal of his country refused no travel, or diligence, how by all means
possible; to reduce his brethren and Countrymen of England to the same taste
and understanding of Gods holy word, and verity which the Lord had endued
him withal.

Where upon he considering in his mind, and partly also conferring with John
Frith thought with him self no way more to conduce thereunto, then if the
scripture were The Scripture in the vulgar tongue, a special manifesting of
the truth.
turned into the vulgar speech, that the poor people might also see the
simple and plain word of God. For first, he wisely casting in his mind,
perceived by experience how that it was not possible to stablish the lay people
in any truth, except the Scripture were so plainlye laid before their eyes in
their mother tongue, that they might see the process, order, and meaning of y^
text: For else whatsoever truth should be taught them, these enemies of the
truth would quench it again either with apparau^t reasons of Sophistrye, and
traditions of their own making, founded without all ground of Scripture:
Either else iugglyng with the text, expounding it in such a sense, as impossible
it were to gather of the text, if the right process, order and meaning thereof
were seen.

Again right well he perceived, and considered this only, or most chiefly to
be the cause of all mischief in the Church, that the Scriptures of God were
hydden from the Ignorance of Scripture cause all mischife and erroures in
religion.
peoples eyes: For so long the abominable doings and Idolatries mainteyned by
the Pharasaicall Clergy, could not be espied, and therefore all their labor
was with might and main to keep it down, so that either it should not be
read at all, or if it were, they would darken the right sense, with the mist
of their Sophistry, and so entangle them which rebuked, or despised their
abominations, with arguments of philosophy, and with worldly similitudes, and
apparent reasons of natural wisdom: and with wresting of Scripture unto
their own purpose, contrary unto the process, order, and meaning of the text,
would so delude them in deskanting upon it with allegoryes, and amaze them,
expounding it in many senses laid before the unlearned lay people, that
though thou felt in thy heart, and were sure that all were false that they
said, yet could thou not solue their subtle ryddells.

For these and such other considerations, this good man was moved (and no
doubts styrred up of God) to translate the Scripture into his mother tongue,
for the public utility and profit of the simple vulgar people of his
country: First setting in hand with the new testament, which he first
translated about the year of our Lord. 1527. Aftrr yt he took in hand to
translate the old testament, finishing the v. books of Moses, with sundry
most learned and godly prologues prefixed before every one of them most worthy
to be read, and read again of all Christians, as the like also he did upon the
new testament.

He wrote also diverse other works under sundry titles, among the which is
that most worthy monument of his intuled the obedyence of a Christian man,
wherein with singular dexterity he instructs all men in the office, and
duty of Christian obedience, with diverse other treatises as may apere in the
contents of this book.

So soon as these books were compiled, and made by William Tyndall, and the
same were published and sent over into England, it can not be spoken what a
door of light they opened to the eyes of the whole English nation, which
before were many years shut up in darkness.

Now these godly books, and specially the new Testament of William Tindals
translation being spread abroad and come into many men's hands, as they wrought
singular profitte to the godly: so the ungodly envying and disdayning that the
people The reprobate are always offended at ye truth.
should be any thing wiser then they: and again, fearing least by the shyning
beams of truth, their false hypocrisy and works of darcknes should be
discerned: began to stir with no small ado, like as at the birth of Christ,
Herod and all Jerusalem were troubled with him, so the Papists made open
exclamation against this godly man, and published him openly in all their
sermons to be an heretic, and that all his books were none other but
damnable heresies, and sought by all the means they might, how to empeach and
hinder that godly man in his blessed trauayles.

But to return to the story. After that William Tyndall had translated the
fifth book of Moses called Deuteronomium, and he mynding to print the same at
Hamborough, sailed thitherward: and by the way upon the coast of Holland, he
suffered shipwreck, and lost all his books, writings, and copyes: and so was
compelled to begin all again an^we, to his hynderaunce and doubling of his
labors. Thus having lost by that ship both money, his copyes and time, he came
in an other ship to Hamborough, where at his appointment M. Couerdale tarried
for him, and helped him in the translatyng of the whole five books of Moses.
And after he returned to Andwarp, and was there lodged more then one whole
year in the house of Thomas Pointz, an English man, who kept a table for
English merchants. About which time, an English man whose name was Henry
Phillips, whose father was customer of Poole, a comely man, and seemed to be a
gentleman. This man suddenly entered into Henry Phillippes a wicked and
dissembling Judas.
the great love and favor of William Tyndall, who greatly commended his
courtesy and learning, and in the end fell into famylier love and
acquaintance with him. And Thomas Pointz their host espying such great love
and familiarity to be between M. Tyndall and this Philippes, which unto him
was but a mere strainger, did much meruell thereat, and fell into a gelousy,
and suspicion that this Phillipes was but a spy, and came but to betraye M.
Tindall, wherefore on a time, the a fore said Thomas Poyntz asked M. Tyndall
how he came acquainted with this Phillipes: M. Tyndall au^swered that he was an
honest man, handsomely learned, and very conformable. Then Pointz perceauing
that he bare such favor unto him, said no more, thinking that he had been
brought acquainted with him by some friend of his. The said Phillipes being in
the town iij. or iiij. days did then depart to the Court at Bruxelles, which
is from Andwarp x^iiij. miles and did so much there that he procured to bring
from thence with him to Andwarp the procuror general, which is the Emperors
attorney with certain other officers. And first the said Phillipes servant
came unto Poyntz and demanded of him whether M. Tyndall were there or not, for
his master would come and dyne with him. And forthwith came Phillipes and
asked Poyntz wife for M. Tyndall and she showed him that he was in his chamber,
then said he, what good meat shall we have to dinner for I entend to dyne with
you, and she answered they should have such as the market would give. Then
went phyllipes straight up into M. Tyndales chamber, and told him that by the
way as he came he had lost his pursse, and therefore prayed him to lend him xl.
shillings, which he forthwith lent, for it was easy enough to be had of him
if he had it. For in the wily subtilnes of this world, he was simple and
inexpert.

Then said Phillipes you shall be my gest here this day. No, said* Tyndall, I
got forth this day to dynner, and you shall go with me and be my gest where
you shall be welcome. And when dynner time came M. Tyndall and Phillipes went
both forth together. And at the going forth of Poyntz house was a long narrow
entrey, so that ij. could not go on a front. Tyndall would have put phillipes
before him, but Phillipes would in no wise, but put Tyndall before him, for
that he pretended to show great humanity. So Tyndall being a man of no great
stature went before, and Phillipes a tall person followed behind him, who had
set officers on either side of the door upon ij. seats, which being there
might see who came in the entrye. And coming through ye said entrye, Phillipes
pointed with his finger over M. Tyndales head down to him, that the officers
which sat at the door, might see that it was he whom they should take, as the
officers that took Tyndall afterward told the a fore said Poyntz, and said
that they pit^ed to see his simplicity when they took him. But Tyndall when
he came Tyndals simplicity pitied of the officers.
nere the door espied the officers and would have shronke back: nay said
Phill^ipes by your leave you shall go forth, and by force bare him forward
upon the officers. And as soon as the officers had taken him, they forthwith
brought him unto the Emperors attorney, or procurour general, where he
dyned. Then came the procurour general to the house of Poyntz, and sent away
all that was of Tyndales, as well his books as other things: And from thence
Tyndall was had to the Castle of filforde, xviij English miles from Andwarpe,
where he remained prisoner more then a year and a half, and in that mean
time, came unto him diverse lawyers, and Doctors in Divinity, as well friars
as other with whom he had many conflyctes: But at the last Tyndall prayed that
he might have some English Deuines come unto him, for the manners and
Ceremonies in religion in Douch land (said he) did much differ from the manners
and Ceremonies used in England. And then was sent unto him diverse Deuines from
Louayne whereof some were Englishmen: and after many examinations, at the last
they condemned him by virtue of the Emperors decree made in the assembly at
Ausbrough, and shortly after brought him forth to the place of execution, and
there tied him to a stake, where with a fervent zeal, and a loud voice he
cried, Lord Tyndals godly zeal to his Prince.
open the eyes of the King of England, and then first he was with a halter
strangled by the hangman, and afterward consumed with fire. In the year of our
Lord. 1536.

Such was the power of his doctrine, and the sincerity of his life, that
during the time of his imprisonment, which (as aforesaid) endured a year and a
half, he converted his keepers Daughter, and other of his household. Also
such as were with him conuersaunt in the Castle reported of him, that if he
were not a good Christian man, they could not tell whom to trust. The Procurour
general the Emperors attorney A testimony of Tyndals godly life, even by his
aduersarye.
being there, left this testemony of him, that he was Homo doctus, pius et
bonus. that is a learned, a good, and a godly man.

The worthy virtues, and doings of this blessed martyr (who for his painful
traueles and singular zeal to his country may be worthelye called in these
our days, an Apostle of England) it were long to recite. Amongst many other,
this one thing, because it seems worthy of remembrance, I thought good to
show unto you. There was at Andwarp on a time, amongst a company of
merchauntes as they were at supper a certain iuggeler, which thorough his
Diabolical inchauntmentes, or Art Magical, would fetch all kind of Vyandes
and wine from any place they would, and set it upon the table incontinent
before them, with many other such like things. The fame of this iuggeler being
much talked of, it chanced that as M. Tyndall heard of it he desired certain
of the merchauntes that he also might be present at supper to see him play his
parts. And to be short, the Supper was appointed and the merchauntes with
Tyndall were there present. Then was the iuggler called forth to play his
feats and to show his conning, and after his wonted boldness began to utter all
that he could The faith of Tyndall showed by a manifest miracle.
do, but all was in vain. At the last with his labor, sweating, and toyling,
when he saw that nothing would go forward, but that all his inchauntmentes
were void, he was compelled openly to confess that there was some man present
at supper which disturbed, and let all his doings. So that a man even in
the martyrs of these our days can not lack the miracles of true faith, if
miracles were now to be desired.

And here to end and conclude this history with a few notes touching his
private behavior in diet, study, and especially his charitable zeal, and
tender releuing of the poor: First he was a man very frugall, and spare of
body, a great student and earnest laborer, namely in the setting forth of y^
Scriptures of God. He reserved or hallowed to him self ij* days in the week,
which he named his days of pastime, and those days were Monday the first day
in the week, and Satterday the last day in the week. On the Monday he visited
all such poor men and women as were fled out of England by reason of
persecution into Antwarp, and those well understanding their good exercises and
qualities he did very liberally comfort and relieve: and in like manner provided
for the sick and deseased persons. On the Satterday he walked round about the
town in Antwarpe, seeking out every Corner, and hole where he suspected any
pooreperson to dwell, (as God knows there are many) and where he found any to
he well occupied, and yet ouerburdened with children, or else were aged, or
weak, those also he plentefully releued. And thus he spent his ij. days of
pastime as he cauled them. And truly his Almose was very large and great: and
so it might well be: for his exhibition that he had yearly of the English
merchauntes was very much, and that for the most part he bestowed upon the
poor as before said. The rest of the days in the week he gave him wholly to
his book where in most dillgently he traueled. When the Sunday came, then went
he to some one merchaunts chamber, or other, whether came many other
merchauntes: and unto them would he read some one percell of Scripture, either
out of the old testament, or out of the new, the which proceeded so frutefully,
sweetly and gentely from him (much like to the writing of S. John the
Euangelest) that it was a heavenly comfort and joy to the audience to hear him
read the scriptures: and in likewise after dinner, he spent an hour in the
aforesaid manner. He was a man without any spot, or blemishe of rancor, or
malice, full of mercy and compassion, so that no man living was able to
reprove him of any kind of sin or crime, albeit his righteousness and
justification depended not there upon before God, but only upon the blood of
Christ, and his faith upon the same: in the which faith constantly he dyed, as
is said at Filforde, and now rests with the glorious campany of Christ's
Martyrs blessedly in the Lord, who be blessed in all his saints Amen. And thus
much of W. Tyndall, Christ's blessed servant, and Martyr.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 16. the 2. col. in the margent, after these words [from the] put to
salvation in Christ. The same Page, and same col. in the next marginall note
after, put out [in Christ] from the beginning of the note.

Page 21. col. 2. in the margent, for adminition, read admonition.

A Protestation made by William Tyndall, touching the Resurrection of the
bodies, and the state of the souls after this life. Adstracted out of a
Preface of his that he made to the new Testament, which he set forth in the
year 1534.
COncernyug the resurrection, I proteste before God and our savior Jesus
Christ, and before the universal congregation that believes in him, that I
believe according to the open and manifest Scriptures and Catholic faith,
that Christ is risen again in the flesh which he received of his mother the
blessed virgin Mary, and body wherein he died. And that we shall all both good
and bad, rise both flesh and body, and appear together before the judgment
seat of Christ, to receive every man according to his deeds. And that the
bodies of all that believe and continue in the true faith of Christ, shall be
indewed with like immortality and glory, as is the body of Christ.

And I protest before God and our Savior Christ, and all that believe in him,
that I hold of the souls that are departed, as much as may be proved by
manifest and open Scripture, and think the souls departed in the faith of
Christ and love of the law of God, to be in no worse case, then the soul of
Christ was, from the time that he delivered his spirit into the hands of his
father, until the resurrection of his body in glory and immortality.
Nevertheless, I confess openly, that I am not persuaded that they be already
in the full glory that Christ is in, or the elect Angels of God are in. Neither
is it any article of my faith: for if it so were, I see not but then the
preaching of the resurrection of the flesh, were a thing in vain.
Notwithstanding yet I am ready to believe it, if it may be proved with open
Scripture.

Moreover, I take God (which alone sees the heart) to record to my conscience,
beseechyng him that my part be not in the blood of Christ, if I wrote of all
that I have written throughout all my book, ought of an evil purpose, of
envy or malice to any man, or to stir up any false doctrine or opinion in
the Church of Christ, or to be author of any sect, or to draw disciples after
me, or that I would be esteemed, or had in price above the least child that
is borne: save only of pity and compassion I had, and yet have, on the
blyndnes of my brethren, and to bring them unto the knowledge of Christ, and
to make every one of them, if it were possible, as perfect as an Angel of
heaven: and to weed out all that is not planted of our heavenly father, and to
bring down all that lifts up it self against the knowledge of the salvation
that is in the blood of Christ. Also, my part be not in Christ, if mine heart
be not to follow and live according as I teach: and also if mine heart weep not
night and day for mine own sin, and other men's indifferently, beseeching God
to convert us all, and to take his wrath from us, and to be merciful as well
to all other men, as to mine own soul: caring for the wealth of the Realm I
was borne in, for the king, and all that are thereof, as a tender hearted mother
would do for her only son.

As concerning all I have translated, or otherwise written, I beseech all men
to read it, for that purpose I wrote it: even to bring them to the knowledge of
the Scripture. And as far as the scripture approoueth it, so far to allow
it: and if in any place the word of God dissalow it, there to refuse it, as I
do before our Savior Christ and his congregation. And where they find
faults, let them show it me, if they be nigh, or write to me if they be
far of: or write openly against it and improoue it: and I promise them, if I
shall perceive that their reasons conclude, I will confess mine ignorance
openly.

The Preface of master William Tyndall, that he made before the five books of
Moses, called Genesis. An. 1530. Ianua. 17.
WHen I had translated the new Testament, I added an Epistle unto the latter
end, In which I desired them that were learned, to amend if ought were found
amiss. But our malicious and wily hypocrites, which are so stubburne, and
hard hearted in their wicked abominations, that it is not possible for the^ The
reason that the papists make against the translation of the scripture into
English.
to amend any thing at all (as we see by daily experience, when both their
lyuynges, and doyngs are rebuked with the truth) say, some of them that it
is impossible to translate the Scripture into English, some that it is not
lawful for the lay people to have it in their mother tou^g, some that it would
A subtle shift of the popes clergy to cover their evil.
make them all heretics, as it would no-doubt from many things which they
of long time have falsely taught, and that is the whole cause wherefore they
forbid it, though they other clokes pretend. And some or rather every one, say
that it would make them rise against the king, whom they them selves (unto
their damnation) never yet obeyed. And lest the temporal rulers should see
their falsehode, if the Scripture came to light, causes the^ so to lie.

And as for my translation in which they affirm unto the lay people (as I have
heard say to be I wotte not how many thousand heresies, so that it can How the
Papists were vexed with Tindals translation of the new testament.
not be mended or correct, they have yet taken so great pain to examine it,
and to compare it unto that they would feign have it, and to their own
imaginations and iugglyng terms, and to have somewhat to rail at, and under
that cloak to blaspheme the truth, that they might with as little labor (as I
suppose) have translated the most part of the Bible. For they which in times
past were wont to look on no more scripture the^ they found in their Duns, The
Papists shamed not to wrest the scriptures.
or such like deuilishe doctrine, have yet now so narowly looked on my
translation, yt there is not so much as one I therein if it lack a title over
his head, but they have noted it, and number it unto ye ignorant people for an
heresy. Finally in this they be all agreed, to drive you from the knowledge of
the Scripture, and that ye shall not have the text thereof in the mother tou^g,
and to keep the world still in darkness, to the intent they might sit in the
consciences of the people, through vain superstition and false doctrine, to
satisfy their filthy lusts, their proud ambition, and insatiable
covetousness, and to exalte their own honor above King and Emperor, yea, and
above God him self. The Papists have wrought wonderfully to have suppressed
y^ scripture.


A thousand books had they lever to be put forth against their abominable
doings and doctrine, then that the Scripture should come to light. For as long
as they may keep that down, they will so darken ye right way with the mist of
their sophistry, and so ta^gle the^ yt either rebuke or despise their
abominations, with Arguments of Philosophy, and with worldly similitudes,
and apparent reasons of natural wisdom: and with wrestyng the Scripture unto
their own purpose clean contrary unto the process, order and meaning of the
text, and so delude them in descantyng upon it with allegories, and amase them,
expoundyng As owls abide not the brightness of the day, so cannot the papists
abide the light of the gospel.
it in many senses before the unlearned lay people (when it has but one simple
litterall sense whose light the owls can not abide) that though thou feel in
thine heart, and art sure how that all is false that they say, yet could you
not solue their subtle rydles.

Which thing only moved me to translate the new Testament. Because I had
perceived by experience, how that it was impossible to stablishe the What
first moved W. Tyndale to translate y^ Scripture into englssh
lay people in any truth, except the Scripture were plainly laid before
their eyes in their mother tongue, that they might see the process, order and
meaning of the text: for else what soever truth is taught them, these enemies of
all truth, quench it again, partly with the smoke of their bottomless pit,
whereof thou read Apocalipsis, ix. that is, with apparent reasons of
sophistry, and traditions of their own making, founded without ground of
Scripture, and partly in iugglyng with the text, expoundyng it in such a
sense, as is impossible to gather of the text, if thou see the process, order
and meaning thereof. And eue^ in the Bishops of Londons house, I entented to
have done it. For This bishop of London was then Tunstall, which afterward was
bishop of Durham
when I was so turmoyled in the country where I was, that I could no le^ger
there dwell (the process whereof were to long here to rehearse) I this wise
thought in my self, this I suffer because the Priests of the country be
unlearned, as God it knows, there are a full ignorant sort which have seen
no more Latin, then that they read in their Portesses and Missales, which yet
many of them can scarcely read (except it be Albertus de secretis mulieru^, in
which yet, though they be never so sorily learned, they poor day and night,
and make notes therein, and all to teach the mydwiues as they say, and Linwode
a book of constitutions to gather tithes, mortuaries, offeringes, customs,
and other pillage, which they call not theirs, but Gods part, and the duty of
holy church, to discharge their consciences with all: for they are bound that
they shall not diminishe, but increase all thing unto the uttermost of The
popes chaplens pulpet, is the al^house
their powers) and therefore (because they are thus unlearned thought I) when
they come together to the Alehouse, which is their preaching place, they
affirm that my sayings are heresy. And besides that they add to of their
own heads, which I never spoke, as the manner is to prolo^g the tale to short
the time with all, and accused me secretly to the Chancellor, and other the
Christ's apoitles did mekely admonish, but the Popes sectaryes did braule and
skold.
Bishops officers. And in deed when I came before the Chancellor, he
threatened me grievously, and reviled me, and rated me as though I had been a
dog, and laid to my charge, whereof there could be none accuser brought forth
(as their manner is not to bring forth the accuser) and yet all yt Priests of
the country were the same day there.

As I this thought, the Bishop of London came to my remembrance Parcialitie
sometime in men of great learning.
whom Erasmus (whose tongue makes of litles gnattes great Elephants, and
lifts up above the Stars whosoever gives him a little exhibition) prayseth
excedyngly among other in his annotations on the new Testament for his great
learning. Then thought I, if I might come to this man's service, I were happy.
And so I gatte me to London, and through the acquaintance of my master, came to
Sir Harry Gilford the Kings graces Controller, and brought him an Oration of
Isocrates, which I had translated out of greek into English, and desired him
to speak unto my Lord of London for me, which he also did as he showed me,
and willed me to write an Epistle to my Lord, and to go to him my self which
I also did, and delivered my Epistle to a servant of his own, one William
Hebilthwayte', a man of mine old acquaintance. But God (which How Tindale was
deceived.
knows what is within hypocrites) saw that I was begyled, and that that
counsel was not the next way unto my purpose. And therefore he gatte me no
favor in my Lords sight.

Whereupon my Lord answered me, his house was full, he had mo then he could
well find, and advised me to seek in London, where he said I could not lack
a service, And so in London I abode almost a year, and marked the course of
the world, and heard our praters, I would say our Preachers, how they boasted
themselves and their hye authority, and beheld the pomp of our Prelates, and
how busy they were (as they yet are) to set peace and unite in the world
(though it be not possible for them, that walk in darkness, to continue
long in peace, for they ca^ not but either stomble or dash themselves at one
thing, or an other yt shall Room enough in my Lords house for belly chere,
but none to translate the new testament.
clean unquiet all together) and saw things whereof I defer to speak at
this time, and understood at the last not only that there was no rowme in my
Lord of Londons Palace to translate the new Testament, but also that there was
no place to do it in all England, as experience does now openly declare.

Under what manner therefore should I now submit this book to be corrected and
amended of them, which can Tindale could get no place in the bishop of Londo^s
house.
suffer nothing to be well? Or what protestation should I make in such a manner
unto our Prelates those stubburne Nimrothes which so mightily fight against
God, and resist his holy spirit, enforcyng with all craft and sutletie to
quench yt light of the everlasting Testament, promises, and appointement made
between God and us? and heapyng the fierce wrath of God upon all Princes and
rulers, mockyng them with false feigned names of hypocrisy, and seruyng their
lusts at all points, and dispensyng with them eue^ of the very laws of God,
of which Christ him self testifies Matthew 5. That not so much as one title
thereof may perish or be broken. And of which the Prophet says Psalm. cxviij.
Thou have commanded thy laws to be kept meod, that is in Hebrew excedyngly,
with all diligence, might and power, and have made the^ so mad with their
iugglyng charms, and crafty persuasio^s, that they think it a full
satisfaction for all their wicked living, to torment such as tell them troth,
and to burn yt word of their souls health, and slay who soever believe thereon.

Notwithstanding yet I submit this book, and all other that I have Tyndals
submission is to all such as submit themselves to God.
either made or translated, or shall in time to come (if it be Gods will that
I shall further labor in his harvest) unto all them that submit them selves
unto the word of God, to be corrected of them, yea and moreover to be disalowed
and also burnt, if it seem worthy, when they have examined it with the Hebrew,
so that they first put forth of their own tra^slatyng, an other that is more
correct.

A prologue by William Tyndall, showing the use of the Scripture, which he
wrote before the five books of Moses.
THough a man had a precious iuell and a rich, yet if he wiste not the value
thereof, nor wherefore it served, he were neither the better nor richer of a
straw. Eue^ so though we read the Scripture, and babble of it never so much, yet
if we know not the use of it, and wherefore it was given, and what is therein to
be sought, it profits us nothing at all. It is not enough therefore to read
and talk of it only, but we must also desire Not the tongue but the life
proves a true Gospeller.
God day and night instantly to open our eyes, and to make us understand and
feel, wherefore the Scripture was given, that we may apply the medicine of
the Scripture, every man to his own sores, unless then we entend to be idle
disputers, and braulers about vain words, ever gnawyng upon the bitter
barcke without, and never attaynyng unto the sweet pith within, and
persecuting one an other in defendyng of lewd imaginations, and fantasies of
our own inventions.

Paul in third of the second Epistle The truest touchestone or Religion is
Christ's Gospel.
to Timothe says, That the Scripture is good to teach (for that ought men to
teach, and not dreams of their own making, as the Pope does) and also to
improve, for the Scripture is the touch stone that tries all doctrines, and by
that we know the false from the true. And in the vj. to the Ephesians he
calls it the sword of the spirit, by cause it kills hypocrites, and
utters and and improueth their false inventions. And in the xv. to yt Romans
he says. All that are written, are written for our learning, that we through
patience and The scripture of god is y^ sword of the Spirit.
comfort of the Scripture, might have hope. That is, the examples that are in
the Scripture, comfort us in all our tribulations, and make us to put our trust
in GOD, and patiently to abide his leisure. And in the x. of the first to the
Corinthians, he brings in examples of the Scripture, to fear us, and to
bridle the flesh, that we cast not the yoke of the law of God from of our
necks, and fall to lustyng and doing of evil.

So now the Scripture is a light, and shows as the true way, both what to
do, and what to hope for. And a defense from all error, and a comfort in
adversity that we despair not, and fears us in prosperity, that we sin
not. Seek therefore in the Scripture as thou read it, first the law, what
God commands us to do. And secondarely the promises, which God promises us
again, namely in Christ Jesus our Lord. Then seek examples, first of comfort,
how God purges all Tribulation is the gift of God.
them that submit themselves to walk in his ways, in the Purgatory of
tribulation, deliueryng them yet at the latter end, and never sufferyng any of
them to perish, that cleave fast to his promises. And finally, note the
examples which are written to fear the flesh that we sin not. That is, how
God suffers the ungodly and wicked sinners What we ought to seek in the
Scriptures.
that resist God, and refuse to follow him, to continue in their wickedness,
ever waxyng worse and worse, until their sin be so sore increased, and so
abominable, that if they should longer endure, they would corrupt the very
elect. But for ye electes sake God sends them preachers. Nevertheless they
harden their hearts against the truth, and God destroys them utterly, and
begins the world a new.

This comfort shall thou evermore find in the plain text, and litterall
sense. Neither is there any storye so homely, so rude, yea or so vile (as it
seems outward) wherein is not excedyng great comfort. And when some which
seem to the^ selves great clerks say: they wott not what more profit is in
many gestes of the Scripture, if they be read without an allegory, then in a
tale of Robenhode: say thou, that A goodly comfort against desperation.
they were written for our consolation and comfort, that we despair not, if
such like happen unto us. We be not holyer then Noe, though he were once
drunk. Neither better beloved then Jacob, though his own son defiled his
bead. We be not holyer then Lot, though his daughters through ignorance
deceived him, nor peradventure holier then those daughters. Neither are we
holyer then David, though he brake wedlock, and upon the same committed
abominable murder. All those men have witness of the Scripture that they
pleased God, and were good me^, both before that those things chanced, and
also after. Neuerlesse such things happened them for our example: not that we
should counterfeite their evil, but if while we fight with our selves,
enforsyng to walk in the law of God (as they did) we yet fall likewise, that
we despair not, but come again to the laws of God, and take better hold.

We read sense the time of Christ's Ensa^ples. of their evils not to bolden us,
but to fear us from sin and desperation.
death, of virgins yt have been brought unto the common stues, and there
defiled, and of Martyrs that have been bound, and whores have abused their
bodies. Why? The judgments of God are bottomless. Such things chanced
partly for examples, partly God through sin heals sin. Pride can neither
be healed, nor yet appear, but through such horrible deades. Peradventure they
were of the popes sect, and reioysed fleshly, thinking that heaven came by
deeds, and not by Christ, and that the outward deed justified them, and made
the^ holy, and not the inward spirit received by faith, and the consent of
heart unto the law of God.

As thou read therefore think that How we ought to prepare our selves, to
the reading of the scriptures.
every syllable pertayneth to thine own self, and suck out the pithe of the
Scripture, and arm thy self against all assaults. First note with strong
faith the power of God, in creatyng all of naught. Then mark the grievous fall
of Adam, and of us all in him, through the light regardyng of the commandment
of God. In the iiij. Chapter God turns him unto Abell, and the^ to his
offering, but not to Cain and his offering. Where thou see that though the
deeds of the evil, appear outwardly as glorious, as the deeds of yt good: yet
in the sight of God, which looks on the heart, the deed is good because of
the man, and not the man good because of his deed. In the vj. God sends Noe
to preach to the wicked, and gives them space to repent: they wax hard hearted,
God brings them to naught. And yet saves Noe: even by yt same water by
which he destroyed them. Mark also what followed the pride of the buildyng of
the Tower of Babell.

Consider how God sends forth Abraham out of his own countey into a
strange land, full of wicked people, Faith our surest shield in all assaults.
and gave him but a bare promise with him that would bless, him and defend
him. Abraham believed: and that word saved, and delivered him in all perilles:
so that we see, how that ma^s life is not maintained ^y bread only, (as
Christ says) but much rather by beleuyng the promises of God. Behold how
soberly, and how circumspectly both Abraham, and also Isaac behaved them selves
among the infidels. Abraham byeth that which might have been given him for
naught, to cut of occasions. Isaac when his wells which he had dug were
taken from him, gives rowme and resists not. Moreover they ear, and sow,
and feed their cattle, and make confederations, and and take perpetual truce,
and do all outward things: Even as they do which have no faith, for God
has not made us to be idle in this world. Every man must work godly and truly
We may not trust in our work^ but in the word and promise of God.
to yt uttermost of the power, that God has given him: and yet not trust
therein: but in Gods word or promise: and God will work with us, and bring that
we do to good effect. And the^ when our power will extend no further, Gods
promises will work all alone.

How many things also resisted the promises of God to Jacob? And yet God
burdened with his promise.
Jacob coniureth God, with his own promises saying: O GOD of my father
Abraham: and GOD of my father Isaac, O Lord which saydest unto me, return unto
thine own country, and unto the place were thou waste borne, and I will do
thee good: I am not worthy of the lest of those mercyes, nor of that troth,
which thou have done to thy servant, I went out with a staff, and come home
with two droues, deliver me out of the hands of my brother Esau, for I fear
him greatly. etc. And God delivered him, and will likewise all that call unto
his promises, with a repentyng heart, were they never so great sins. Mark
also the weak infirmities of the man. He loves one wife more then an other,
one son more then an other. And see how God purges him. Esau threateneth
him: Laban begyleth him. The beloved wife is long baren: his daughter is
ravished: his wife is defiled, and that of his own son. Rahell dies, Joseph
is taken away, yea and (as he supposed) rent of wild beasts. And yet how
glorious was his end? Note the weakness of his children, yea and the sin
of them, and how God through their own wickedness saved them. These examples
teach us, that a man is not at once perfect the first day he begins to live
well. They that be strong, therefore must suffer with the weak, and The holy
ghost breateth where and when it pleases him.
help the^ in unity, and peace, one with an other until they be stronger.

Note what the brethren said when they were tached in Egypt, we have verily
sinned (said they) against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul
when he besought us, and would not hear him: and therefore is this tribulation
come upon us. By Conscience of evil doings fyndeth out (...)(...) men.
which example thou see, how that conscience of evil doings finds men out
at last. But namely in tribulation and adversity: there temptation and also
desperatio^, yea and the very pains of hell find us out: there there yt soul
feels the fierce wrath of GOD, and wishes mountains to fall on her, and to
hyde her (if it were possible) from the angry face of God.

Mark also how great evils follow of how little an occasion Dina goes but
forth alone to see the daughters of the country, and how great mischief and
trouble follows? Jacob loved but one son more then an other, and how
grievous murder followed in their hearts? These are examples for Of small
occasions do rise great evils.
our learning, to teach us to walk warely, and circumspectly in yt world of
weak people, that we give no man occasions of evil.

Finally, see what GOD promised Joseph in his dreams. These promises
accompanied him, always, and went down with him even into the deep dongeon.
And brought him up again. And never forsook him till all yt was promised was
fulfilled. These Ensa^ples for our ^earn^ng.
are examples written for our learning (as Paul says) to teach us to trust in
God in the strong fire of tribulation, and purgatory of our flesh. And that
they which submit them selves to follow GOD, should note and mark such
things, for learning and comfort, is the fruit of the scripture, and cause why
it was written: And with such a purpose to read it, is the way to everlasting
life, and to those ioysul blessings that are promised unto all nations in the
seed of Abraham, which seed is Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be honor and
praise for ever, and unto God our father through him. Amen.

A Table expoundyng certain words in the first book of Moses called Genesis.
ABrech, tender father, or (as some will) how the knee.

Arc, a ship made flat, as it were a chest, or cofer.

Bisse, fine white, whether it be silk or lynen.

Bless, Gods blessings are his gifts: as in the first Chapter he blessed them,
saying, grow and multiply, and have dominion. etc. And in the ix. Chapter, he
blessed Noe, and his sons, and gave them dominion over all beasts, and
authority to eat them. And God blessed Abraham with cattle, and other riches.
And Jacob desired Esau to receive the blessing, which he brought him, that is
the present and gift.

God blessed yt vij. day, that is, gave it a prehemine^ce that men should rest
therein, from bodily labor, and learn to know the will of God, and his laws,
and how to work their works godly all the week after. God also blesses all
nations in Abraham's sede, that is, he turns his love, and favor unto them,
and gives them his spirit, and knowledge of the true way, and lust and power
to walk therein, and all for Christ's sake Abraham's son.

Cain, so is it written in Hebrew. Notwithstanding whether we call him Cain or
Caim, it makes no matter, so we understand the meaning: Every land has his
manner, that we call John, the Welshmen call Euan, the Dutch Haunce. Such
difference is between yt Ebrue, Greek, and Latin: and that makes them that
translate out of the Ebrue vary in names from them, that translate out of
Latin, or Greek.

Curse, Gods curse is the taking away of his benefits: as God cursed yt earth,
and made it barren: So now hunger, dearth, war, pestilence, and such like,
are yet right curses, and signs of the wrath of God unto the unbelievers: but
unto the^ that know Christ, they are very blessings, and that wholesome cross,
and true purgatory of our flesh, through which, all must go that will live
godly, and be saved: as thou read Math. 5. Blessed are they that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, etc And Hebr. 11. The lord chastises whom
he loves, and scourges all the children that he receaueth.

Eden, pleasure.

Firmament, the sky.

Faith, is the beleuyng of Gods promises, and a sure trust in the goodness and
truth of God, which faith justified Abrah. Genesis 15. and was the mother of all
his good works which he afterafterward did, for faith is the goodness of all
works in the sight of god. Good works are things of gods commandment wrought
in faith. And to sow a shoe at the commandment of God, to do thy neighbor
service withal, with faith to be saved by Christ (as God promises us) is
much better the^ to build an abbey of thine own imagination, trusting to be
saved by the fained works of hipocrites. Jacob robbed Laban his uncle: Moses
robbed the Egiptians. And Abraham is about to slay and burn his own son:
and all are holy works, because they are wrought in faith at Gods
commandment. To steal, rob, and murder, are no holy works before worldly
people, but unto them that have their trust in God, they are holy when God
commands them. What God commands not, gets no reward with god. Holy
works of men's imaginations receive their reward here, as Christ testisieth:
Math. 6. Howbeit of faith and works I have spoken abundantly in Mammon. Let
him that desires more, seek there.

Grace, favor, as Noe found grace, that is to say, found favor and love. Ham
and Came all one.

Jehovah, is gods name, neither is any creature so called, and it is as much to
say, as one that is of himself, and depends of nothing: Moreover as often as
thou see LORD in great letters (except there be any error in the printing)
it is in Hebrew Jehovah, thou that art, or he that is.

Marshall in Hebrew, he is called Sartabaim, as thou would say, Lord of the
slaughter men. And though that Tabaim, be taken for cooks in many places,
(for the cooks did slaye the beasts themselves in those days,) yet it may be
taken for them that put men to execution also: and that I thought it should
here best signify, in as much as he had the oversight of the kings prison,
and the kings prisoners: were they never so great men, were under his
custody: and therefore I call him chief Marshal, an officer as it were, yt
Lieuetenaunt of the tower, or master of the Marshalsey.

Slyme was their mortar, chap. 11. and slyme pittes chap. 4. that slyme was a
fatness that issued out of the earth, like unto carre: and thou may call it
cement, if thou will.

Siloh after some, is as much to say as sent, and after some happy: and after
some it signifies Messiah, that is to say, anointed, and that we call Christ
after the Greek word: and it is a prophecy of Christ: for after all the other
tribes were in captivity, and their kingdom destroyed, yet the tribe of Judah
had a ruler of the same blood, even unto the coming of Christ: and about the
coming of Christ, the Romans conquered them, and the emperor gave the
kingdom of the tribe Judah, unto Herod, which was a stranger, even an
Edomite, of the generation of Esau.

Testament, that is an appoymente made between God and man, and gods promises:
And sacrament is a sign representyng such appointment, and promises: as the
raynebowe represents the promise made to Noe, that God will no more drown
the world: And circumcision represents the promises of God to Abraham, on the
one side, and that Abraham and his seed should circumcise, and cut of the
lusts of their flesh, on the other side, to walk in the ways of the lord. As
baptism which is come in the room thereof, now signifies on the one side,
how that all that repent and believe, are washed in Christ's blood: and on the
other side, how that the same must quench, and drown the lusts of the flesh,
to follow the steps of Christ.

There were tirantes in the earth in those days, for the sons of god saw the
daughters of men etc. The sons of God were the Prophets children, which
(though they succeeded their father) fell yet from the right way, and through
falshode of hypocrisy, subdued the world under them, and became tirantes, as
the successors of the Apostles have played with us.

Vapor, a dewie miste, as the smoke of a seething pot.

To walk with God, is to live godly, and to walk in his commaundedementes.

Enos walked with God, and was no more seen, he lived godly and died: God took
him away, that is, God hid his body, as he did Moses and Aarons, lest happly
they should have made an Idol of him, for he was a great preacher, and an holy
man.

Zaphnath Paenea words of Egypt are they (as I suppose) and as much to say,
as a man to whom secret things be opened, or an expounder of secret things,
as some interpret it.

That Joseph brought the Egiptians into such a subjection, would seem unto
some a very cruel deed: how be it, it was a very equal way: for they paid
but yt fifth part of that, that grew on the ground, and therewith were they
quit of all duties, both of rent, custom, tribute, and toll: and the king
therewith found them Lords, and all ministers, and defended them, we now pay
half so much unto the priests only: beside their other craftye exactions. Then
pay we rent yearly, though there grow never so little on yt ground, and yet
when the king calls, pay we never the less. So that if we look
indifferently, their condition was easier then ours, and but even a very
indifferent way, both for the common people, and the king also.

See therefore that thou look not on the ensamples of the Scripture with
worldly eyes, least thou prefer Cain before Abell: Ismaell before Isaac: Esau
before Jacob: Ruben before Judah: Sarah before Phares: Manasses before Ephraim,
and even the worst before the best, as the manner of the world is.

The Prologue to the second book of Moses called Exodus.
BY the Preface upon Genesis, may thou understand how to behave thy self
in this book also, and in all other books of the Scripture. Cleave unto ye
text and plain story, and endeavor thy self to search out the meaning of
all Learn here how to read and understand y^ scripture.
that is described therein, and the true sense of all manner of speakinges of
the Scripture, of proverbs, similitudes, and borrowed speech, whereof I
entreated in the end of the obedience, and beware of subtle allegories.

And note every thing earnestly, as things pertainyng unto thine own heart and
soul.

For as God used him self unto the^ of the old Testament: even so shall he
unto the worlds end use him self unto us, which have received his holy
Scripture, and the testimony of his son Jesus. As God does all things here
for the^ that believe his promises, and harken unto his commau^dements, and with
patience cleave unto him, and walk with him: even so shall he do for us, if we
receive the witness of Christ with a strong faith, and endure patiently following
his steps. And on the other side, as they that fell from the promise of God
through unbelief, and If we harken unto the voice of God, and bend our selves to
do his will, he will be our God, and help us, but otherwise he will plague us as
he plagued the unthankful and faythlesse Jews.
from his law and ordinances, through impatie^cie of their own lusts, were
forsaken of God, and so perished: even so shall we as many as do likewise, and
as many as mock with the doctrine of Christ, and make a cloak of it to live
fleshly, and to follow our lusts.

Note thereto how God is found true at the last, and how when all is past
remedy, and brought into desperation: he then fulfilleth his promises, and that
by an abject and a cast away, a despised, and a refused person, yea, and by a
way impossible to believe.

The cause of all the captivity of Gods people is this. The world ^uer hates
them for their faith, and trust which they have in GOD: but in vain, till
they fall from the faith of yt promises, and love of the law, and ordinances
of God, and put their trust in holy deeds Trust and believe in God, and care not
what the world say.
of their own finding, and live altogether at their own lust and pleasure,
with out regard of God, or respect of their neighbor. Then God forsakes us,
and sends us into captivity, for our dishonoryng of his name, and despisyng
of our neighbor. But the world persecuteth us for our faith in Christ only
(as the people now does) and not for our wicked living. For in his kingdom
thou may quietly, and with license, and under aprotection, do what The world
likes well all wicked lyuers and ungodly people.
soever abhominatio^ thine heart lusts: but God persecuteth us, because we
abuse his holy Testament, and because when we know the truth, we follow it not.

Note also the mighty hand of the Lord, how he plays with his adversaries,
and provoke them, and styrreth them up a little and a little, and delivers
not his people in an hour that both the patience of his elect, and also the
worldly wit and wyly policy of the wicked, wherewith they do fight against God,
might appear.

Mark yt long sufferyng, and soft patience of Moses, and how he loves the
people, and is ever between the Here is set forth the office of every good
person,
wrath of God and them, and is ready to live and dye with them, and to be put
out of the book that God had written for their sakes (as Paul for his
brethren. Romans ix.) and how he takes his own wrongs patiently, and never
auengeth him self. And make not Moses a figure of Christ with Rochester: but
an ensample unto all Princes, and to all that are in authority, how to rule
unto Gods pleasure, and unto their own profit. For there is not a perfecter
life in this world, both to the honor of God, and profit of his neighbor, nor
yet a greater cross, the^ to rule christianly. And of Aaron also, see that
thou make no figure of Christ, until he come unto his sacrifisyng: but an
example unto all Preachers, that they add nothing unto Gods word, or take
ought therefro.

Note also, how GOD sends his promise to the people, and Moses confirms it
with miracles, and the people Temptation is the trial of true christians.
believe. But when temptation comes, they fall into unbelief, and few bide
standing. When thou see that all be not Christen that will be so called, and
that the cross tries the true from the feigned: for if the cross were not,
Christ should have Disciples enough. The excellency of faith which is the gift
of God.
Whereof also thou see, what an excellent gift of God true faith is, and
impossible to be had, without the spirit of God. For it is above all natural
power, that a man in time of temtation, when GOD scourges him, should believe
then steadfastly, how that God loves him, and cares for him, Those who^ God
scourges he dearly loves.
and has prepared all good things for him, and that, that scourgyng is an
earnest that GOD has elect and chosen him.

Note how often Moses styred them up to believe, and trust in God, putting them
in remembrance always in time A necessary lesson for a good precher.
of temptation, of the miracles and wonders that GGD has wrought before time
in their eye sight. How diligently also forbids he all that might withdraw
their hearts from God? to put ought to GODS word, to take ought from it,
co^maundyng to do that only, that is right in the sight of the Lord, that they
should make no manner God commands that we should make no images.
Image, to kneel down before it: yea, that they should make none aultare of
hewed stone, for fear of Images, to fle the heathen Idolatries utterly, and to
destroy their Idols, and cut down their groves where they worshypped, and that
they should not take the daughters of them unto their sons, nor give their
daughters to yt sons of them, and that who soever moved any of them to
worship false Gods, how soever nighe of kynne he were, they must accuse him,
and bring him to death: yea, and wheresoever they The worshipping of Idols or
Images, was abhorred of god.
heard of man, woman, or City, that worshypped false Gods, they should slay
them, and destroy the City for ever, and not build it again, and all because
they should worship nothing but God, nor put confidence in any thing, save in
his word.

Yea, and how warns he to beware Witchcraft sorcery, etc. abhorred of God.
of witchcraft, sorcerie, enchauntment, nicromancie, and all crafts of the
Devil, and of dreamers, ^othsayers, and of miracle doers to destroy the word,
and that they should suffer none such to live.

Thou will hapely say, they tell a man the truth. What then? GOD will that we
care not to know what shall come. He will have us to care only to keep his
commandments, and to commit all chances unto him: He has promised to
care for us, and to keep us from all ill. All things are in his hand, he can
remedy all things, and will for his truth sake, if we pray him. In his
promises only will he have us trust, and there rest, and to seek no farther.

How also does he provoke them to love, ever rehearsing the benefits of God
done to them already, and the godly promises that were to come? And Moses often
reherseth the benefits of almighty God, to move vsto fear him, and to love
our neighbor.
how goodly laws of love gives he, to help one an other, and that a man
should not hate his neighbor in his heart, but love him as himself. Leuit. 19
And what a charge gives he in every place, over the poor and nedie? over the
stranger, friendless and widows? And when he desires to show mercy, he
rehearses with all, the benefits of God done to them at their need, that
they might see a cause, at the least way in GOD to show mercy of very love
unto their neighbors at their need.

Also there is no law so simple in apparaunce thoroughout the v. books of
Moses, but that there is a great reason of yt making thereof, if a man search
diligently. As that a man is forbid to sethe a Kydde in his mothers milk,
moves us unto compassion, and to be pitiful. As does also that a man should
not offer the sire or damme and the young both in one day. Leuiticus.xxij. For
it might seem a cruel thing, in as much as his mothers milk is as it were his
blood, wherefore god will not have him God will have us to be merciful to our
neighbors.
sodde therein: but will have a man show courtesy, upon the very beasts. As in
an other place he commands that we mosell not the Ox that treads out the
corn (which manner of threshyng is used in hoate countries) and that because
we should much rather to be liberal and kind unto men that do us service. Or
happily GOD would have none such wanton meat used among his people. For the
Kydde of it self is nourishyng, and the Goats milk is restauratiue, and both
together might be to rank, and therefore forbidden, or some other like cause
there was.

Of the ceremonies, sacrifices, and tabernacle, with all his glory and pomp,
understand that they were not permitted only, but also commanded of GOD, to
lead the people in the shadow of Moses and night of the All the ceremonies of
the old testament, we^^ but preachers of Christ that was to come.
old Testament, until the light of Christ, and day of the new Testament were
come. As children are lead in the fantasies of youth until the discretion of
man's age be come upon them. And all was done to keep them from Idolatry.

The tabernacle was ordained to the intent they might have a place appointed
them, to do their sacrifices openly in the sight of the people, and namely the
Priests which waited thereon: that it might be seen that they did all
things according to Gods word, and not after the Idolatry of their own
imagination. And the costlinesse of the The ^ea^(...) of the tabernacle was to
keep the Jews from harkenyng to the heathen.
Tabernacle and the beauty also, pertaining thereunto, that they should see
nothing among the heathen, but that they should see things more beautiful at
home, because they should not be moved to follow them.

And in like manner the diverse fashions of sacrifices and ceremonies, was to
occupy their minds, that they should have no lust to follow the Heathen: and the
multitude of them was, that they should have so much to do in keepyng them,
that they should have no leisure to imagine other of their own: yea, and that
Gods word might be there by in all that they did, that they might have their
faith and trust in God, which he cannot have that follows either his own
inventions, or traditions of men's making without Gods word.

Finally, God has two testaments, the old and the new. The old testament is
those te^porall promises which God made the children of Israel of a God had
two Testaments, that is, the old and the new.
good land, and that he would defend them, and of wealth and prosperity, and
of temporal blessings, of which thou read over all the law of Moses, but
namely, Leuiticus. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. and the avoiding of all threatenynges and
curses of which thou read likewise every where, but specially in the two
books above rehearsed, and the avoiding of all punishment ordained for the
transgressors of the law.

And the old Testament was builte The old testament was built upon the
observation of the law.
altogether upon the keeping of the law and ceremonies, and was the reward of
keeping them in this life only, and reached no farther then this life and this
world. As thou read Leuit. 18. A man that does them shall live therein, which
text Paul reherseth, Romans 10. and Gal. 3. That is, he that keeps them shall
have his life glorious, according to all the promises and blessings of the law,
and shall avoid both all temporal punishments of the law, and all the
threatenings and cursinges also. For neither the law of the ten
commandments, nor yet the ceremonies, justified in the heart before God, or
purified unto the life to come. In so much that Moses at his death, even
fourtye years after the law, and ceremonies were given, complains saying,
God has not given, you an heart to understand, nor eyes to see, nor ears to
hear unto this day. As who should The law could not give life.
have said. God has given you ceremonies, but ye know not the use of them,
and has given you a law, but god has not written it in your hearts.

Wherefore serves the law then, if it give us no power to do the law? Paul
answers them, that it was given to utter sin only, and to make it appear.
As a corosie is laid unto an old The law is the vtterer of sin.
sore, not to heal it, but to stir it up, and make the disease alive, that a
man might feel in what ^eopardie he is, and how nigh death and not aware, and
to make a way unto the healing plaster.

Even so says Paul Gal. 3. The law was given because of transgression (that is
to make the sin alive, that it might be felt and seen) until the seed came
unto whom it was promised, that is to say, until the children of faith came,
or until Christ that sede in whom God promised Abraham, that all nations of
the world should be blessed, came.

That is, the law was given to utter sin, death, damnation, and curse, The
law was given by God to show what sin was.
and to drive us unto Christ, in whom forgeuenes, life, iustifiyng, and
blessings were promised, that we might see so great love of God to us ward in
Christ, that we hence forth overcome with kindness, might love again, and of
love keep the commandments.

Now he that goes about to quiet his conscience, and to justify him self
with the law: does but heal his wounds with freatyng coroseis. And he that
goes about to purchase grace with Ceremonies are not given to justify the
heart, but to signify our justification by Christ.
ceremonies: does but suck the ale pole to quench his thyrst, in as much as
the ceremonies were not given to justify the heart, but to signify the
iustifiyng, and forgiveness that is in Christ's blood.

Of the ceremonies that they justify not thou read. Hebr. x. It is
impossible that sin should be done away with the blood of Oxen, and Goats.
And of Ceremonies cannot justify.
the law thou read. Galla. iij. If there had been a law given that could
have quickened or given life: then had righteousness, or iustifiyng come by the
law in deed. Now the law not only quickens not the heart, but also wounds
it with conscience of sin, and ministers death, and damnation unto her. ij.
Cor. iij. So that she must needs dye and be damned, except she find other
remedy. So far it is of, that she is justified, or helped by the law.

The new Testament is those everlasting promises, which are made us The new
Testament are the everlasting promises made to us in Christ.
in Christ the Lord throughout all the the Scriptures. And that Testament is
built on faith, and not in works.

For it is not said of that Testament. He that works shall live: but he that
believes shall live. As thou read. John. iij. God so loved the world, that
Faith only justifies.
he gave his only begotten son, that none that believe in him should perish,
but have life everlasting.

And when this Testament is preached and believed, the spirit enters the heart,
and quickens it, and gives it life, and justifies her. The spirit also
makes the law, a lively thing in the heart, so that a man brings forth good
works of his own accord, without compulsion of the law, without fear of
threatenynges, Good works spryng out of the love we have to God.
or cursings: yea, and without all manner respect, or love unto any te^porall
pleasure, but of the very power of the spirit, received thorough faith, as
thou read. John. i. He gave them power to be the sons of God, in that they
believed on his name.

And of that power they work, so that he which has the spirit of Christ, is
now no more a child: he neither learneth, nor works any longer for pain of
yt rod, or for fear of bugges or pleasure of apples, but does all things of
his own courage. As Christ says. John. vij. He that believes on me, shall
have rivers of living waters flowyng out of his belly. That is all good works,
and all gifts of grace spring out of Where true faith is, there good works
do flow and abound.
him naturally, and by their own accord. Thou nedest not to wrest good works
out of him, as a man would wring veriuce out of crabbes. Nay they flow
naturally out of him, as sprynges out of rocks.

The new Testament was ever even from the beginning of the world. For there
were always promises of Christ The new Testament was from the beginning.
to come by faith, in which promises, the elect were then justified inwardly
before God, as outwardly before the world, by keeping of the law, and ceremonies.

And in conclusion, as thou see blessings, or cursings follow the breaking,
or keeping of the law of Moses: even so naturally do the blessings, or
cursings follow the breakyng of keeping of the law of nature, out of which Our
temporal laws spring out of the law of nature.
spryng all our temporal laws. So that when the people keep the temporal
laws of their land, temporal prosperity, and all manner of such temporal
blessings (as thou read of in Moses) do accompany them, and fall upon
them. And contrariwise, when they sin unpunished, and when the rulers have no
respect unto equity or honesty, then God sends his curse among them, as
hunger, dearth, morein, bannyng, pestilence, war, oppression, with strange
and wonderful diseases, and new kinds of misfortune and evil luck.

If any man ask me, seeing that faith justifies me, why I work? I answer.
Love co^pelleth me. For as long Love counsels the faithful to work.
as my soul feels what love GOD has showed me in Christ: I can not but love
God again, and his will and commandments, and of love work them, hor can
they seem hard unto me. I think not my self, better for my woorkyng, nor
seek heaven nor an higher place in heaven because of it. For a Christian
works to make his weak brother perfecter, and not to seek an higher place
in heaven. I compare not my self unto him, that woorketh not. No, he that
works not to day, shall have grace to turn, and to work to morrow, and in
the mean time, I pity We must nor presume in our well doing, not co^de^ne
others that run astray: the last which turns to god is as far forward as
the first.
him and pray for him, If I had wrought the will of God those thousand years,
and an other had wrought the will of the devil as long, and this day turn,
and be as well willing to suffer with Christ as I: he has this day over
taken me, and is as far come as I, and shall have as much reward as I, and I
envy him not, but rejoice most of all, as of lost treasure found.

For if I be of GOD, I have these thousand years suffered to win him, for to
come and praise the name of God with me. These thousand years, I have prayed,
sorowed, longed, sighed, and sought for that which I have this day found, and
therefore rejoice with all my might, and praise God for his grace and mercy.

A Table expounding certain words of the second book of Genesis.
ALbe, a long garment of white linen.

Arc, a cofer or chest, as our shrines, save it was flat, and the sample of
ours was taken thereof.

Booth, an house made of bows.

Brestlap, or brestflappe is such a flap, as thou see in the breast of a cope.

Consecrate, to appoynte a thing to holy uses.

Dedicate, purify or sanctify.

Ephod, is a garment somewhat like an amice, save ye arms came through, and it
was girded to.

Geeras, in weight as it were an English halfepeny, or somewhat more.

Heave offringes, because they were houen up before the Lord.

House, he made them houses, that is, he made a kynrede, or a multitude of
people to spring out of them, as we say the house of David, for the kindred of
David.

Peace offering, offering of thanks giving of devotion, and not for conscience
of sin and trespass.

Pollute, defile.

Reconcile, to make at one, and to bring in grace or favor.

Sanctify, to cleanse and purify, to appoint a thing to holy uses, and to
separate from unclean and unholy uses.

Sanctuary, a place hallowed and dedicate unto God.

Tabernacle, a house made tentwise, or as a pauilion.

Tunicle, much like the vppermoste garment of the Deacon.

Waueoffring, because they were wauen in the priests hands to diverse quarters.

Worship, by worshippyng, whether it was in the old testament, or new,
understand the bowing of a man's self upon the ground: as we often times, as we
kneel in our prayers how our selves, and lie on our arms, and hands with our
face to the ground.

Of this word I will be, comes the name of God Jehovah, which we interpret
Lord, and is as much to say, as I am that I am. 3. Chap.

That I here call a sheep in Hebrew is a word indifferent to a sheep, and a
goat both. 12. Chap.

The Lamb was called passover, that the very name it self, should put them
in remembrance, what it signified, for the signs that God ordained, either
signified the benefits done, or promsses to come, and were not done, as the
signs of our domme God the Pope.

Jehovah Nissi, the Lord is he that exalts me. chap. 17.

Ephod, is a garment like an amice. Chap. 25.

Shewbread, because it was always in the sight and presence of the Lord. Chap.
25.

A Prologue into the third book of Moses called Leuiticus.
THe ceremonies which are described in yt book following, were chiefly
ordained of God, (as I said in the end of the Ma^s wisdom is plain Idolatry,
it scat tereth, divides, and makes sects.
prologue upon Exodus.) to occupye the minds of that people the Israelites, and
to keep them from serving of God, after the imagination of their blind zeal,
and good intent: that their consciences might be stablished, and they sure that
they pleased God therein, which were impossible, if a man did of his own head
that which was not commanded of god, nor depended of any appointment made
between him and God. Such ceremonies Ceremonies to the Israelites and ^ewts
were as good schole masters are to young scholars.
were unto them as an A, B, C, to learn to spell and read, and as a nurse to
feed them with milk and pappe, and to speak unto them after their own
capacity, and to lispe the words unto them according as the babes and
children of that age might sound them again. For all that were before Christ,
were in the infancy and childhoode of the world, and saw that son which we
see openly, but through a cloud, and had but feeble, and weak imaginatio^s of
Christ, as children have of men's deeds (a few prophets except) which All
things were first reveled in ceremonies and shadows until it pleased almighty
God, to reuele his son Jesus Christ.
yet described him unto other in sacrifices and ceremonies, likenesses, riddles
proverbs, and dark and strange speaking, until the full age were come, that
god would show him openly unto the whole world, and deliver them from their
shadows and cloudelight, and the hethen out of their dead sleep, of starck
blind ignorancy. And as the shadow vanishes away at the coming of the
light, eue^ so do the ceremonies and sacrifices at the coming of Christ, and
are henceforth no more necessary, then a token left in remembrance of a
bargayn, is necessary when the bargayne is fulfilled. And though they seem
plain childishe, yet they be not altogether fruitelesse: as the puppets and
xx. manner of trifles, which mothers permit unto their young children, be not all
in vain. For albeit that such fantasies be permitted Small and little gifts
given by the parents to their children, causes love and obedience.
to satisfy the childerns lusts, yet in that they are the mothers gift, and
be done in place and time at her commandment, they keep the children in awe,
and make them know the mother, and also make them more apt against a more
stronger age to obey in things of greater earnest.

And moreover, though sacrifices and Sacrifices and ceremonies serve for
allegories to find out Christ.
ceremonies can be no ground, or foundation to build upon: that is, though we
can prove naught with them: yet when we have once found out Christ and his
mysteries, the^ we may borow Similitudes prove nothing, but do more plainly
lead thee to understand the text.
figures, that is to say allegories, similitudes, or examples to open Christ,
and the secrets of God hid in Christ, even unto the quick, and to declare
them more lively and se^sibly with them, the^ with all the words of the world.
For similitudes have more virtue and power with them then bare words, and
lead a man's wits further into the pithe and marye, and spiritual
understanding of the thing, the^ all the words that can be imagined. And
though also that all the ceremonies, and sacrifices have as it were a
starrelight of Christ, yet some there be that have as it were the light of the
broad day, a little before the son rising, and express him, and Some
ceremonies co^teine whole some and profitable doctrine.
the circumstaunces and virtue of his death so plainly, as if we should play
his passion on a scaffold; or in a stage play, openly before the eyes of the
people. As the escape got, the brazen Serpent, the Ox burnt without the host,
the passover Lamb, etc. In so much that I am fully persuaded, and cannot
Ceremonies ordained to confirm our faith.
but believe that God had showed Moses the secrets of Christ, and the very
manner of his death before hand, and commanded him to ordain them for the
confirmation of our faith, which are now in the clear day light, and I believe
also that ye prophets, which followed Moses to confirm his prophesies, and to
maintayn his doctrine until Christ's coming, were moved by such things to
search further of Christ's secrets. And though God would Gods secrets were
opened but to a few.
not have the secrets of Christ generally known, save unto a few familiare
friends, which in that infa^cy he made of man's wit to help the other babes:
yet as they had a general promise that one of the seed of Abraham should
come and bless them, even so they had a general faith, that God would by the
same man save them, though they wist not by what means, as the very apostles
when it was often told them, ye they could never comprehend it, till it was
fulfilled in deed.

And beyond all this, their sacrifices, and ceremonies as far forth as the
promises The ceremonies of themselves saved not, but faith in Gods promise.
annexed unto them extend, so far forth they saved the^, and justified the^,
and stood them in the same stead as our Sacraments do us: not by the power
of the sacrifice or deed it self, but by the virtue of the faith in ye
promise, which the sacrifice or Ceremonye preached, and whereof it was a token
or sign. For the ceremonies and sacrifices were left with them, and commanded
them to keep the promise in remembrance, and to wake up their faith. As it is
not enough to send many on errandes, and to tell them what they shall do: but
they must have a remembrance with them, and it be but a ringe of a rushe
about one of their fingers. And as it is not inoughe to make a bargayne with
words only, but we must put thereto an oath, and give earnest to confirm the
faith of ye person with whom it is made. And in like Our nature is so weak
that we must be helped by outward signs and tokens.
manner if a man promise, whatsoever trifle it be, it is not believed except he
hold up his finger also, such is the weakness of the world. And therefore
Christ himself used ofttymes diverse ceremonies in curyng ye sick to stir
up their faith with all. As for example: it was not ye blood of ye Lamb that
saved the^ in Egypt, when ye angel smote the Egiptians: but the mercy of God
and his truth, whereof that blood was a token and remembrance, to stir up
their faythes withal. For though god No man is helped by (...) promises, but
sinners that feel their sin.
make a promise, yet it saves none finally but them, that long for it, and
pray God with a strong faith to fulfill it, for his mercy and truth only, and
knowledge their unworthiness. And even so our sacraments (if they be truly
ministered) preach Christ unto us, and lead Sacraments truly ministered are
profitable.
our faith unto Christ, by which faith our sins are done away, and not by
the deed or work of the Sacrament. For as it was impossible that yt blood of
calves should put away sin: even so is it impossible that the water of the
river should wash our hearts. Nevertheless, Sacraments truly mini^^res preach
unto us repentance of our sins.
the sacraments cleanse us and absolve us of our sins as the priests do, in
preaching of repentance and faith, for which cause either other of them were
ordained, but if they preach not, whether it be the priest, or the Sacrament,
so profit they not.

And if a man allege Christ, John in the, iij. Chapter saying: Except a man be
borne again of water, and the holy Ghost he can not see the kingdom of GOD,
and will therefore that the holy ghost be present in the water, and therefore the
very deed, or work does put No^ naked or dome ceremonies, but the holy ghost
through faith washes away sins.
away sin: then I will send him unto Paul which asks his Galathia^s,
whether they received the holy ghost by the deed of the law, or by preaching of
faith, and there concludes that the holy ghost acco^panyeth the preaching of
faith, and with the word of faith, enters the heart and purges it, which thou
may also understand by Saint Paul's saying: Ye are borne a new out of the
water through the word. So now if Baptism preach me the washyng in Christ's
blood, so does the holy ghost accompany it, and that deed of preaching
through faith does put away my sins. For the holy Ghost is no dome God, nor
no God that goes a mummynge. If a man say of the Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood, that it is a sacrifice as well for the dead as for the quick, and
therefore the very deed it self justifies and puts away sin: I answer
that a sacrifice is the sleyng of the body of a beast, or a The difference
between a sacrifice, and a Sacrament.
man: wherefore if it be a sacrifice, then is Christ's body there slain and
his blood there shed: but that is not so. And therefore it is properly no
sacrifice but a Sacrament, and a memorial of that everlasting sacrifice once
for all, which he offered upon cross now upon a xv. hundred years ago, and
preaches only unto them that are aly^e. And as for them that be dead, it is
as profitable unto them as is a ca^dle in a La^terne without light unto them
that What slate we dye in the same we shall rise again, either of salvation or
damnation.
walk by the way in dark night, and as the Gospel song in Latin is unto
them that understand none at all, and as a Sermon preached to him that is dead,
and hears it not. It preaches unto them that are a live only, for they that
be dead, if they dyed in the faith which that Sacrament preaches, they be
safe, and are past all ieopardy. For when they were alive their hearts loved
the law of GOD, and therefore sinned not, and were sorry that their members
sinned, and ever The Sacraments are unto ye dead, no Sacraments at all.
moved to sin, and therefore thorough faith it was forgeuen them. And now
their synnefull members be dead, so that they can now sin no more, wherefore
it is unto them that be dead neither Sacrament nor sacrifice: But under the
pretense of their soul health it is a servant unto our spiritualties holy
Sacraments abused up y^ Clergy.
coueteousnesse, and an extorcioner, and a builder of Abbayes, Colleges,
Chauntryes and Cathedral Churches with false gotten good, a pickepurse, a
polar, and a bottomless bag. The Papists have had no small friend and good
helper of the mass


Some man would happily say, that the prayers of the Mass help much: not the
living only, but also the dead. Of the hoate fire of their fervent prayer
which consumes faster then all the world is able to bring sacrifice, I have
Hipocrites prayers ca^ neither profit them selkes, nor any man ^ls
said sufficiently in other places. How beit it is not possible to bring me in
belief, that the prayer which helps her own master unto no virtue, should
purchase me the forgeuenes of sins. If I saw that their prayers had obtained
them grace to live such a life, as Gods word did not rebuke, the could I soon
be borne in hand that what so ever they asked GOD, their prayers should not be
in vain. But now what good ca^ he wish me in his prayers that Those that are
enemies to the word of God, love neither god nor his people.
enuieth Christ the fode, and the life of my soul? What good can he wish
me, whose heart cleaves a sonder for pain, when I am taught to repent of my
evil?

Furthermore, because that few know the use of the old Testament, and the most
part think it nothing necessary but to make allegories, which they feign
every man after his own brain at all wyld adventure without any certain
rule: therefore (though I have spoken of them in an other place) yet lest the
book come not to all men's hands that shall read this, I will speak of them
here also a word or twain.

We had need to take heed every Allegories are to be well weyed and considered.
where that we be not begyled with false allegories, whether they be drawn
out of the new Testament, or the old, either out of any other story, or of the
creatures of the world, but namely in The greatest cause of the decay of faith
and blindness that we were in* was thorough Allegories.
this book. Here a man had need to put on all his spectacles, and to arm him
self against inuisibles spirits.

First allegories prove nothing (and by allegories understand examples or
similitudes borrowed of strange matters, and of an other thing then that thou
entreatest of.) And though circu^sion be a figure of Baptism, yet thou can
not prove Baptism by Circumcision. For this argument were very How allegories
are to be understand.
feeble, the Israelites were Circumcised therefore, we must be Baptized. And in
like manner though ye offering of Isaac were a figure or example of the
resurr^ction, yet is this argument naught, Abraham would have offered Isaac,
but GOD delivered him from death, therefore we shall rise again, and so forth
in all other.

But the very use of allegories is to declare and open a text that it may be
The right used of allegories.
the better perceived and understand. As when I have a clear text of Christ
and of the Apostles, that I must be baptized, then I may borow an example of
Circumcision, to express the nature, power, and fruit or effect of baptism.
For as Circumcision was unto them a common badge signifiyng that they were all
soldiers of god, to war his war, and separating them from al other
nations, disobedient unto God: Baptism is ye common badge of all true
professors of Christ.
even so baptism is our common badge, and sure earnest and perpetual memorial
that we pertain unto Christ, and are separated from all that are not
Christ's. And as Circumcision was a token certifyeng them, that they were
received unto the favor of God, and their sins forgiven them: even so
Baptism certifieth us that we are washed in the blood of Christ, and received
to favor for his sake, and as Circumcision signified unto them, the cuttyng
away of their own lusts, and Baptism teaches us repentance of sin.
sleayng of their free will, (as they call it) to follow the will of GOD, even
so Baptism signifies unto us repentance, and the mortifying of our unruly
members, and bodies of sin, to walk in a new life, and so forth.

And likewise, though that the saving of Noe, and of them that were with him
in the ship, thorough water, is a figure, that is to say an example and
likeness of Baptism, as Peter makes it. 1. Peter. 3. yet I can not prove The
bare washyng helps not but throrough the word of faith it purifieth us.
Baptism therewith, save describe it only: for as the ship saved them in the
water thorough faith, in that they believed God, and as y^ other that would not
believe Noe perished: even so Baptism saves us through the word of faith
which it preaches, when all the world of the unbelieving perish. And Paul. 1.
Corin. 10. makes the sea and the cloud a figure of Baptism, by which, and a
thousand mo I might declare, it but not prove it. Paul also in the said place
makes the rock, out of which Moses brought water unto the children of Israel,
a figure or example of Christ, not to prove Christ (for that were impossible)
but to describe Christ only: even as Christ him self John. 3 boroweth a
similitude or figure of the braien serpent to lead Nichodemus from How christ
boroweth figures of the old Testament, to make plain the textes of the new
testament.
his earthy imagination, into the spiritual understanding of Christ's saying:
As Moses lifted up a Serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be
lifted up, that none that believe in him perish, but have everlasting life. By
which similitude the virtue of Christ's death is better described then thou
could declare it with a thousand words. For as those murmurers against God,
as soon as they repented were healed of their deadly wounds, thorough
lookynge on the brazen Serpent only, without medicine or any other help, yea
and without any other reason, but that God has said it should be so, and not
to murmr again, but to leave their murmuryng: even so all that repent and
believe in Christ, are saved from everlasting death, of pure grace without, and
before their good works, and not to sin again, but to fight against sin,
and henceforth to sin no more.

Even so with the ceremonies of this book thou can prove nothing, save
describe, and declare only the putting away of our sins through the death
of Christ. For Christ is Aaron, and Aarons sons, and all that offer the
sacrifice to purge sin. And Christ is all manner offering that is offered: he
is the ox, the sheep, the got, the kyd and lamb: he is the ox that is burnt
without the host, and yt scapegote that carried all the sin of the people away
into the wilderness: for as they purged the people from their worldly
vncleanesses through blood of ye sacrifices, even so does Christ purge us from
the uncleannesses of everlasting death with his own blood, and as their
worldly sins could no otherwise be purged, then by blood of sacrifice: even
so can our sins be no otherwise Our duty is to do good deeds but salvation
we cannot challenge thereby.
forgeuen, then through the blood of Christ. All the deeds in the world, save
the blood of Christ, can purchase no forgiveness of sins: for our deeds do
but help our neighbor, and mortify the flesh, and help that we sin no more,
but and if we have sinned, it must be freely forgeuen through the blood of
Christ, or remain ever.

And in like manner of the Leapers A good example taken of the Lepers.
thou can prove nothing: thou can never conjure out confession thence,
howbeit thou have an handsome example there, to open the binding and losyng of
our priests, with the key of Gods word, for as they made no man a Leper, even
so ours have no power to command any man to be in sin, or to go to
purgatory or hell. And therefore (in as much as binding and loosing is one
power) as those Priests healed no man, even so ours can not of their
innisible, and domme power, drive any man's sins away, or deliver The true
preaching of Gods word, does bind and lose consciences.
him from hell, or feigned purgatory, how be it, if they preached Gods word
purely, which is the authority that Christ gave them, then they should bind
and lose, kill and make alive again, make unclean and clean again, and send
to hell and fetch thence again, so mighty is gods word. For if they preached
the law of God, they should bynd the consciences of sinners, with the bonds of
the pains of hell, and bring them unto repentance. And then if they preached
unto the^ ye mercy that is in Christ, they should loose them and quiet their
ragyng consciences, and certify them of the favor of God, and In allegories
is both honey and gall, that is to say, both good and evil
that their sins be forgeuen.

Finally, beware of allegories, for there is not a more handsome or apt thing
to beguile withal, then an allegory, nor a more subtle and pestilente thing in
the world to persuade a false matter then an allegory. And contrariwise, there
is not a better, vehementer or mightier thing to make a man understand with
all, the^ an allegory. For allegories make a man quick witted, and printe
wisdom in him, and makes it to abide, where bare words go but in at the one
ear, and out at the other. As this with such like sayings: put salt to all
your sacrifices, in stead of this sentence, do all your deeds with discretion,
greeteth and biteth (if it be understand) more then plain words. And when I
say instead of these words, boast not your self of your good deeds, eat not
the blood, nor the fat of your sacrifice, there is as great difference between
them, as there is distance between heaven and earth. For All good deeds are
gods work manship, and we his instruments whereby he does them.
the life and beauty of all good deeds is of God, and we are but the caren
lean, we are only the instrument whereby God works only, but the power is
his. As God created Paul a new, poured his wisdom into him, gave him might,
and promised him that his grace should never fail him, etc. and al with out
deseruinges, except that nurtering the saints, and making them curse and rail
on Christ be meritorious. Now as it is death to eat the blood or fat of any
sacrifice, is it not (think ye) damnable to rob God of his honor, and to
glorify my self with his honor?

An exposition of certain words of the fourth book of Moses, called Numeri.
AVims, a kind of Giauntes, and the word signifies crooked, unright, or
weaked.

Beliall, weaked, or weakeuesse, he that has cast the yoke of God of his
neck, and will not obey God.

Bruterer, prophesies or southsayers.

Emims, a kind of gyantes so called, because they were terrible and cruel,
for Emim signifies terriblenes.

Enacke, a kind of Giauntes so called happly, because they ware chains about
their necks.

Horims, a kind of Giauntes, and signifies noble, because that of pride they
called themselves nobles, or gentles.

Rock, God is called a rock, because both he and his word lasts for ever.

Whet them on thy children, that is, exercise thy children in them, and put
them in ure.

Zamzumims, a kind of Gyauntes, and signifies mischeuous, or that be always
imagining.

The Prologue into the fourth book of Moses called Numeri.
IN the second and third book they received the law. And in this fourth, they
begin to work, and to practice. Of which practicing ye see many good
examples of unbelief, and what Freewill and unbelief were the overthrow of
ou^ for e^athers.
freewill does, when she takes in hand to keep yt law of her own power, with
out help of faith in yt promises of god: how she leaves her masters
carcasses by the way in the wilderness, and brings them not into the land
of rest. Why could they not enter in? Because of their unbelief, Hebrew. 3.
For had they believed, so had they been under grace, and their old sins had been forgiven them, and power should have been given them to have fulfilled the
law thenceforth, and they should have been kept from all temptations that had
been to strong for them. For it is written, John. 1. He gave them power to be
the sons of God, through beleuyng Then cannot they be the children of God,
which put more trust in their own works, then in ye blood of Jesus Christ.
in his name. Now to be yt son of God, is to love God and his
commandments, and to walk in his way after the ensample of his son
Christ. But these people took upon them to work without faith, as thou see
in the 14. of this book, where they would fight and also did, without the
word of promise: even when they were warned that they should not. And in the
16. again, they would please God with their holy faythlesse works (for
where Gods word is not, there can be no faith) but the fire of God consumed
their holy works, as it did Nadab and Abihu Leuit. 10. And from these
unbelievers turn thine eyes unto the Pharisees which before the coming of
Christ in his flesh, had laid the foundation of freewyll, after the same
ensample. Whereon they built holy works after their own imagination without
faith of yt word, Faithless works.
so fervently, that for the great zeal of them, they slew the king of all
holy works, and the lord of freewil, which only through his grace makes the
will free, and loses her from bondage of sin, and gives her love, and
lust unto the laws of God, and power to fulfill them. And so through their
holy works done by the power of freewil, they excluded themselves out of the
holy The Pharisees by their freewill excluded them selves from the salvation
rest of forgeuenes of sins by faith in the blood of Christ.

And then look on our hipocrites, which in like manner followyng the doctrine
of Aristotle, and other hethen Paganes, have against all the Scripture set up
freewill again, unto whose power they ascribe the keeping of the commandments
of God. For they have set up wilful poverty of another manner then any is
commanded of god. And yt chastity of matrimony utterly defied, they have set
up another wilful chastity not required of God, which they swear, vow and
profess to give God, whether he will give it them or no, and compel all their
disciples thereunto, saying that it is in the power of every man's freewill to
observe it, contrary (...) Christ. Blasphemy to christ's death.
to Christ and his apostle Paul.

And the obedience of God and man excluded, they have vowed an other wilful
obedience condemned of all the scripture, which they will yet give god whether
he will or will not.

And what is become of their wilful O subtle Foxes through poverty made
themselves Lords of all.
poverty? has it not robbed the whole world, and brought and under them? Can
there be either king or emperor, or of whatsoever degree it be, except he will
hold of them, and be sworn unto them to be their servant, to go and come at
their lust, and to defend* their quarrels be they false or true? Their wilful
poverty has already eaten up y^ whole world, and is yet still gredier then ever
it was, in so much that teune worlds mo were not enough to satisfy the
honger thereof.

Moreover besides daily corruptyng of other men's wives, and open whore dome,
unto what abhominacions (to filthy to be spoken of) has their volu^tary
chastity brought them? Wilful chastity is wilful wikednes.


And as for their wilful obedience, what is it but the disobedience and the
diffiaunce both of all the laws of God and man? in so much that if any Prince
begin to execute any law of man upon them, they curse him unto the bottom of
h^l, and proclayme him no right king, and that his Lords ought no longer The
Papist^ wilful obedience, is common disobedience to all princes.
to obey him, and interdite his common people as they were heathen Turks or
Saracenes. And if any man preach them gods law, him they make an heretic and
burn him to ashes. And in sieade of Gods law and man's, they have set up one
of their own imagination, which they observe with dispensations.

And yet in these works they have so great confidence that they not only Our
(...) comes not by our merits, but through says, by the blood of ou^ savior
Jesus Christ.
trust to be saved thereby, and to be hyer in heaven then they yt be saved
through Christ: but also promise to all other for geuen^u^ of their sins,
thorough the merits of the same. Wherein they rest, and teach other to rest
also, excludyng the whole world from the rest of forgiveness of sins through
faith in Christ's blood.

And now seeing that faith only lets Faith only brings us to christ and
vnbe^ drives do from Christ.
a man in unto rest, and unbelief excludes him, what is the cause of this
unbelief? verily no sin yt the world sees, but a Pope holiness, and a
righteousness of their own imagination as Paul says. Roma. x. They be
ignorant of the righteousness wherewith God justifies, and have set up a
righteousness, of their own making thorough which they be disobedient unto the
righteousness of God. And Christ rebukes not the Phariseys for gross sins
which the world saw, but for Christ rebu^ the Pharisees for their holy and
(...).
those holy deeds which so blered the eyes of the world, that they were taken
as Gods: even for long prayers, for fasting, for tythyng so diligently that
they left not so much as their herbs vntithed, for their clennesse in washyng
before meat, and for washyng of cups, dishes, and all manner vessels, for
buildyng ye Prophets sepulchers, and for keeping the holy day, and for turnyng
yt heathen unto the faith, and for geuyng of alms. For unto such holy deeds
they ascribed righteousness, and The pharisees ascribe righteousn^ works, and
therefore were condemned of Christ.
therefore when the righteousness of GOD was preached unto them they could not
but persecute it, the devil was so strong in them. Which thing Christ well
describes. Luke. xj. saying, That after the devil is cast out, he comes
again, and finds his house swept, and made gay, and then takes seven worse
then him self and dwells therein, and so is the end of that man worse then
the beginning. That is, when they be a little cle^sed from gross sins which
the world seyth, and then made gaye in their own sight, with the righteousness
of traditions, then comes The iustifiyng o^ our selves, makes the diu^ more
bu^ then he would be.
seven, that is to say the whole power of the devil: for vij. with the Hebrews
signifies a multitude without number, and the extremity of a thing, and is a
speech borrowed (I suppose) out of Leuiticus, where is so often mention made of
seven. Where I would say: I will punish thee, that all the world shall take an
example of thee, there the Jew would say, I will Circumcise thee or What to
meant in the scrip^ by this (...) v^. tyme^.
Baptize thee seven times. And so here by seven is meant all the devils of hell,
and all the might and power of the devil. For unto what further blindness
could all the devils in hell bring them, then to make the^ believe that they
were justified thoroughe their own good works? For when they once believed
that they were purged from their sins, and made righteous thoroughe their
own holy works, what rowme was there left for the righteousness that is
Merit^ger^ ye more their blindness is rebuked, the more they rebel against
Christ and his goly^.
in Christ's bloudshedyng? And therefore when they be fallen into this
blindness, they can not but hate and persecute the light. And the more clear
and evidently their deeds be rebuked, the furiousser and maliciousser blind
are they, until they break out into open blasphemy, and synnyng against the
holy ghost, which is the malicious persecutyng of the clear troth so
manifestly proved, that they can not once hish against it: as the Phariseis
persecuted Christ, because he rebuked their holy deeds. And when he proved his
doctrine with the Scripture and miracles, yet though they could not The
doctrine of the pharisees, and the doctrine of our papists do well agree.
improve him, nor reason against him, they taught y^ the scripture must have
some other meaning, because his inter pretation undermined their foundation and
plucked up by the roots the sects which they had planted, and they ascribed
also his miracles to the devil. And in like manner though our hypocrites can
not deny but this is the scripture, yet because there can be no other sense
gathered thereof, but that ouerthoweth their buildings, therefore they ever
think that it has some other meaning then as the words sound, and that no
man understands it, or understood it since the time of the Apostles. Or if
they think that some that wrote upon it since the Apostles understood it: they
yet think that w^ like manner as we understand not the text it self, so we
understand not the meaning of the words of that Doctor. For when thou layest
the justifying of holy works and deniest the justifying of faith, how can
thou understand S. Paul, Peter, John and The Papists cannot away with
justification by faith.
the Acts of ye Apostles or any Scripture at all, seeing the justifying of
faith is almost all that they ente^de to prove?

Finally, concerning vows whereof thou read in the xxx. Chapter, there may
be many questions, whereunto Of vows
I answer shortly, that we ought to put salt to all our offerynges: that is,
we ought to minister knowledge in all our works, and to do nothing whereof we
could not give a reason out of Gods words. We be now in the day light, and all
the secrets of God, and all his counsel and will, is opened unto us, and he
that was promised should come and bless us, is come already, and has shed his
blood for us and has blessed us with all manner blessings, and has obtained
all grace for us, and in him we have all. Wherefore God henceforth will receive
God accepts for us none other sacrifice, but only Jesus christ his son.
no more sacrifices of beasts of us as thou read. Hebr. 10. If thou burn
unto god the blood or fat of beasts, to obtain forgiveness of sins
thereby, or that God should the better hear thy request, then thou do wrong
unto the blood of Christ, and Christ unto thee is dead in vain. For in him God
has promised not forgiveness of sins only, but also what soever we ask to
keep us from sin and temptation with all. And what if thou burn frankencens
unto him, what if thou burn (...) holiness in our own imagination is a robbing
of christ's honor.
a candle, what if thou burn thy chastity, or virginity unto him for the
same purpose, do thou not like rebuke unto Christ's blood? Moreover, if thou
offer gold, silver, or any other good for the same intent, is there any
difference? And even so if thou go in pilgrimage, or fastest, or go wolward,
or sprynelest thy self with holy water, or else what soever deed it is, or
obseruest what soever ceremony it be, for like meaning, then it is like
abhominatio^. We must therefore bring the salt of the knowledge of Gods word,
with all our sacrifices, or else we shall make no sweet savor unto God thereof.
Thou will ask me, shall I vow nothing at all? yes, Gods commandment, which
thou have vowed in thy Baptism. For what intent? verelye for the love of
Christ, which has bought thee with his blood, and made the son and heir of
God with him, that thou should wait on his will and commandments, and
purify thy members according to the same doctrine that has purified thine
heart, for if the knowledge of Gods word has not purified thine heart, so yt
thou consentest unto the law of god yt it is righteous and good, and sorowest,
yt thy members move thee unto the contrary, so have thou no part with Christ.
For if thou repent not of thy sin, so it is impossible that thou Faith
follows repentance of sin.
should believe that Christ had delivered thee from the danger thereof. If
thou believe not that Christ has delivered thee, so is it impossible that thou
should love Gods commandments. If thou love not the commandments, so
is Christ's spirit not in thee, which is the earnest of forgiveness of sin,
and of salvation.

For Scripture teaches, first repentance, Repentance goes before faith, and
prepares the way unto Christ.
then faith in Christ, that for his sake sin is forgeuen to them that repent:
then good works, which are nothing save the commandment of God only. And
the commau^dements are nothing else, save the helpyng of our neighbors at
their need, and the tamyng of our members, that they might be pure also, as the
heart is pure thorough hate of vice and love of virtue, as Gods word teaches
us, which works must proceed out of the faith: that is, I must do them for
the love How our works are good in the sight of God.
which I have God, for that great mercy which he has showed me in Christ, or
else I do them not in the sight of God. And that I fainte not in yt pain of
the slaying of the sin that is in my flesh, mine help is the promise of the
assistance of the power of God, and the comfort of the reward to come, which
reward I ascribe unto the goodness, mercy, and truth, of the promiser, that
has chose^ me, called me, taught me, and The work saves not, but the word,
that it is to say, the promise
given me the ernest thereof, and not unto the merits of my doings, or
sufferynges. For all that I do and suffer, is but the way to the reward, and
not the deseruyng thereof. As if the kings grace should promise to defend
me at home in mine own realm, yet the way thither is thoroughe the Sea
wherein I might happily suffer no little trouble. And yet for all that, if I
might live in rest when I come thither, I would think, and so would other say,
that my pains were well rewarded: which reward and benefit, I would not
proudly ascribe unto the merits of An apt similitude for reward of good works.
my pains taking by the way: but unto the goodness, mercyfulnesse and
constant truth of the kings grace whose gift it is, and to who^ the praise
and thank thereof belongs of duty and right. So now a reward is a gift
given freely of the goodness of the geuer, and not of the deservings of the
receauer. Thus it appears, that if I vow what soever it be, for any other
All vows must be made for y^ mortifying or tamyng* of our members or the
edifying of our neighbors, or else they are wicked.
purpose the^ to tame my members, and to be an ensample of virtue and edifying
unto my neighbor, my sacrifice is unsavory, and clean without salt and my
lamp without oil, and I one of the foolish virgins, and shall be shut from yt
feast of the bridegroom when I think my self most sure to enter in.

If I vow voluntary poverty, this must be my purpose, that I will be content
with a competent living, which comes unto me either by succession How we
ought to vow wilful poverty.
of mine elders, or which I get truly with my labor in ministryng, and doing
service unto the common wealth, in one office or in an other, or in one
occupatio^ or other, because that riches and honor shall not corrupt my mind,
and draw mine heart from God, and to give an example of virtue and edifying unto
other, and that my neighbor may have a living by me as well as I, if I make a
cloak of dissimulation of my vow, laying a net of feigned beggary to catch
superfluous abundance Whether fished the Popes prelates with t^ not or no?
of riches, and hye degree and authority, and thorough the estimation of false
holiness, to feed and maintain my slouthful idleness with the sweat, labor,
lands, and rentes of other me^ (after the example of our spirituality) robbyng
them of their faythes, and God of his honor turnyng unto mine hypocrisy that
confidence, which should be given unto the promises of GOD only, am I not a
wily fox, and a rauenyng wolf in a lambs skin, and a painted sepulcher
fair without and filthy with in? In like manner though I seek no worldly
promotion thereby, yet if I do it to be justified therewith, and to get an
hyer place in heaven, thinkyng that I do it of mine own natural strength,
and of the natural power of my freewill, and that every man has might even so
to do, and that they do it not is their fault, and negligence, and so with
the proud Pharisie in comparison of my self despise the sinful Publicanes:
what other thing do I then eat the blood and fat of my sacrifice, devouring
that my self, which should be offered unto God alone, and his Christ. And
shortly what soever a man does of his natural gifts, of his natural wit,
wisdom, understanding, reason, will, and good Our works do not stand in the
wisdom of man but in the power of God.
intent before he be otherwise and clean contrary taught of Gods spirit, and
have received other wit, understanding, reason and will, is flesh, worldly
and wrought in abominable blindness, with which a man can but seek him
self, his own profit, glory and honor, even in very spiritual matters. As
if I were alone in a wilderness, where no man were to seek profit or praise
of, yet if I would seek heaven of God there, I could of mine own natural
gifts seek it no other ways then for the merits and deseruyngs of my good
works, and to enter therein by an other way then by the door Christ, which
were very theft, for Christ is Lord over all, and what soever any man will
have of God, he must have it given him freely for Christ's sake. Now to have
heaven for mine own deseruyng, is mine own praise and not Christ's. For I can
not have it by favor, and grace in Christ and by mine own merits also: For
Desert, and free gift are contraries.
free giving, and deseruyng can not stand together.

If thou will vow of thy goods unto God, thou must put salt unto this
sacrifice: that is, thou must minister knowledge in this deed as Peter
teaches. 2. Pet. 1. Thou must put oil of Gods word in thy Lamp, and do it
according to knowledge, if thou wait for the coming of the bridegroom to enter
in with him into his rest. But thou peradventure wilt hang it about the image
to move men to devotion. Devotion is a fervent love unto gods commandments,
and a desire to be with God, and with his everlasting promises. Now shall the
sight of such riches as are showed at S. Thomas shryne, or at Walsingham, move
a man The sight of riches, is rather a cause of coueteousnes then a mean to
honor God
to love the commandments of god better, and to desire to be loosed from his
flesh, and to be with God, or shall it not rather make his poor heart sigh,
because he has no such at home, and to wish part of it in another place? The
priest shall have it in Gods stead. Shall the priest have it? If the Priest be
bought with Christ's blood, then he is Christ's servant and not his own, and
ought therefore to feed Christ's flock with Christ's doctrine, and to
minister Christ's Sacraments unto them purely for very love, and not for
filthy lucres sake, or to be Lord over them as Peter teatheth. 1. Pet. v. and
Paul, Acts. xx. Beside this, Christ is ours, and is a gift given us, and we be
heirs of Christ, and of all that, is Christ's. Wherefore the Priests doctrine
is ours, and we heirs of it, it is the food of our souls. Therefore if
Whether did the papist so or no
he minister it not truly, and freely unto us without sellyng, he is a thief,
and a soul murderer: and even so is he if he take upon him to feed us, and
have not wherewith. And for a like conclusion, because we also with all that we
have, be Christ's, therefore is the priest heir with us also of all that we
have received of God, wherefore in as much as yt priest wayteth on yt word of
God, and is our servant therein, therefore of right we are his detters, and owe
him a sufficient living of our goods, and even thereto a wife of our daughters
owe we unto him, if he require her. And now when we have appointed Yet y^
spiritualities pillage was more then their standing stipe^d.
him a sufficient living, whether in tithes, rentes, or in yearly wages, he
ought to be content and to require no more, nor yet to receive any more, but to
be an ensample of soberness and of despising worldly things unto the ensample
of his parishioners.

Will thou vow to offer unto the poor people? that is pleasant in the A
good vow is to keep Gods commandments.
sight of God, for they be left here to do our alms upon in Christ's stead,
and they be the right heirs of all our abundance and overplus. Moreover we
must have a schole to teach Gods word in (though it needed not to be so
costly) and therefore it is lawful to vow unto the building or maintenance
thereof, and unto the helping of all good works. And we ought to vow to pay
custom, toll, rent, and all manner duties, and whatsoever we owe: for that is
Gods commandment. How thou may lawfully go on pilgrimage


If thou will vow pilgrimage, thou must put salt thereto, in like manner, if it
shall be accepted, if thou vow to go and visit the poor, or to hear gods
word, or whatsoever edifieth thy soul unto love and good work after
knowledge, or whatsoever God commands, it is well done, and a sacrifice that
sauoureth well, ye will happly say, that ye will go to this or that place,
because God has chosen one place more then another, and will hear your
petition more in one place then another? As for your prayer it must be
according to to gods word. Ye may not desire god to take vengeance on him,
whom Gods word teaches you to pity and to pray for. And as for the other
gloss, that God will here you more in one God hears all that call upon him in
all times and at al places alyke.
place then in another, I suppose it sal infatuatum, salt unsavory, for if it
were wisdom, how could we excuse yt death of Steven Acts 7. which died for that
article that God dwells not in temples made with hands, we yt believe in God,
are the temple of God (says Paul.) If a man love God, and keep his word, he
is the temple of God, and has God presently dwelling in him, as witnesses
Christ, John. 14. saying: If a man love me, he will keep my word, and then my
father will love him, and we will come unto him and dwell with him. And in the
15. he says: if ye abide in me, and my words also abide in you, then ask
what ye will God regards the heart, and not y^ place where we pray.
and ye shall have it. If thou believe in Christ and have the promises which
God has made thee in thine heart, then go on pilgrimage unto thine own heart
and there pray and God will hear thee, for his mercy and truths sake and for
his sons Christ's sake, and not for a few stones sakes. What cares GOD for
the temple? The very beasts in that they have life in them, be much better
then an heap of stones couched together.

To speak of chastity, it is a gift not Wilful chastity is not mete for all
persons to vow.
given unto all persons, as testifies both Christ and also his Apostle Paul,
wherefore all persons may not vow it. Moreover there be causes wherefore many
persons may better live chaste at one time then at an other. Many may live chaste
at twenty and thirty for certain cold diseases following them, which at xl.
when their health is come can not do so. Many be occupied with wild fantasies
in their youth that they care not for marriage, which some when they be waxen
sad shall be greatly desirous, it is a dangerous thing to make sin where none
is, and to forswear the benefit of God and to bind thy self under pain of
damnation of thy soul, that you would not use remedy that god has created,
if need required.

An other thing is this, beware that thou get thee not a false feigned chastity
False feigned chastity.
made with the ungodly persuasio^s of S. Hierome, of Ouide in his filthy book
of the remedy against love, l^st when through such imaginatio^s thou have
utterly despised, defied and abhorred all womankynde, thou come into such case
thoroughe the fierce wrath of God, that thou can neither live chaste nor find
in thy heart to mary and so be compelled to fall into the abomination of the
Pope against nature and kind.

Moreover, god is a wise father and, The Pope restrained that which God
permitted and sets at liberty that which God forbids.
knows all the infirmities of his children, and also merciful, and therefore
has created a remedy without sin, and given thereto his favor and blessyng.
Let us not be wyser then GOD with our imaginatio^s, nor tempt him, for as godly
chastity is not every ma^s gift: even so he that has it to day has not power
to continue it, at his own pleasure, neither has God promised to give it him
still, and to cure his infirmities without his natural remedy, no more then he
has promised to slake his hunger without meat or thyrst without drink.
Wherefore either let all A good adminition to such as will make vows.
things bide free as God has created them, and neither vow that which God
permits thee with his favor and blessing also: or else if thou will needs
vow, then vow godly and under a condition, that thou will continue chaste, so
long as God gives thee that gift, and as long as neither thine own necessity,
neither charity toward thy neighbor, nor the authority of the^ under whose
power thou art, drive thee unto the contrary.

The purpose of thy vow must be salted also with the wisdom of God. Thou
may not vow to be justified Whereunto and how we should apply our vows.
thereby, or to make satisfaction for thy sins, or to win heaven, nor an
hyer place: for then did thou wrong unto the blood of Christ, and thy vow
were plain Idolatry and abominable in the sight of GOD. Thy vow How a vow is
to be made.
must be only unto the furtheraunce of the commandments of GOD, which are
(as I have said) nothing but the tamyng of thy members, and the service of thy
neighbor: that is if thou think thy back to weak for the burden of
wedlock, and that thou can not rule thy wife, children, servants and make
provision for them godly, and without overmuch busying and vnquietyng thy
self, and drownyng thy self in worldly business vnchristenly, or that thou
can serve thy neighbor in some office better being chaste then married. And
then thy vow is He that fasteth to any other end the^ to tame his body, that
it may wait upon God, deceives him self.
good and lawful. And even so must thou vow abstinence of meats, and drinks
so far forth as it is profitable unto thy neighbors, and unto the tamyng of
thy flesh: But thou may vow neither of them unto the slaying of thy body.
As Paul commands Tymothe to drink wine, and no more water because of his
diseases. Thou will say that Timothy had not happily forsworn wine. I think
the same, and that the Apostles forsware not wedlock though many of them
lived chaste, neither yet any meat or drink, though they absteined from them,
and that it were good for us to follow their example. Howbeit though I vow and
swear and think on none exception, All our doings must tend to the honor
of God, and love of our neighbor.
yet is the breakyng of Gods co^maundeme^ts except, and all chances that hang
of God. As if I swear to be in a certain place at a certain hour, to make a
loueday without exception, yet if the king in the mean time command me an
other way, I must go by Gods commandment, and yet break not mine oath. And
in like case if my father and mother be sick and require my presence, or if my
wife, children or household be visited that any assistance be required, or if my
neighbors house be a fire, at the same hour and a thousand such chances: in
which all I break mine oath, and am not forsworn and so forth. Read Gods
word diligently and with a good heart, and it shall teach thee all things.

A Prologue into the fifte book of Moses called Deuteronomy.
THis is a book worthy to be read in, day and night, and never to be out of
hands. For it is the most excellent of all the books of Moses. It is This book
is a preaching of faith and love.
easy also and light, and a very pure Gospel, yt is to wit, a preaching of
faith and love: deducyng the love to God out of faith, and the love of a man's
neighbor out of yt love of God. Herein also thou may learn right meditation
or Here thou may learn a right meditation or contemplation.
contemplation, which is nothing else save yt calling to mind, and a repeatyng
in the heart of the glorious and wonderful deeds of God, and of his terrible
handling of his enemies, and merciful entreatyng of them that come when he
calls them which thing this book does, and almost nothing else.

In the four first Chapters he rehearses the benefits of GOD done unto them,
to provoke them to love, and The works of God are supernatural.
his mighty deeds done above all natural capacity of faith, that they might
believe GOD, and trust in him, and in his strength. And thirdly he rehearceth
the fierce plagues of God upon his enemies, and on them which through
impatiencie and unbelief fell from him: partly to tame and abate the appetites
of the flesh which always fight against the spirit, and partly to bridle the
wild ragyng lusts of them in whom was no spirit: that though they had We
must abstain from outward evil though not for love yet for fear of the
vengeance of God.
no power to do good of love, yet at the lest way, they should abstain from
outward evil for fear of wrath, and cruel vengeance which should fall upon
them and shortly find them out, if they cast up gods nurter, and run at
riotte beyond his laws and ordinances. Unto the law of god, we may neither
add nor minish.


Moreover he charge them to put naught to, nor take ought away from Gods
words, but to be dilligent only to keep them in ree^mbraunce, and in the heart
and to teach their children, for fear of forgettyng. And to beware either of
We are commanded to abstain from Images.
making imagery, or of bowyng them selves unto Images, saying: Ye saw no image
when God spoke unto you, but heard a voice only, and that voice keep, and
thereunto cleave, for it is your life, and it shall save you. And finally if
(as the frailty of all flesh is) they shall have fallen from God, and he have
brought them into trouble, adversity, and combraunce and all necessity: yet
if they repent and turn, he God is mercyful to them that repent.
promises, them that God shall remember his mercy, and receive them to grace
again.

In the fifte he repeateth the x. Commandments, and that they might see a
cause to do them of love, he bids them remember that they were bound in
Egypt, and how God delivered the^ with a mighty hand, and a stretched out
arm, to serve him and to keep his maundementes: as Paul says that Christ
has delivered us, and therefore we ought to serve him and our neighbor for his
sake.
we are bought with Christ's blood, and therefore are his servants and not
our own, and ought to seek his will and honor only, and to love and serve
one an other for his sake.

In the sixte he sets out the fountain of all commandments: that is,
that they believe how that there is but one God that does all, and therefore
ought only to be loved with all the heart, all the soul, and all the might.
For love only is the fulfillyng of the Love only to the fulfillyng of the
laws of God.
commandments, as Paul also says unto the Romans, and Galathians
likewise. He warns them also that they forget not the commandments, but
teach them their children, and to show their children also how God delivered
them out of the bondage of the Egiptians, to serve him and his commandments,
that the children might see a cause to work of love likewise.

The seventh is all together of faith: We must trust only in God, and not in
our selves.
he remoueth all occasions that might withdraw them from the faith, and
pulls them also from all confidence in them selves, and sturreth them up to
trust in God boldly and only.

Of the eight Chapter thou see how that the cause of temptation is, that a
man might see his own heart. For when I am brought into that extremity, that I
must either suffer or forsake GOD, then I shall feel how much I believe and
trust in him, and how much I love him. In like manner, if my brother How a man
may try and examine him self, how much he loves God, and his neighbor.
do me evil for my good, then if I love him when there is no cause in him, I
see that my love was of God, and even so if I then hate him, I feel and
perceive that my love was but wordly, and finally he sturreth the^ to the
faith and love of God, and drives them from all confidence of their own
selves.

In the ninth also he moves them God styrreth up his people unto faith.
unto faith, and to put their trust in God, and draws them from confidence of
them selves, by rehearsing all ye wickedness which they had wrought from the
first day, he knew them unto that same day. And in the end he repeteth A right
way of prayer.
how he coniured God in Horeb, and overcame him with prayer, where thou may
learn the right manner to pray.

In the tenth he reckeneth up the pith of all laws, and the keeping of the
The pith and effect of all ye laws of God.
law in heart: which is to fear GOD, love him and serve him with all their heart
soul and might, and keep his commandments of love. And he shows a reason
why they should that do: even because God is Lord of heaven and earth, and has
also done all for them of his own goodness without their deseruyng. And then
out of the love unto God, he brings the love unto a And if we first love
God, then out of that love, we must needs love our neighbor.
man's neighbor saying: God is Lord above all Lords and loves al his
servants indifferently, as well the poor and feeble, and the stranger, as
the rich and mighty, and therefore will that we love the poor and the
stranger. And he adds a cause, for ye were strangers, and God delivered you
and has brought you unto a land, where ye be at home. Love the stranger
therefore for his sake.

In the xj. he exhorts them to love and fear God, and rehearceth the
terrible deeds of God upon his enemies, What it is to love and fear God, and
what it is to despise him.
and on them that rebelled against him. And he testifies unto them both what
will follow, if they love and fear God, and what also if they despise him, and
break his commandment.

In the xij. he commands to put The word of god may not be altered.
out of the way all that might be an occasion to hurt the faith, and forbids
to do ought after their own minds, or to alter the word of God.

In the xiij. he forbids to harken unto ought save unto Gods word: no Let no
man draw us from gods word.
though he which counseleth contrary should come with miracles, as Paul does
unto the Galathians.

In the xiiij. the beasts are forbidden, partly for uncleanness of them, and
partly to cause hate between the heathen and them, that they have no
conversation together, in that one abhors what the other eats. Unto this
xv. chapter all pertain unto faith and Of matters of the common weals
love chiefly. And in this xv. he begins to entreat more specially of
things pertainyng unto the commonwealth, and equity, and exhorts unto the
love of a man's neighbor. And in the xvj. among other he forgets not the
same. And in the xvij. he entreats of right and equity chiefly, in so much
that when he looks unto faith, and unto the punishment of Idolaters, he yet
ends in a law of love and equity: forbiddyng to condemn any man under less
then two witnesses at the lest, None may be condemned under two witnessed.
and commands to bring the trespassers unto the open gate of the city,
where all men go in and out, that all men might hear the cause and see that he
had but right. But the Pope has found a better way, even to oppose him with
out any accuser, and that secretly, that no man know whether he have right or
no, either hear his Articles or answer: for fear lest the people should
search whether it were so or no.

In the xviij. he forbids all false and deuilish crafts that hurt true
faith. Moreover because the people could not hear the voice of the law spoken
Christ our savior declared in the old testament.
to them in fire, he promises them an other Prophet to bring them better
tidings which was spoken of Christ our Savior.

The xix. and so forth unto the end of the xxvij. is almost altogether of love
unto our neighbors, and of laws, of equity, and honesty, with now and the^ a
respect unto faith.

The xxviij. is a terrible Chapter and to be trembled at: A Chrisren ma^s heart
The curse and wrath of God over al those that break his laws.
might well bleed for sorrow at the readyng of it, for fear of the wrath that
is like to come upon us, according unto all the curses which thou there
read. For according unto these curse has God dealt with with all nations,
after they were fallen into the abominations of blindness.

The xxix. is like terrible with a godly lesson in the end that we should leave
We may not be to curious in the searchyng of Gods secrets, but rather study to
understand and to do our duty toward god and our neighbor.
searchyng of Gods secrets, and give diligence to walk according to that he
has opened unto us. For the keepyng of the commandments of God, teaches
wisdom as thou may see in the same Chapter, where Moses says, keep the
commandments, that ye may understand what ye ought to do. But to search
Gods secrets, blinds a man, as it well proved by the swarms of our
sophisters, whose wise books are now when we look in the Scripture, found
but full of foolishness.

The Prologue of the Prophet Jonas made by William Tyndall.
AS the envious Philislines stopped ye wells of Abraham, and filled them up
with earth, to The Papists kept the Scriptures from the lay people, because
they only will be the publishers and expositors thereof
put the memorial out of mind, to the intent that they might challenge the
ground: even so the fleshly minded hipocrites, stop up the veins of life,
which are in the scripture, with the earth of their traditions, false
similitudes, and lying allegories, and that of like zeal, to make the
Scripture their own possession, and merchaundice, and so shut up the kingdom
of heaven, which is Gods word, neither entering in themselves, nor suffering
them that would.

The Scripture has a body without, The scripture has a body and a soul.
and within a soul, spirit and life. It has without a bark, a shel, and as
it were an hard bone, for the fleshlye minded to gnaw upon. And within it has
pith, cornell, mary, and all swetenes for Gods elect, which he has chosen to
give them his spirit, and to write his law, and the faith of his son in
their hearts.

The scripture contains iij. things in it: First, the law to condemn all
The scripture contains iij. things.
flesh: Secondarily, the Gospel, that is to say, promises of mercy for all that
repent and knowledge their sins, at the preaching of the law, and consent
in their hearts that the law is good, and submit themselves to be scholars to
learn to keep the law, and to learn to believe the mercy that is promised
them: and thirdly, the stories and lives of those scholars, both what chances
fortuned them, and also by what means their scholemaister taught them, and
made them perfect, and how he tried ye true from the false.

When the hipocrites come to the The manner of hipocrites in reading the law of
god.
law, they put gloses to, and make no more of it, the^ of a worldly law which
is satisfied with the outward work, and which a Turk may also fulfill. When
yet Gods law never cease to condemn a man, until it be written in his heart,
and until he keep it naturally without compulsion, and all other respect,
save only of pure love to God, and his neighbor, as he naturally eats when
he is an hungered, without compulsion, and all other respect, save to slake his
hunger only. And when they come to the Gospel, The papisticall and corrupt
doctrine of the papists
there they mingle their leven and say. GOD now receives us no more to mercy,
but of mercy receueth us to penance, that is to wit, holy deeds y^ make
them fat bellies, and us their captives, both in soul and body. And yet they
feign their Idol the Pope so merciful, that if that thou make a little money
glister in his Balaams eyes, there is neither penance, nor purgatory, nor any
fasting at all, but to fly to heaven as swift as a thought, and at the
twincklyng of an eye.

And the lives, stories, and gifts of men, whith are contained in the bible,
Now the Papists ^ring and wrest the scriptures.
they read as things no more pertaining unto them, then a tale of Robin hood,
and as things they wot not whereto they serve, save to feign false discant, and
iuglyng allegories, to stablishe their kingdom with all. And one of the
chiefest and fleshliest studies they have, is to magnify the ^aintes above
measure, and above the truth: and with their Poetry to make them greter the^
ever God made them. And if they find any infirmity, or sin ascribed unto the
saints, that they excuse with all diligence, diminishyng the glory of the
mercy of god, and robbyng wretched sinners of all their comfort: and think
thereby to flatter the saints, and to obtain their favor, and to make
special advocates of them, even as a man would obtain the favor of worldly
tyrauntes: as they also feign ye saints more cruel then ever was any heathen
man, and more wreakeful, and vengeable, then the Po^tes feign their gods or
furies, that torment the souls in bell, if their euens be not fasted, and
their images visited, and saluted with a pater noster, which prayer only our
lips be acquainted with: our hearts understanding none at all, and worshipped
with a candle, and the offering of our devotion, in the place which they have
chosen to hear supplicatio^s, and make petitions of their clientes therein

But thou reader, think of the law of god, how that it is altogether
spiritual, and so spiritual, that it is never fulfilled with deeds or works,
until they flow out of thine heart, with as great love toward thine
neighbor, for no deseruyng of his (yea though he be thine ennemy) as Christ
loved thee, and dyed for thee, for no deseruyng of thine, but even when thou
wast his ennemy. And in the mean time, through out all our infantie, and
childhoode in Christ, till we be grown up into perfect men, in the full
knowledge of Chrst, and full love of Christ again, and of our neighbors for
his sake, after the ensample of his love to us, remembering that the fulfillyng
of the law, is a fast faith in Christ's blood coupled with our profession, and
submit ous selves to do better.

And of the gospel or promises which thou meetest in the scripture, believe
fast that god will fulfill them unto thee, and that unto the uttermost jot, at
the repentance of thine heart, when thou turnest to him and forsakest evil,
even of his goodness, and fatherly mercy unto thee, and not for thy flatteryng
him with hipocritishe works of thine own fayning. So that a fast faith only,
without respect of all works, is the forgiveness both of the sin, which we
did in time of ignorance, with lust and consent to sin: and also of that
sin which we do by chance, and of frailty: after yt we are come to
knowledge, and have professed the law out of our hearts. And all deeds serve
only for to help our neighbors, and to tame our flesh that we fall not to
sin again, and to exercise our souls in virtue, and not to make
satisfaction to Godwarde for the sin that is once paste.

And all other stories of the Bible, with out exception, are y^ practicing of
ye law, and of the gospel, and are true and faithful ensamples, and sure
earnest that God will even so deal with us, as he did with them, in all
infirmities, in all temtations, and in all like cases and chances. Wherein ye
see on the one side, how fatherly and tenderly, and with all compassion GOD
entreats his elect, which submit themselves as scholars, to learn to walk
in the ways of his laws, and to keep them of love. If they forgate themselves
at a time, he would stir them up again with all mercy, if they fell and hurt
themselves, he healed them again with all compassion and tenderness of heart. He
has often brought great tribulation and adversity upon his elect: but all of
fatherly God corrects where he loves.
love only, to teach them, and to make them see their own hearts, and the
sin that there lay hid, that they might afterward feel his mercy. For his
mercy waited upon them, to rid them out again as soon as they were learned,
and come to the knowledge of God casts none away, but such as refuse to kept
his laws, and will not harken unto his voice.
their own hearts: so that he never cast man away, how deep so ever he had
sinned, save them only which had first cast the yoke of his laws from their
necks, with utter de^iaunce, and malice of heart.

Which ensamples how comfortable are they for us, when we be fallen into sin,
and God is come upon us with ascourge, that we despair not, but repent with
full hope of mercy, after the ensamples of mercy that are gone before? And
therefore they were written for our learning, as testifies Paul, Romans 15. to
comfort us, that we might the better put our hope and trust in god, when we
see, how merciful he has been in times past unto our weak brethren, that
are gone before in all their adversities, need, temptations, ye and horrible
sins into which they now and then fell.

And on the other side, ye see how they that hardened their hearts and sinned
of malice, and refused mercy that Such as harde^ their hearts and not harken to
the will of God to do it, God casts out
was offered them, and had no power to repent, perished at the latter end with
all confusion and shame mercilessely. Which ensa^ples are very good and
necessary, to keep us in awe, and dread in time of prosperity, as thou may
see by Paul. 1. Cor. 10. that we abide in the fear of God, and wax not wild
and fall to vanities, and so sin and provoke God, and bring wrath upon us.

And thirdly, ye see in the practice, how as God is merciful and long
suffering, even so were all his true Prophets and preachers, bearing the
infirmities of their weak brethren, and The Prophets of God bare the weakness
of their brethren, and their (...)ries also with patience.
their own wrongs, and injuries with all patience, and long suffering, never
casting any of them of their backs, until they sinned against the holy ghost,
maliciously persecutyng the open and manifest troth: contrary unto the
ensample of the Pope, which in sinnyng against God, and to quench the truth of
his holy spirit, is ever chief Captain and trompet blower, to set other a
work, and seeks only his own fredome, liberty, privilege, wealth,
prosperity, The Pope and his ministers are persecutors over their brethren.
profit, pleasure, pastime, honor and glory, with the bondage, thraldom,
captivity, misery, wretchedness, and vile subjection of his brethren: and in
his own cause is so fervent, so stiff and cruel, that he will not suffer one
word spoken against his false majesty, wily inventions, and iugling
hypocrisy to be vnauenged, though all christendom should be set together by
the ears, and should cost he cared not how many hundred thousand their lives.

Now that thou may read Jonas frutefully, and not as a Poets fable, but as
an obligation between god and thy soul, as an earnest penny given thee of God,
that he will help thee in time of need, if thou turn to him, and as the word
of God the only food, and life of thy soul, this mark, and note. First count
Jonas the friend of God, and a man chosen of GOD, to testify his name unto the
world: But yet a young scholar, weak and rude, after the fashion of the
apostles, while Christ was with them yet bodily, which though Christ taught
them ever to be meek, and to humble themselves, yet often strove among
themselves who should be greatest. The sons of ^ebede would sit the one on
the right hand of Christ, the other on the left. They would pray that fire
might descend from heaven and consume the Samaritanes. When Christ asked who
say men that I am? Peter answered, thou art the son of the living God, as
though Peter had been as perfect as an angel. But immediately after when Christ
preached unto them of his death and passion: Peter was angry and rebuked
Christ, and thought earnestly that he had raued, and not wist what he said, as
at another time, when Christ was so fervently The cruel opinion that the
disciples had of Christ.
busied in healyng the people, that he had no leisure to eat, they went out to
hold him, supposing that he had been beside himself. And one that cast out
devils in Christ's name they forbade, because he waited not on them, so
glorious were they yet.

And though Christ taught always to The ignorance and imperfection of the
apostles.
forgive, yet Peter after long going to schole, asked whether men should
forgive seven times, thinkyng that viij. times had been to much. And at the
last supper Peter would have dyed with christ, but yet within few hours after,
he denied him, both cowardly and shamefully. And after the same manner, though
he had so long heard that no man might avenge him self, but rather turn the
other cheek to, then to smite again, yet when Christ was in taking, Peter
asked whether it were lawful to smite with the sword, and tarried none answer,
but laid on rashly. So that though when we come first unto knowledge of the
truth, and the peace is made between God and us, and we love his laws, and
believe and trust in him, as in our father and have good hearts unto him, and be
borne a new in the spirit, yet we are but children and young scholars, weak
and feeble, and must have leisure to grow in the spirit: in knowledge, love and
in the ded^ thereof, as young children must have time to grow in their bodies.

And God our father and scholemaster feeds us, and teaches us accorcordyng
unto the capacity of our stomachs, and makes us to grow and wax perfect,
and fineth and tries us, as gold, in the fire of temptations and tribulations.
As Moses witnesses Deutero. viij. saying. Remember all the way by which the
Lord thy God carried thee this xl. years in the wilderness, God does
mercifully try and tempt us, to move us to utter our hearts and minds toward
him.
to humble thee, and to tempte or provoke thee, yt it might be known what were
in thine heart. He brought thee into adversity, and made thee an hungered, and
then fed thee with Manna, which neither thou nor yet thy fathers ever knew of,
to teach that man lives not by bread only, but by all that proceeds out of
the mouth of GOD. For the promises of God are life unto all that cleave unto
them, much more then bread and bodyly sustenaunce, as the journey of the
children of Israel out of Egypt into the land promised them, ministers thee
notable ensamples, and that abundantly, as does all the rest of the Bible
also. Howbeit it is impossible for flesh to believe, and to trust in the truth
of Gods promises, until he have learned it in much tribulation, after that God
has delivered him out thereof again.

God therefore to teach Jonas, and to show him his own heart, and to make him
perfect, and to instruct us also by his ensample, sent him out of the land of
Israel where he was a Prophet to go among the heathen people, and to the
greatest and mightiest City of the world then, called Niniue: to preach that
within xl. days they should all perish for their sins, and that the City
Jonas of himself, was an un mete messenger to be sent of such a message, but
god assisted him with his holy spirit.
should be overthrown. Which message the free will of Jonas had as much power
to do, as the weakest hearted woman in the world* has power, if^ were
commaunde^ to leap int^e of living snakes and adders: as happily if God had
commanded Sara to have sacrificed her son Isaa^ as he did Abraham, she would
have disputed with him, yer she had done it, or though she were strong enough:
yet many an holy Saint could not have found in their hearts, but would have
run away from the presence of the commandment of God, with Jonas, if they
had been so strongly tempted.

For Jonas thought of this manner: lo, I am here a Prophet unto Gods The carnal
imagination of man's nature without Gods spirit.
people the Israelites: Which though they have Gods word testified unto them
daily, yet despise it, and worship God under the likeness of calves, and after
all manner fashions save after his own word, and therefore are of all nations
the worst, and most worthy of punishment. And yet God for love of few that are
among them, and for his names sake spares and defends them. How then should
GOD take so cruel vengeance on so great a multitude of them to who^ his name
was never preached to, and therefore are not the tenth part so evil as these?
If I shall therefore go preach, so shall I lay and shame my self and God
thereto, and make them the more to despise God, and set the less by him, and
to be the more cruel unto his people.

And upon that imagination he fled from the face or presence of God: that Jonas
so long as he was in his carnal imagination, could not abide the voice of God,
but fled: howbeit God called him ^ne.
is, out of the country where God was worshipped in, and from the prosecutyng
of Gods commandment, and thought, I will get me an other way among the
heathen people, and be no more a prophet, but live at rest and out of all
combraunce. Nevertheless the God of all mercy which cares for his elect
children, and turns all unto good to them, and smites them, to heal the^
again, and kills them to make them alive again, and plays with them (as a
father does some time with his young ignorant children) and tempts them, and
proves them to make them see their own hearts, provided for Jonas, how all
things should be.

When Jonas entered into the ship, he laid him down to sleep, and to take his
rest: that is, his conscience was tossed Jonas flesh r^belled against the
spirit.
between the commandment of God which sent him to Ninine, and his fleshly
wisdom that dissnaded, and counseled him the contrary, and at the last
prevailed against the commandment, and carried him an other way, as a ship
caught between two streams, and as Poets feign the mother of Meliager to be
between diverse affections: while to aduenge her brothers death, she sought to
slay her own son. Whereupon for very pain and tediousnes he lay down to
sleep, for to put the commandment which so gnewe and fret his conscience, out
of mind, as the nature of all wicked is, when they have sinned a good, to seek
all The wicked seek to to co^er their wickedness with ^ope holy works.
means with riot, revel and pastime, to drive the remembrance of sin out
of their thoughts, or as Adam did, to cover their nakedness with apornes of
Pope holy works. But God awoke him out of his dream, and set his sins
before his face.

For when yt lot had caught Jonas, then be sure that his sins came to How
Jonas was ^rapped and made a^rayed.
remembrance again, and that his conscience raged no less then the waves of
the Sea. And then he thought that he only was a sinner, and the heathen that
were in the ship, none in respect of him, and thought also, as verily as he was
fled from God, that as verily God had cast him away: for the sight of the rod
makes the natural child not only to see, and to knowledge his fault, but
also to forget all his fathers old mercy and kindness. And then he Jonas being
afraid comesseth his sins.
confessed his sin openly, and had yet lever perish alone, then that the
other should have perished with him for his sake: and so of very desperatio^ to
have lived any longer, he bad cast him into the Sea betimes, except they would
be lost also.

To speak of lottes, how far forth they are lawful, is a light question.
First to use them for the breakyng of Lets how they may be used law fully.
strife, as when parteners, their goods as equally divided as they can, take
every man his part by lot, to avoid all suspicion of disceitfulnesse: and as
the Apostles in the first of the Acts, when they sought an other to succeed
Judas the traitor, and two persons were presented then to break strife, and
to satisfy all parties, did cast lottes whether should be admitted, desiryng
God to temper them, and to take whom he knew most mete, seeing they wyste not
whether to prefer, or happily could not all agree on: either is lawful, and
in all like cases. But to abuse them unto the temptyng of God, and to compel
him therewith to utter things whereof we stand in doubt, when we have no
commandment of him so to do, as these heathen here did, though God turned it
unto his glory, can not be but evil.

The heathen shypmen astonyed at Miracle moves the heathen to know god, and to
call upon him.
the sight of the miracle, feared GOD, prayed to him, offered sacrifice and
vowed vows. And I doubt not, but that some of them, or happily all came
thereby unto the true knowledge, and true worshipping of GOD, and were won to
GOD in their souls. And thus God which is infinite merciful in all his ways,
wrought their souls health out of the infirmity of Jonas, even of his good
will and purpose, and love wherewith he loved them, before the world was made
and not of chance, as it appears unto the eyes of the ignorant.

And that Jonas was three days and three nights in the belie of his As Jonas
lay three days and iij. nights in yt Whals Belly, so Christ lay three days and
three nights in the earth.
fish: we can not thereby prove unto the Jews, and infideles or unto any man,
that Christ must therefore dye, and be buried and rise again. But we use the
ensample and likeness to strength the faith of the weak. For he that believes
the one, ca^ not dout in the other: in as much as the hand of GOD was no less
mighty in preseruyng Jonas alive against all natural possibility, and in
deliueryng him safe out of this fish, then in raising up Christ again, out of
his sepulcher. And we may describe the power and virtue of the resurrection
thereby, as Christ him self boroweth the similitude thereto. Math. xij. saying
unto the Jews that came How christ shows his death, and resurrection by
Jonas the Prophet.
about him, and desired a sign or a wonder from heaven, to certify them that
he was Christ: this evil and wedlock breakyng nation (which break the
wedlock of faith, wherewith they be married unto God, and believe in their false
works) seek a sign, but there shall no sign be given them save the sign
of the Prophet Jonas. For as Jonas, was three days and three nights in the
belly of the Whale, even so shall the son of man be three days, and three
nights in the heart of the earth. Which was a watch word (as we say) and a
sharp threatenynge unto the Jews, and as much to say as thus, ye hard hearted
Jews seek a sign: lo this shall be your sign, as Jonas was raised out of the
sepulcher of his fish, and then sent unto the Ninevites to preach that they
should perish, even so shall I rise again out of my sepulcher, and come and
preach repentance unto you. See therefore, when ye see the sign that ye
repent, or else ye shall surely perish and not escape. For though the
infirmities which ye now see in my flesh, be a let unto your fathers, ye shall
then be without excuse, when ye see so great a miracle and so great power of
God shed out upon you. And so Christ by the mouth of his Apostles preached
repentance to the Jews.
Christ came again after the resurrection in his spirit, and preached
repentance unto them, by the mouth of his Apostles and Disciples, and with
miracles of the holy Ghost. And all that repented not, perished shortly after,
and the rest carried away captive into all quarters of the world for an
example, as ye see unto this day.

And in like manner since the world began, where soever repentance was
offered, and not received, their GOD took cruel vengeance immediately: Where
there is no repe^tau^ce, there God powers out his vengeance.
as ye see in the floude of Noe, in the ouerthrowynge of Sodom and Gomorra,
and all the country about, and as ye see of Egypt, of the Amorites, Cananites
and afterward of the very Israelites, and then at the last of the Jews to, and
of the Assirians, and Babilonians, and so throughout all the impeires of the
world.

Gildas preached repentance unto the old Britains, that inhabited England:
Gildas a writer of yt Brittishe Chronicle.
they repented not, and therefore God sent in their enemies upon them on every
side, and destroyed them up, and gave the land unto other nations. And great
vengeance has been taken in that land for sin, since that time.

Wicleffe preached repentance unto our fathers not long since: they repented,
Wicleffe a preacher of repen^^n^ce
not for their hearts were indurate, and their eyes blinded with their own Pope
holy righteousness, wherewith they had made their souls gay against the
receiving again of the wicked spirit, that brings seven worse the^ him
self with him, and makes the later end worse then the beginning: for in open
sins there is hope of repentance, but in holy, hypocrisy none at all. But
what followed? they slew their true and right king, and set They slew Richard yt
second.
up three wrong kings arowe, under which all the noble blood was slain up,
and half the commons thereto, They set up Henry the fourth.
what in France, and what with their own sword, in fightyng among them selves
for the crown, and the Cities Henry the fifth.
and Towns decayed, and the land brought half into a wilderness, in respect
Henry the sixth.
of that it was before.

And now Christ to preach repentance, Christ now preaches repentance unto
us.
is rise^ yet once again, out of his sepulcher in which yt Pope had buried him,
and kept him down, with his pillars and polars and all disguisinges of
hipocrisy, with gyle, wiles and falshode and with the sword of all Princes,
which he had blinded with his false marchau^dise. And as I doubt not of the
ensamples that are past, so am I sure that great wrath will follow, except
repentance turn it back again, and cease it.

When Jonas had been in the fishes Jonas called upon God out of the fishes
belly.
belly a space, and the rage of his conscience was somewhat quieted, and swaged,
and he come to him self again, and had received a little hope, the qualmes and
panges of desperation which went over his heart, half overcome, he prayed, as
he makes mention in the text saying: Jonas prayed unto the Lord his GOD out of
the belly of the fish. But the words of that prayer are not here set. The
prayer that here stands in the text, is the prayer of praise, and
thankesgeuyng, which he prayed, and wrote when he was escaped, and past all
ieopardie.

In the end of which prayer he says, I will sacrifice with the voice of
thankesgeuyng, The sacrifice that Jonas offers unto God.
and pay that I have vowed, that saving comes of the Lord. For verily to
confess out of the heart, that all benefits come of GOD, even out of the
goodness of his mercy, and not deserving of our deeds, is the only sacrifice
that pleases God. And to believe that all the Jews vowed in their
Circumcision, as we in our Baptism. Which vow Jonas now being taught with
experience, promises to pay. For those outward sacrifices of beasts, unto
which Jonas had happily ascribed to much before, were but feeble, and childish
things, and not ordained, that the works of them selves should be a service
unto the people, but to put them The sacrifices of the old law were ordained
to put us in remembrance of the sacrifice of thankesgeuyng.
in remembrance of this inward sacrifice of thanks and of faith, to trust and
believe in GOD the only Savior: which signification when it was away, they
were abominable and deuilishe Idolatry, and Image service: as our ceremonies
and Sacraments are become now to all that trust and believe in the work of
them, and are not taught the significations, to edify their souls with
knowledge, and the doctrine of God.

When Jonas was cast upon land Jonas did that God commanded him.
again, then his will was free, and had power to go whether God sent him, and
to do what GOD bade, his own Imaginations laid a part. For he had been at a
new schole, yea and in a furnace where he was purged of much refuse and dross
of fleshely wisdom, which resisted the wisdom of God, and led Ionasses
will contrary unto the will of God. For as far as we be blind in Adam, we
can not but seek, and will our own profit, pleasure and glory. And as far
as we be taught in the spirit, we can not but seek and will the pleasure, and
glory of God only.

And as the iij. days journey of Niniue, Niniue was the greatest City in the
world*
whether it were in length, or to go round about it, or thorough all the
streets, I commit unto yt discretion of other men. But I think that it was
then the greatest City of the world.

And that Jonas went a days journey in the City. I suppose he did it not in
one day: but went fair and easyly preaching here a Sermon, and there another,
and rebuked the sin of the people, for which they must perish.

And when thou art come unto the repentance of the Ninevites, there have thou
sure earnest, that how soever angry God be, yet he remembers mercy, unto all
that truly repent and believe in mercy. Which ensample our Savior Christ also
casts in the Christ is merciful to the that repent and call for mercy.
teeth of the indurate Jews saying: The Ninevites shall rise in judgment with
this nation, and condemn them, for they repented at the preaching of Jonas,
and behold a greater then Jonas, here meaning of him self. At whose preaching
yet, though it were never so mighty to pearce the heart, and for all his
miracles thereto, the hard hearted Jews could not repent: when the heathen
Ninevites repented at the bare preaching of Jonas, rebukyng their sins
without any miracle at all.

Why? For the Jews had leuened the spiritual law of God, and with their
gloses had made it altogether earthly The doctrine of the Phariseis and the
Papists make sin of that is no sin.
and fleshly, and so had set a veil or coueryng on Moses face, to shadow and
darken the glorious brightness of his countenance. It was sin to steal: but
to rob widows houses under a color of long praying, and to polle in the
name of offerynges, and to snare yt people with intolerable constitutions
against all love, to catch their money out of their purses, was no sin at
all.

To smite father and mother was This is y^ doctrine of yt Papists and
hypocritical monks at this day.
sin: But to withdraw help from them at their need, for blind zeal of
offering, unto the profit of ye holy pharisees, was then as meritorious as it is
now, to let all thy kin choose whether they will sincke or swim, while thou
buildest and make goodly foundations for holy people, which thou have chosen
to be thy Christ, for to supple thy soul with yt oil of their sweet
blessings, and to be thy Jesus for to The blind and fruteles works of the
Papists.
save thy soul from the purgatory of the blood, that only purges sin, with
their watching, fasting, wolward going, and rising at midnight, etc. wherewith
yet they purge not themselves, from their covetousness, pride, lechery, or any
vice that thou see among the lay people.

It was great sin for Christ to heal Papisticall sins.
the people on the sabbath day unto the glory of God his father, but none at
all for them to help their cattle unto their own profit.

It was sin to eat with unwashed hands, or on an unwashed table, or out of
an unwashed dishe: but to eat out of that purified dishe: that which came of
bribery, theft and extortion, was no sin at all.

It was exceeding meritorious to make many disciples: but to teach the^ to
fear God in his ordinances, had they no care at all.

The hye Prelates so defended the Papists taught the^ selves and their works
withal crueltie^.
right of holy church, and so feared the people with the curse of God, and
terrible pains of hell, that no man durst leave the vilest herb in his garden
vntithed. And the offeringes and things dedicate unto GOD, for the profit of
his holy vicars, were in such estimation and reverence, that it was a much
grete^ sin to swear truly by them, then to forswear thy self by God. What
The false and wicked doctrine of the Papists.
vengeance then of God, and how terrible and cruel damnation think ye
preached they to fall on them that had stolen so the holy things? And yet
says Christ, that righteousness and faith in keeping promise, mercy, and
indifferent judgment, were utterly trodden under foot, and clean despised of
those blessed fathers, which so mightelye maintained Aarons patrimony, and had
made it so prosperous, and environed it, and walled it about on every side with
the fear of God, that no man durst touch it.

It was great holiness to garnish the Blind and btpocritical doctrine.
Sepulchers of the prophets, and to condemn their own fathers for slaying of
them, and yet were they themselves for blind zeal of their own
constitutions, as ready as their fathers to slay whosoever testified unto them,
the same truth which, the prophets testified unto their fathers. So yt Christ
compares all the righteousness of those holy patriarckes, unto the outward
beauy of a painted Sepulcher full of stenche, and all uncleanness within.

And finally to beguile a ma^s neighbors in subtle bargaining, and to wrap and
compass him in with cautels of the law, was then as it is now in the kingdom
of the Pope. By the reason whereof, they excluded the law of love out of their
hearts, and consequently all true repentance: for how could they repent of
that they could not see to be sin?

And on the other side they had set up The Phariseto set up a righteousness of
works to cle^se their souls withal.
a righteousness of holy works, to cle^se their souls with all: as the Pope
sanctifies us with holy oil, holy bread, holy salt, holy candels, holy dome,
ceremonies, and holy dome blessings, and with whatsoever holiness thou will,
^aue with the holiness of Gods word, which only speaks unto the heart, and
shows the soul his filthiness, and uncleanness of sin, and leads her by
the way of repentance unto the fountain of Christ's blood, to wash it away
through faith. By the reason of By the worldly and fleship interpretations of
the scriptures the Jews hearts were hardened.
which false righteousness, they were disobedient unto the righteousness of god,
which is the forgiveness of sin in Christ's blood, and could not believe it.
And so through fleshly interpretyne the law, and false imagined righteousness,
their hearts were hardened, and made as stony as clay, in an whot furnace of
fire, that they could receive neither repentance nor faith, or any moisture of
grace at all.

But the heathen Ninevites, though they were blinded with lusts, yet werin
those two points incorrupt, and vnhardened, and therefore with the only The
he^^ then repented at the preaching of Jonas.
preaching of Jonas, came unto the knowledge of their sins and confessed
them, and repented truly, and turned every man from his evil deeds, and
declared their sorrow of heart and true repentance, with their deeds which
they did out of faith and hope of forgiveness, chastieing their bodies with
prayer and fasting, and with taking all pleasures from the flesh: trustyng, as
God was angry for their wickedness, even so should he forgive them of his
mercy if they repented, and forsook their misseliuing.

And in the last end of all, thou have A good and profitable example.
yet a goodly ensample of learning, to see how earthy Jonas is still for all
his trying in yt whales belly. He was so sore displesed because the Ninevites
perished not, that he was weary of his life, and wished after death for very
sorrow, that he had lost the glory of his prophesiyng, in yt his prophecy came
not to pass. But GOD rebuked him with a likeness, saying: it greueth thine heart
for the loss of a vile shrub or spray whereon thou bestowedst no labor or
cost, neither was it thine handy work. How much more then should it grieve mine
heart the loss of so great a multitude of innocents as are in Niniue, which
are all mine hands work. Nay Note her^ the great mercy of God.
Jonas, I am God over all, and father as well unto the heathen as unto the
Jews, and merciful to all, and warneere I smite, neither threate I so cruelly
by any prophet, but that I will forgive, if they repent and ask mercy: neither
on the other side, whatsoever I promise, will I fulfill it, save for their
sakes only, which trust in me, and submit themselves to keep my laws of very
love, as natural children.

ON this manner to read the Scripture The right manner how to read the Scripture
is the right use thereof, and why the holy ghost caused it to be written. That
is, that thou first seek out yt law, that God will have thee to do,
interpreting it spiritually, without gloss or covering the brightness of Moses
face, so that that thou feel in thine heart, how that it is damnable sin
before God, not to love thy neighbor that is thine enemy, as purely as Christ
loved thee, and that not to love thy neighbor in thine heart, is to have
committed already all sin against him. And therefore until that love be come,
thou must knowledge unfeignedly that there is sin in the best deed thou
do. And it must ernestly grieve thine heart, and thou must wash all thy good
deeds in Christ's blood, ere they can be pure, and an acceptable sacrifice unto
god, and must desire God the father for his sake to take thy deeds a worth, All
our deeds are made perfect in christ's blood.
and to pardon the imperfectnesse of them, and to give thee power to do the^
better, and with more fervent love.

And on the other side, thou must search diligently for the promises of mercy,
which God has promised thee again. Which two poynces, that is to wit, the
law spiritually interpreted, how that all is damnable sin, that is not
unfeigned love out of the ground, and bottom of the heart, after the ensample
of Christ's love to us, because we be all equally created and formed of one God
our father, and indifferently bought, and redeemed with one blood of our
savior Jesus Christ: and that the promises be given unto a repentyng soul,
that thursteth and longs All the promised made by God in Christ, are made to
the^ that repent
after the^, of the pure and fatherly mercy of God, through our faith only with
out all deseruyng of our deeds, or merits of our works, but for Christ's sake
a lone, and for the merits and deservings of his works, death and passions
that he suffered all together for us, and not for himself: which two The two
keys that open a^ the Scripture
points I say, if they be written in thine heart, are the keys which so open
all the Scripture unto thee, that no creature can lock thee out, and with
which thou shall go in and out, and find pasture, and food every where. And if
these lessons be not written in thine heart, then is all the scripture shut up,
as a cornel in the shale, so that thou may read it, and commen of it, and
rehearse all the stories of it, and dispute wittily, and be a profounde
sophister, and yet understand not one jot thereof.

And thirdly that thou take the stories and lives which are contained in the
bible, for sure and undoubted ensamples, that god so will deal with us unto the
worlds end.

Herewith Reader farewell, and be commended unto God, and unto the grace of his
spirit. And first see yt thou stop not thine ears unto the calling of GOD,
and harden not thine heart beguiled with fleshly interpreting of the law, and
false imagined and hipocritish righteousness, least then the Ninevites rise with
thee at the day of judgment, and condemn thee.

And secondarily, if thou find ought amiss, when thou see thy self in the
glass of Gods word, think it necessary wisdom, to amend the same betymes,
monished and warned by the ensample of other men, rather then to tarry until
thou be beaten also.

And thirdly, if it shall so chance, that the wild lusts of thy flesh shall
blind thee, and carry thee clean away with A very fruitful and good lesson
the for a time: yet at yt latter end, when the God of all mercy shall have
compassed thee in on every side with temtations, tribulation, adversities and
combrance, to bring thee home again unto thine own heart, and to set thy
sins which thou would so feign cover, and put out of mind with
delectation of voluptuous pastunes, before the eyes of thy conscience: then call
the faithful ensample of Jonas, and all like stories unto thy remembrance, and
with Jonas turn unto thy father How thou may at all times apply the stories
of the Bible to thy great comfort.
that smote thee, not to cast thee away, but to lay a corosie, and a fretting
plaster unto the pocke, that lay hid and fret inward, to draw the disease
out, and to make it appear, that thou might feel thy sickness, and the
danger thereof, and come and receive the healyng plaster of mercy.

And forget not that whatsoever ensample of mercy, God has showed since the
beginning of the world, the The law must be fulfilled with the mercy that is in
Christ.
same is promised thee, if thou wylt in like manner turn again, and receive it
as they did, and with Jonas be a known of thy sin and confess it, and
knowledge it unto thy father.

And as the law which fretteth thy conscience is in thine heart, and is none
outward thing, even so seek within thy heart the plaster of mercy, the
promises of forgeuenes in our Savior Jesus Christ, according unto all the
ensamples of mercy yt are gone before.

And with Jonas let them that wait on vanities, and seek God here and there,
and in every temple save in their hearts, go: and seek thou the testament of
God in thine heart. For in thine heart is the word of the law, and in thine In
thy heart are the words of the law, and in thine heart are the promises and
mercy of Christ.
heart is the word of faith, in the promises of mercy in Jesus Christ. So that
if thou confess with a repentyng heart and knowledge, and surely believe that
Jesus is Lord over all sin, thou art safe.

And finally, when the rage of thy conscience is ceased, and quieted with fast
faith in the promises of mercy, the^ offer with Jonas the offering of praise and
thankesgeuyng, and pay the vow of thy Baptism, that God only saves, Our
sin is of our selves: but remission and sorgeuenes thereof comes freely of
the mercy of God for christ's sake.
of his only mercy and goodness: that is, believe stedsastly and preach
co^sta^tly, that it is God only that smites, and GOD only that heals:
ascribyng the cause of thy tribulation unto thine own sin, and the cause of
thy deliverance unto yt mercy of god.

And beware of the leven that says we have power in our free will before the
preaching of the Gospel, to deserve grace, to keep the law of congruite, or god
to be unrighteous. And say with John in the first, that as the law was given
by Moses, even so grace to fulfill it, is given by Christ. And when they say
our deeds with grace deserve heaven, say thou with Paul. Romans vj that
everlasting life is the gift of GOD thorough Jesus Christ, our Lord, and that
we be made sons by faith. John. i. And therefore heirs of GOD with Christ.
Romans viij. And say that we receive all of God through faith, that follows
repentance, and that we do not our works unto God, but either unto our
selves, to slay the sin that God has no need of our works but we must do
the^ for our selves, and for the profit of our neighbors.
remains in the flesh, and to wax perfect, either unto our neighbors,
which do as much for us again in other things. And when a man excedeth in
gifts of grace, let him understand that they be given him, as well for his
weak brethren, as for him self: as though all the bread be committed unto the
panter, yet for his fellows with him, which give thee thanks unto their Lord,
and recompense the panter again, with other kind of service in their offices.
And when they say that Christ has made no satisfaction for the sin we do
after our Baptism: Christ has satisfied for our sins, as well after
baptism, as before Baptism.
say thou with the doctrine of Paul, that in our Baptism we receive the
merits of Christ's death through repentance, and faith, of which two,
Baptism is yt sign. And though when we sin of frailty after our Baptism,
we receive the sign no more, yet we be renewed again through repentance, and
faith in Christ's blood, of which twain, yt sign of Baptism even continued
among us in Baptising our young children, does ever keep us in mind, and call
us back again unto our profession if we begone astray, and promises us
forgiveness. Neither ca^ Our actual sins are washed away in Christ's blood.
actual sin be washed away with our works, but with Christ's blood: neither
can there be any other sacrifice, or satisfaction to Godward for them, save
christ's blood. For as much as we can do no works unto God, but receive only
of his mercy, with our repenting faith, through Jesus Christ our lord, and only
savior: unto whom and unto God our father through him, and unto his holy
spirit, yt only purges, sanctifies, and washes us in the innocent blood
of our redemption, be praise for ever.

Amen.
The Prologue upon the Gospel of S. Matthew, by M. William Tyndall.
HEre have thou (mostdere reader) the new Testament, or covenant made with us
of GOD in Christ's blood. Which I have looked over again (now at the last)
with all diligence, and compared it unto the Greek, and have weeded out of it
many fautes, which lack of help at the beginning and oversight, did sow
therein. If ought seem changed, or not altogether agreyng with the Greek, let
the finder of the fault consider the Hebrew phrase, or manner of speech left in
the Greek words. Whose preterperfectence and presentence is often both one, and
the futuretence is the optatiue mode also, and the futuretence often yt
imperative mode in the active voice, and in the passive ever. Likewise person
for person, number for number, and interrogatio^ for a co^ditionall, and such
like is with the Hebruesa common usage.

I have also in many places set light in the margent to understand the text by.
If any man find fautes either with the translation or ought beside (which is
easier for many to do, then so well to have translated, it the^ selves of their
own pregnante wits, at the beginning without an ensample) to the same it
shall be lawful to translate it them selves, and to put what they lust thereto.
It I shall perceive either by my self, or by information of other, yt ought be
escaped me, or might more plainly be translated: I will shortly after cause it
to be amended. Howbeit, in many places, me thinks it better to put a
declaration in the margent, then to run to far from the text. And in many
places where the text seems at the first choppe hard to be understand, yet the
circumstaunces before and after, and often readyng together, make it plain
enough.

Moreover, because the kingdom of heaven, which is the Scripture and word of
GOD, may be so locked up, that he which reads or hears it, can not
understand it: as Christ testifies how that the Scribes, and Phariseis had so
shut it up Math. xxiij. and had taken away the keye of knowledge. Luke. xj.
that yt Jews which thought The Zewes to this day ar locked out from the
understanding of the scriptures.
them selves within, were yet so locked out, and are to this day, that they can
understand no sentence of the Scripture. unto their salvation though they ca^
rehearse the textes every where and dispute thereof, as subtely as the Popish
Doctors of Dunces dark learning, which with their sophistry serned us, as
the Phariseis did yt Jews. Therefore, that I might be found faith full to my
father, and Lord in distributyng unto my brethren and fellows of one faith,
their due and necessary fode: so dressing it and seasonyng it, that the weak
stomachs may receive it also, and be the better for it: I thought it my duty
(most dear reader) to warn thee before, and to show thee, the right way in,
and to give thee, the true keye to open it with all, and to arm thee against
false Prophets, and malicious hypocrites, whose perpetual study is to blind
the scripture with gloses, and there to lock it up, where it should save thee
soul, and to make us shoot at a wrong mark, to put our trust in those
things that profit their bellyes only, and slay our souls.

The right way (yea, and the only The right way into the understanding of the
Scritures.
way) to understand the Scripture unto salvation is, that we earnestly and
above all thing search for the profession of our Baptism, or couenantes made
between GOD and us. As for an ensample. Christ says Mat. v. Happy are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Lo, here GOD has made a covenant
with us, to be merciful unto us, if we will be merciful one to an other, so
that the man which shows mercy unto his neighbor: may be bold to trust in
GOD for mercy, at all needs. And contrariwise, judgment without mercy, shall be
to him that Iaco. 1.
shows not mercy. So now, if he that shows no mercy, trust in GOD for
mercy, his faith is carnal and worldly, and but vain presumption. For God
has promised mercy only to the merciful.

And therefore the mercyles have not Gods word that they shall have mercy: but
contrariwise that they shall have judgment without mercy. And Math. vi. If ye
shall forgive then their fautes, your heavenly father shall forgive you: but
and if ye shall not forgive men their faults: no more shall your father
forgive you, your faults.

Here also by the virtue and strength of this covenant, wherewith God of his
mercy, has bound him self to us unworthy: he that forgeueth his neighbor
may be bold, when he returns and amendeth, to believe and trust in GOD for
remission of what soever he has done amiss. And contrariwise, he that will
not forgive, can not but despair of forgiveness in the end, and fear
judgment without mercy.

The general covenant wherein all The general covenant that God has made
with us.
other are comprehended and included, is this. If we meke our selves to god, to
keep all his laws, after the ensample of Christ: then God has bound him
self unto us, to keep and make good all yt mercies promised in Christ,
thoroughout all the Scripture.

All the whole law, which was given Law.
to utter our corrupt nature, is comprehended in the ten commandments. In
these commaundemento is contained tee whole law.
And the ten commaundeme^ts are comprehended in these two: love God, and thy
neighbor. And he that loves his neighbor in GOD, and Christ, fulfilleth
these two, and consequently the ten, and finally all the other. Now if we love
our neighbors in God and Christ, that is to wit, if we be loving, kind and
merciful to them, because God has created them unto his likeness, and Christ
has redeemed them, and bought them with his blood: the^ may we be bold to trust
in God through Christ and his deserving, for all mercy. For God has promised
and bound him self to us, to show us all mercy, and to be a father almighty
to us, so that we shall not need to fear the power of all our adversaries.

Now if any man that submits not him self to keep the commandments, Where
no good(...)are, there the faith is vain.
do think that he has any faith in God: the same man's faith is vain,
worldly, damnable, devilish, and plain presumption as is above said, and is no
faith that can justify, or be accepted before God. And that is it that James
means in his Epistle. For how can a man believe (says Paul) without a
preacher, Romans 10. Now read all the scripture, and see where God sent any to
preach mercy to any, save unto them only that repent, and turn to God with
all their hearts, to keep his commandments. Unto the disobedient that will
not turn, is threatened wrath, vengeance, and damnation, according to all the
terrible acts, and fearful ensamples of the Bible.

Faith now in God yt father through What faith it is that saves.
our Lord Jesus Christ, according to the couenauntes and appointment made
between God and us, is our salvation. Wherefore I have ever noted the couenantes
in the margents, and also yt promises. Moreover, where thou find a promise,
and no covenant expressed therewith: there must thou understand a covenant,
that we when we be received to grace, know it to be our duty to keep the law.
As for an ensample when the scripture says, Mat. 7. Ask, and it shall be
given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. It
is to be understand, if that when thy neighbor asks, seeks or knocks to
thee, thou the^ show him the same mercy which thou desire of God, then has
god bound him self to help thee again, and else not.

Also ye see that two things are required to be in a christen man. The first
is a steadfast faith, and trust in almighty Two things are required to be in a
christian man.
God, to obtain all the mercy that he has promised us, through yt deseruyng
and merits of Christ's blood only, without all respect to our own works.

And the other is, that we forsake evil, and turn to GOD to keep his laws,
and to fight against our selves and our corrupt nature perpetually, that we may
do the will of God every day better and better.

This have I said (most dear reader) to warn thee, least thou should be
deceived, and should not only read the scriptures in vain, and to no What
the nature of gods word is.
profit, but also unto thy greater damnation. For the nature of gods word is,
that whosoever read it, or hear it reasoned and disputed before him, it will
begin immediately to make him every day better and better, till he be grown
into a perfect man in yt knowledge of Christ, and love of the law of God, or
else make him worse and worse, till he be hardened, that he openly resist the
spirit of god, and then blaspheme, after the ensample of Pharao, Coran, Abiron,
Balam, Judas, Simon Magus and such other.

This to be even so, the words of Christ, John. 3. do well confirm. This is
condemnation (says he) the light is come into the world, but the men loved
darkness more then light, for their deeds were evil. Behold, when the light
of Gods word comes to a man, whether he read it, or hear it preached or
testified, and he yet have no love thereto, to fashion his life thereafter, but
consents still unto his old deeds of ignorance: then begins When we
hear gods will and do it not, then God withdraws his mercy and favor from
us.
his just damnation immediately, and he is henceforth without excuse, in that he
refused mercy offered him, for God offreth mercy upon the condition that he
will mende his living: but he will not come under the couenaunte. And from that
hour forward he waxech worse and worse, God taking his spirit of mercy and
grace from him, for his unthankfulness sake.

And Paul writes Romans 1. that the heathen, because when they knew god, they
had no lust to honor him with godly living, therefore God poured his wrath upon
them, and took his spirit from them, and gave the^ up to their hearts lusts
to serve sin, from iniquity to iniquity, till they were thoroughly hardened,
and past repentance.

And Pharao because when ye word of God was in his country, and Gods people
scattred throughout all his la^d, and yet he neither loved the^, nor it,
therefore God gave him up, and in taking his spirit of grace from him, so
hardened his heart with covetousness, that afterward no miracle could convert
him.

Hereunto pertains yt parable of the talentes. Mat. 25. The Lord commands
He that harkeneth to the word of God and does it, the same shall be blessed in
his deed.
the talent to be taken away from the evil and slothful servant, and to
bind him hand and foot, and to cast him into utter darkness, and to give the
talent unto him that had ten, saying: to all that have, more shall be given:
but from him that has not, that he has, shall be taken from him. That is to
say, he that has a good heart toward the word of god, and to garnish it with
godly living, and to testify it to other, ye same shall increase daily more and
more in the grace of Christ. But he that loves it not, to live thereafter, and
to edify other, the same shall loose the grace of true knowledge, and be
blinded again, and every day wax worse and worse, and blynder and blynder,
till he be an utter enemy of the word of God, and his heart so hardened, that
it shall be impossible to convert him.

And Luke xij. The servant that knows his masters will and prepares not
himself, shall be beaten with many stripes? That is, shall have greater
damnation. And Mat. 7. All that hear the word of God, and do not thereafter,
build on sand: that is, as the foundation laid on sand, can not resist
violence of water, but is undermined and overthrown, even so the faith of them
that have no lust, nor What it is to build upon ^and.
love to the law of God, builded upon yt sand of their own imaginatio^s, and
not on the rock of Gods word, according to his couenauntes: turns to
desperation in time of tribulation, and when God comes to judge.

And the vineyard Mat. 21. planted and hired out to the husbandmen that would
not render to the Lord of the fruit in due time, and therefore was taken from
them, and hired out to other, does confirm the same. For Christ says to the
Jews, the kingdom of heaven shall be taken from you, and given to a nation that
will bring forth yt fruits thereof, as it is come to pass. For the Jews have
lost the spiritual knowledge of God, and of his commandments, and also of
all the scripture, so that they can understand nothing godly. And the door is
so locked up, that all their knockyng is in vain, though many of them take
great pain for gods sake. And Luke 13. The fig tree that bears no fruit,
is commanded to be plucked up.

And finally, hereto pertayneth with infinyte other, the terrible parable of
the unclean spirit (Luke. 11.) which after he is cast out, when he comes,
The unclean spirit that returns in worse sort, the^ he was when he was cast
forth.
and finds his house swept and garnished, takes to him 7. worse then
himself, and comes and enters in, and dwells there, and so is yt end of
the man worse then the beginning. The Jews, they had cleansed themselves with
gods word, from all outward idolatry, and worshipping of idols. But their
hearts remained still faythlesse to godward, and toward his mercy and truth,
and therefore without love also, and lust to his law, and to their neighbors
for his sake, and through false trust in their own works (to which heresy,
the child of perdition, the wicked bishop of Rome with his lawyers, has
brought us christen) were more abominable idolaters the^ before, and become
ten times worse in the end, then at the beginning. For the first idolatry was
soon spyed and easy to be rebuked of the Prophets by the Scripture. But the
latter is more subtle to beguile withal, and an hundredth times of more
difficulty, to be weeded out of men's hearts.

This also is a conclusion, nothing more certain, or more proved by the
testimony, and ensamples of the scripture: that if any that favors the word
of God, be so weak that he can Such (...) are profes sours of the word (...)
God, and will not tame and scourge the^ selves, the^ will God plague (...)
scourge.
not chaste his flesh, him will the lord chastise and scourge every day sharper
and sharper with tribulation, and misfortune, that nothing shall prosper with
him, but all shall go against him, what soever he takes in hand, and will
visit him with poverty, with sickenesses and diseases, and shall plague him,
with plague upon plague, each more loathsome, terrible and fearful then other,
till he be at utter desiaunce with his flesh.

Let us therefore that have now at this time our eyes opened again, through
the tender mercy of GOD, keep a mean. Let us so put our trust in the mercy of
GOD through Christ, that we know it our duty to keep the law of GOD, and to
love our neighbors, for their fathers sake which created them, and for their
Lords sake which redeemed them, and bought the^ so dearly with his blood. Let
us walk in yt fear of God, and have our eyes open unto both parts of Gods
couenaunts, being certified that none shall be partaker of the mercy, save he
that will fight against the flesh to keep the law. And let us arm our selves
with this remembrance, yt as Christ's works justify from sin, and set us
Christ's deeds ^et us in the favor of God: and our own, help us to continue
in his favor.
in the favor of GOD: so our own deeds through workyng of the spirit of God,
help us to continue in the favor and the grace, into which Christ has
brought us, and that we can no longer continue in favor and grace, then our
hearts are to keep the law.

Furthermore concerning the law of God, this is a general conclusion, that
the whole law, whether they be ceremonies, sacrifices, yea, or Sacraments
either, or precepts of equity between man and man, throughout al degrees of
the world, all were given for our profit and necessity only, and not for any
need that God has of our keeping the^, or yt his joy is increased thereby: or
that the deed, for the deed it self does please him. That is, all that God
requires of us, when we be at one with him, and do put our trust in him, and
love him, is that we love, every man his neighbor to pity him, and to have
compassion on him in all his needs, and to be merciful unto him. This to be
even so Christ testifies, in the. vij. of Math: This is the law, and the
Prophets. That is, to do as thou would be done to (according I mean to the
doctrine of the Scripture) and not to do that thou would not have done to
thee, is all that the law requires and the Prophets. Love is the fulfilling of
the law.
And Paul to the Romans xiij. affirms also yt love is that fulfillyng of the
law, and that he which loves, does of his own accord all that the law
requires. And. i. Tim. i. Paul says, that the love of a pure heart and good
conscience and faith unfeigned, is the end and fulfillyng of the law. For faith
unfeigned in Christ's blood, causes ye to love for Christ's sake, which love is
the pure love only, and the only Faith is cause of love.
cause of a good conscience. For then is the conscience pure, when the eye
looks to Christ in all her deeds, to do them for his sake, and not for her
own singular aduau^tage, or any other wicked purpose. And John, both in his
Gospel and also Epistles, speaks never of any other law, then to love one an
other purely, affirmyng that we have God him self dwelling in us, and all that
GOD desires, if we love one the other.

Seeing then, that faith to God and love, and mercyfulnesse to our neighbors,
is all that ye law requires, therefore of necessity the law must be
understand and interpret by them. So that all inferior laws are to be kept
and observed, as long as they be seruau^ts to faith and love: and then to be
broken immediately, if thorough any occasion, they hurt either the faith which
we should have to Godward, in the confidence of Christ's blood, or the love
which we owe to our neighbors for Christ's sake.

And therefore when the blind Phariseis murmured, and grudged at him and his
Disciples, that they brake the Sabbath day, and traditions of the elders, and
that he him self did eat with Publicanes, and sinners, he answered. Math. ix.
allegyng Esayas ye Prophet: Go rather and learn what this means, I require
mercy, and not sacrifice. God requires mercy and not sacrifice.
And Math. xij. Oh that ye wist what this means, I require mercy and not
sacrifice. For only love and mercyfulnesse understands the law: and else
nothing. And he that has not that written in his heart, shall never understand
the law: no, though all the angels of heaven went about to teach him. And he
that has that graven in Only love understands the law.
his heart, shall not only understand the law, but also shall do of his own
inclination all that is required of the law, though never law had been given:
as all mothers do of them selves without law unto their children, all that can
be required by any law, love ouercommyng all pain, grief, tediousness or
lothsomnesse: and even so no doubt if we had continued in our first state of
innocence, we should ever have fulfilled the law, without compulsion of the
law.

And because the law (which is a doctrine through teaching every man his
duty, does utter our corrupt nature) is sufficiently described by Moses,
therefore is little mention made thereof in the new Testament, save of love only,
wherein all the law is included, as seldom mention is made of the new Testament
in the old law, save here and there are promises made unto the^, that Christ
should come and bless them, and deliver them, and that the Gospel, and new
Testament should be preached and published unto all nations.

Gospel.
The Gospel is glad tidings of mercy and grace, and that our corrupt nature
shall be healed again for christ's sake, and for the merits of his deservings
only. Yet on that condition that we will turn to God, to learn to keep his
laws spiritually, that is to say, of love for his sake, and will also suffer
the curyng of our infirmities.

New Testament.
The new Testament is as much to say as a new covenant. The old Testament is an
old temporal covenant, made between GOD, and the carnal children of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, otherwise called Israel, upon the deeds, and the observing
of a temporal law: where the reward of the keeping is temporal life, and
prosperity in the land of Canaan, and the breaking is rewarded with te^porall
death, and punishment. But the new Testament is an everlasting covenant, made
unto the children of GOD thorough faith in Christ, upon the deservings of
Christ: where eternal life is promised to all that believe, and death to all
that are unbelieving. My deeds, if I keep the law, are rewarded with temporal
promises of this life. But if I believe in Christ, Christ's deeds have
purchased for me the eternal promise of the everlasting life. If I commit
nothing worthy of death: I deserve to my reward that no man kill me: if I hurt
no man, I am worthy that no man hurt me. If I help my neighbor, I am worthy
that he help me again. etc. So that with outward deeds with which I serve
other men, I deserve Our works extend no farther then to our neighbor.
that other men do like to me in this world: and they exte^d no further. But
Christ's deeds extend to life everlasting unto all that believe. etc. These be
sufficient in this place concerning the law and the Gospel, new Testament and
old: so that as there is but one God, one Christ, one faith, and one Baptism,
even so understand thou that there is but one Gospel, though many write it,
and many preach it. For all preach the same Christ, and bring the same glad
tidinges. And thereto Paul's Epistles with the Gospel of John and his first
Epistle, and the first Epistle of S. Peter, are most pure Gospel: and most
plainly, and richely describe the glory of the grace of Christ. If ye require
more of the law, seek in the Prologue to the Romans, and in other places
where it is sufficiently entreated of.

Repentance.
COncerning this word repentance, Why Tyndall used this word repe^tau^ce,
rather then penance.
or (as they used) penance, the Hebrew has in the old Testament generally
(Sob) turn, or be converted. For which the translation that we take for S.
Ieromes, has most part (Conuerti) to turn, to be converted, and sometime
(Agere poenitentiam) And the Greek in the new Testament has perpetually
(Metanoeo) to turn in the heart, and (...).
mind, and to come to the right knowledge, and to a man's right wit again. For
which (Metanoeo) s. Ieromes translation (...).
has sometime (Ago poenitentiam) I do repent: sometime (Poeniteo) I repent,
sometime (Poeniteor) I am repentaunt: sometime (Habeo poenitentiam) I have
repentance: sometime (Poenitet me) it repents me. And Erasmus uses much
this word (Resipisco) I come to my self, or to my right mind again. And the
very sense and signification both of the Hebrew, and also of the Greek word is:
to be converted and to turn to God with all the heart, to know his will, and to
live according to his laws, and to be cured of our corrupt nature with the
oil of his spirit, and wine of obedience to his doctrine. Which conversion
or turnyng if it be unfeigned, these four do accompany it, and are included
therein. Confession, not in the Priests ear, for that is but man's invention,
but to God in the heart, and The four parts of repentan^ce.
before all the congregation of GOD, how that we be sinners and sinful, and
that our whole nature is corrupt, and inclined to sin and all unrighteousness,
and therefore evil, wicked, and damnable, and his law holy and just, by which
our sinful nature is rebuked. And also to our neighbors, if we have
offended any person particularly. Then contrition, sorowfulnes that we be such
damnable sinners, and not only have sinned, but are wholly inclined to sin
still.

Thirdly, faith (of which our old^ doctors have made no mention at all in the
description of their penance) that God for Christ's sake does forgive, us and
receive us to mercy, and is at one with us, and will heal our corrupt nature.
And fourthly, satisfaction What manner of satisfaction we^ ought to make.
or amends making, not to god, with holy works, but to my neighbor whom I
have hurt, and the congregation of God whom I have offended (if any open crime
be found in me) and submittyng of a man's self unto the congregation or church
of Christ, and to the officers of the same, to have his life corrected and
governed henceforth of them, according to the true doctrine of yt church of
Christ. And note this, that as satisfaction or ame^des making, is counted
righteousness before the world, and a purging of sin: so that the world when
I have made a full mendes, has no further to complain. Even so faith in
Christ's blood is counted righteousness, and a purging of all sin before God.

Moreover, he that sins against his brother, sins also against his father
almighty God, and as the sin committed against his brother, is purged before
the world with making amends, or asking forgeuenes: even so is the sin
committed against God, purged through faith in christ's blood only. For Christ
says, John. 8. Except ye believe that I am be, ye shall die in your sins. That
is to say, if ye think that there is any other sacrifice, or satisfaction to
Godward, than me, ye remain ever in sin before God, howsoever righteous ye
appear before the world. Wherefore now, whether ye call this (Metonoia)
repentance (...).
conversion or turning again to god, either amendyng, etc. or whether ye say,
repent, be converted, turn to god, amend your living, or what ye lust, I ^n
content, so ye understand what is meant thereby, as I have now declared.

Elders.
IN the old testament, the temporal Why he names the^ Elders, and not
priests.
heads and rulers of the Jews, which had the governance over the lay, or
common people, are called Elders, as ye may see in the four Evangelists. Out
of which custom, Paul in his epistle, and also Peter, call the prelates, and
spiritual governors which are Bishops and priests, Elders. Now whether ye
call them elders or priests, it is to me all one: so that ye understand that
they be officers, and servant of the word of God: unto the which all men
both hie and low, that will not rebel against Christ must obey, as long as
they preach and rule truly, and no longer.

A Prologue made upon the Gospel of S. Mark, by M. William Tyndall.
OF Mark read (Act. 12.) how William Tyndals Prologue upon the Gospel of
Mark.
Peter (after he was loosed out of prison by the Angel) came to Marks mothers
house, where many of the Disciples were praying for his deliverance. And Paul
and Barnabas took him with them from Jerusalem, and brought him to Antioche,
Act. 12. and Acts. 13. Paul and Barnabas took Mark with them, when they were
sent to preach, from whom he also departed, (as it appears in yt said
chapter,) and returned to Jerusalem again. And Act. 15. Paul and Barnabas
were at variaunce about him, Paul not willing to take him with them, because
he forsook them in their first journey. Notwithstanding yet, when Paul wrote
the epistle to the Collossians, Mark was with him, as he says in yt fourth
Chapter: of who^ Paul also testifies, both that he was Barnabas sisters
son, and also his fellow worker in the kingdom of God.

And 2. Timothy 4. Paul commands Timothy to bring Mark with him,
affirmyng that he was needful to him, to minister to him. Finally, he was
also with Peter when he wrote his first Epistle, and so familiar, that Peter
calls him his son, whereof ye see, of whom he learned his gospel, even of
the very apostles, with whom he had his continual conversation, and also of
what authority his writing is, and how worthy of credence.

A Prologue made upon the Gospel of S. Luke, by M. William Tyndall.
LVcas was Paul's companion, at the least way The Prologue of W. Tyndall upon
the Gospel of Luke.
from the 16. of the Acts forth, and with him in all his tribulation, and he
went with Paul at his last going up to Jerusalem. And from thence he followed
Paul to Cesarea, where he lay two year in prison. And from Cesarea he went with
Paul to Rome, where he lay ij. other years in prison. And he was with Paul
when he wrote to the Colossians, as he testifies in the fourth chapter,
saying: The beloved Lucas the Physician saluteth you. And he was with Paul when
he wrote the second epistle to Timothy, as he says in the 4. chapter,
saying: Only Lucas is with me: Whereby ye see the authority of the man, and of
what credence and reverence his writing is worthy of, and thereto of whom he
learned the story of his Gospel, as he himself says, how that he learned it,
and searched it out with all diligence of them that saw it, and were also
partakers at the doing. And as for the Acts of the Apostles, he himself was
at the doing of them (at the least) of the most part, and had his part therein,
and therefore wrote of his own experience.

A Prologue made upon the Gospel of S. John, by William Tyndall.
The Prologue of W. Tyndall upon the Gospel of John.
John, what he was, is manifest by the three first evangelists. First christ's
Apostle, and yt one of the chief. Then christ's nie kinsman, and for his
syngular innocence and softness, singularly beloved, and of singular
familiarity with Christ, and ever one of yt three witnesses of most secret
things. The cause of his writing was certain heresies that arose in his time,
namely, ij. of which one denied Christ to be very God, and the other to be very
man, and to become in the very flesh, and nature of man. Against the which
ij. heresies, he wrote both his Gospel and also his first epistle, and in the
beginning of his gospel says: That the word or thing was at the beginning,
and was with God, and was also very God, and that all things were created by
it, and that it was also made flesh: that is to say, became very man, and he
dwelt among us (says he) and we saw his glory.

And in the beginning of his epistle he says: we show you of the thing that
was from the beginning, which also we heard, saw with our eyes and our hands
handled. And again, we show you everlasting life, that was with the father
and appeared to us, and we heard and saw, etc.

In that he says, that it was from the beginning, and that it was eternal
life, and that it was with God, he affirms him to be very God. And that he
says, we heard, saw, and felt, he witnesses y^ he was very man also. John
also wrote last, and therefore touched not the story that the other had
compiled. But writes most of faith, and promises, and of the Sermons of
Christ. This be sufficient concerning the four Evangelists and their
authority, and worthiness to be believed.

A Prologue upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, by M. William Tyndall.
FOrasmuch as this epistle is the principal, The epistle to the Romans to the
excellentest part of the new Testament.
and most excellent part of the new testament, and most pure Euangelion, that
is to say, glad ridings, and that we call gospel, and also a light and a way
in, unto the whole scripture. I think it meet that every christen man not
only know it, by roate and without the book, but also exercise himself therein
evermore continually, as with the daily bread of the soul. No man verily can
read it to often, or study it to well, for the more it is studied, the easier it
is, the more it is chewed, the pleasanter it is, and the more groundly it is
searched, the precioser things are found in it, so great treasure of
spiritual things lies hid therein.

I will therefore bestow my labor and diligence, through this little preface or
prologue, to prepare a way in, thereunto, so farreforth as God shall give me
grace, that it may be the better understand of every man, for it has been
hitherto evil darkened with gloses, and wonderful dreams of sophisters, that
no man could spy out the intent, and meaning of it, which nevertheless of it
self, is a bright light, and sufficient to give light unto all the scripture.

First we must mark diligently the Here you must note these words, law,
sin, etc. Law, how it is to be understand
manner of speaking of the Apostle, and above all thing, know what Paul means
by these words the Law, sin, grace, faith, righteousness, flesh, sprite, and
such like, or else read thou it never so often, thou shall but loose thy labor.
This word Law may not be understand here, after the common manner, and to use
Paul's term, after the manner of men, or after man's ways: that thou would
say the law here in this place were nothing but learning, which techeth what
ought to be done, and what ought not to be done, as it goes with man's law,
where the law is fulfilled with outward works only, though the heart be never
so far of, but God judges after the ground of the heart, ye and the thoughts
and the secret mouinges of the mind, therefore his law requires the ground of
the heart, and love from the bottom thereof, The law of God requires the bottom
of our hearts
and is not content with the outward work only, but rebukes those works
most of all, which spryng not of love from the ground, and low bottom of the
heart, though they appear outward, never so honest and good, as Christ in the
gospel rebukes the pharisees above all other that were open sinners, and
calls them hipocrites, that is to say, Simulars, and painted Sepulchers,
which Pharisees yet lived no men so pure, as pertaining to the outward deeds,
and works of yt law, ye, and Paul in the third chapter of his epistle unto the
Philippia^s confesses of himself, that as touching the law, he was such a
one, as no man could complain on, and notwithstanding was yet a murderer of
the christen, per S. Paul was a great persecutor of the christians.
secuted them, and tormented them so sore, that he compelled them to blaspheme
Christ, and was altogether merciless, as many which now feign outward good
works, are.

For this cause the 115. psalm calls all men liars, because that no man
keeps the law from the ground of the heart, neither can keep it.

For all men are naturally inclyned unto evil, and hate the law, we find in
our selves unlust, and tediousnes to do good, but lust and delectation to do
evil. Now where no free lust is to do good, there the bottom of the heart
fulfilleth not the law, and there no doubt If we be not willing to do good,
then does sin reign in us.
is also sin and wrath deserved before GOD, though there be never so great
outward show, and appearance of honest living.

For this cause concludes S. Paul in the second chapter, that the Jews all
are sinners and transgressors of the law, though they make men believe through
hypocrisy of outward works, how that they fulfill the law, and says, that he
only which does the law is righteous before God, meaning thereby No man can
fulfill the law, but Christ only.
that no man with outward works, fulfilleth the law.

Thou (says he to the Jew) teach a man should not break wedlock, and yet
breakest wedlock thy self. Wherein thou iudgest an other man, therein
condemnest thou thy self, for thou thy self do even the very same things
which thou iudgest. As though he would say, thou live outwardly well in
the works of the law, and iudgest them that live not so: thou teach other
men: and see a mote in an other, ma^s eye, but art not ware of the beam that
is in thine own eye. For though thou keep the law outwardly with works, for
fear of rebuke, shame, and punishment, either for love of reward, vantage, and
vain glory, yet do thou all without lust and love toward the law, and
had lever a great deal otherwise do, if thou did not fear the law,
ye inwardly in thine heart thou would that there were no law, The p^^e and
perfect keeping of the law is to do the ^a^e of (...).
no nor yet God, the author and venger of the law (if it were possible) so
paynefull it is unto thee, to have thine appetites refrayned, and to be kept
down.

Wherefore then it is a plain conclusion, that thou from the ground and
bottom of thine heart art an enemy to the law. What preuayleth it now, that
thou teach an other man not to steal, when thou thine own self art a
thief in thine heart, and outwardly would feign steal if thou durst? though
that the outward deeds abide not always behind with such hypocrites and
dissimulers, but break forth among, even as an evil scabbe, or a pocke can
not always be kept in with violence of medicine. Thou teach an other man,
but teach not thy self, ye (...) but o^ inward love.
thou w^est not what thou teach, for thou vnderstadest not the law a right,
how that it can not be fulfilled and satisfied, but with inward love and
affection, much less can it be fulfilled with outward deeds, and works
only. The law increases sin.
Moreover the law increases sin, as he says in the fifth Chapter, because
that man is an enemy to the law, for as much as it requires so many things
clean contrary to his nature, whereof he is not able to fulfill one point or
title, as the law requires it. And therefore are we more provoked, and have
greater lust to break it.

For which causes sake he says in the seventh Chapter, that the law is The
law is spiritual
spiritual, as though he would say, if the law were fleshly, and but man's
doctrine, it might be fulfilled, satisfied, and stilled with outward deeds.
But now is the law ghostly and no man fulfilleth it, except that all that he
does spryng of love from the bottom of the heart. Such a new heart and lusty
courage unto the law ward can thou never come by of thine own strength and
enforcement, but by the operation and workyng of the spirit. For the spirit
of God only makes a man spiritual The spirit of god makes a man spiritual.
and like unto the law, so that now hence forth he does nothing of fear, or
for lucre or vantages sake, or of vain glory, but of a free heart, and of
inward lust. The law is spiritual, and will be both loved, and fulfilled of a
spiritual heart, and therefore of necessity requires it the spirit, that
makes a man's heart free, and gives him lust and courage unto the law ward.
Where such The law is good, righteous and holy.
a spirit is not, there remains sin, grudging, and hatred against the law,
which law nevertheless is good, righteous, and holy.

Acquaint thy self therefore with the manner of speaking of the Apostle, and let
this now stick fast in thine heart, that it is not both one, to do the deeds
and works of the law, and to fulfill the law. The work of yt law is, what
Works of the law and the fulfilling of the law, are two things
soever a man does, or can do of his own free will, of his own proper
strength, and enforcing. Notwithstanding though there be never so great
workyng, yet as long as their remains in the heart, unlust, tediousnes,
grudgyng, grief, pain, loths^nnes, and compulsion toward the law, so long are
all the works unprofitable, lost, ye and damnable in the sight of God. This
means Paul in the iij. Chapter, where he says, by the deeds of the law
shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God. Hereby perceauest thou, that
those sophisters are but disceauers, which teach that a man may and must
prepare him self to grace and to the favor of god, with good works. By the
works of the law no man can be justified.
How ca^ they prepare them selves unto the favor of God, and to that which is
good, when them selves can do no good, no can not once think a good thought,
or consent to do good, the devil possessing their hearts, minds, and
thoughts captive at his pleasure? Ca^ those works please GOD, think thou,
which are done with grief, pain, and tediousnes, with an evil will, with a
contrary and a grudgyng mind? O holy saint Prosperous, how mightily, with the
Scripture of Paul did thou confound this heresy, twelve hundred years a
go or thereupon.

To fulfill the law is, to do yt works thereof, and what soever the law
commands As the law is spiritual so it must be fulfilled spiritually.
with love, lust, and inward affection and delectation, and to live godly and
well, freely, willyngly, and without compulsion of the law, even as though
there were no law at all. Such lust and free liberty to love the law, comes
only by the workyng of the spirit in the heart, as he says in the first
Chapter.

Now is the spirit none otherwise given, then by faith only, in that we
believe the promises of God, without waueryng how that God is true, and will
fulfill all his good promises toward us for Christ's blondes sake, as it is
plain in the first Chapter, I am not ashamed, says Paul, of Christ's Where
true faith is, there is the spirit of God.
glad tidings, for it is the power of GOD unto salvation to as many as believe,
for at once and together even as we believe the glad tidings preached to us,
the holy ghost enters into our hearts, and loses the bonds of the devil,
which before possessed our hearts in captivity, and held them that we could
have no lust to yt will of God in the law, and as the spirit comes by faith
only, even so faith comes by hearing the word, or glad tidings of God, when
Christ is preached how that he is Gods son and man also, dead and risen
again for our sakes, as Our justification is by faith in Christ.
he says in the third, fourth, and tenth Chapters. All our justifying then
comes of faith, and faith and the spirit come of God, and not of us.

Hereof comes it, that faith only justifies, makes righteous, and
fulfilleth the law, for it brings the spirit through Christ's deseruinges,
the spirit brings lust, loses the heart, makes him free, sets him at
liberty, and gives him strength to work the deeds of the law with love,
even as the law requires, then at the last out of the same faith, so workyng
in the heart, spryng all good works by their own accord. That means he in
the third Chapter, for after he has cast away Out of true faith springs all
good worke^.
the works of the law, so that he sounds as though he would break, and
disanulle the law through faith, he answers to that might be laid against,
saying, we destroy not the law through faith, but mayntaine, further, or
stablish the law through faith, that is to say, we fulfill the law thorough
faith.

Sin in the Scripture is not called O^synne.
that outward work only committed by the body, but all the whole business, and
what so ever accompanyeth, moves or stirs unto the outward Sin what it is?
deed, and that whence the works spring, as unbelief, pronenes and readynes
unto the deed in the ground of the heart, with all the powers, affections and
appetites, wherewith we can but sin, so that we say, that a man then sins
when he is carried away headlong into sin, all together as much as he is, of
that poison inclination and corrupt nature, wherein he was conceived and
borne: For there is none outward sin committed, except a man be carried away
all together, with life, soul, heart, body, lust and mind thereunto. The
Scripture looks singularly unto the heart, and unto the root and original
fountain of all sin, which is unbelief in the bottom of the heart. For as
faith only justifies and brings the spirit, and lust unto the outward good
works. Even so unbelief only damneth and keeps out the spirit, provoke
the flesh, and styrreth up lust unto the evil outward works, as it fortuned
to Adam and Eu^ in Paradise. Gene. 3.

For this cause Christ calls sin unbelief, and that notably in the. 16.
Sin in y^ scripture is chiefly called vnbe liefe.
of John, the spirit (says he) shall rebuke the world of sin, because they
believe not in me. Wherefore then before all good works as good fruits, there
must needs be faith in the heart whence they spryng, and before all bad deeds
as bad fruits, there must needs be unbelief in the heart, as in the root,
fountain, pith, and strength of all sin, which unbelief is called the head
of the Serpent, and of the old Dragon, which the woman's seed Christ, must
tread underfoot, as it was promised unto Adam.

Grace and gift have this difference. Grace properly is Gods favor,
benevolence or kind mind, which of his Grace, how it is understand in the
scriptures.
own self, without deseruyng of us, he bears to us, whereby he was moved,
and inclined to give Christ unto us, with all his other gifts of grace. Gift
is yt holy ghost, and his working Gift, what it is.
which he pours into the hearts of them, on who^ he has mercy, and who^ he
favors. Though the gifts and the spirit increase in us daily, and have not
yet their full perfection, ye and though there remain in us yet evil lusts
and sin, which fight against the sprite, as he says here in the 7. chapter,
and in the 5. to the Galath. and as it was spoken before in the 3. chapter of
Genesis of the debate between y^ woman's sede, and the seed of yt serpent, yet
nevertheless gods favor is so great, and so strong over us for Christ's sake,
that we are counted for full whole, and perfect before God. For Gods favor
toward us, deuideth not her self, encreasyng a little and a little, as do the
gifts, but receives us whole, and altogether in full love for Christ's sake
our intercessour God for Christ's sake receaueth us.
and mediator, and because yt the gifts of the sprite, and the battle,
between the sprite and evil lusts, are begone in us already.

Of this now understand thou the 7. chapter, where Paul accuses himself as
a sinner, and yet in the 8. chapter, There is no damnation to the^ that are in
Christ.
says: there is no damnation to them that are in Christ, and that because of
the spirit, and because the gifts of the sprite are begone in us. Sinners we
are, because the flesh is not full killed, and mortified. Nevertheless, in as
much as we believe in Christ, and have the earnest and beginning of the sprite,
God is so loving and favorable unto us, that he will not look on such sin,
neither will count it as sin, but will deal with us according to our belief
in Christ, and according to his promises which he has sworn to us, until the
sin be full slain and mortified by death.

Faith is not man's opinion and dream, as some imagine and feign, Faith, what
it is?
when they hear the story of the Gospel: but when they see that there follow
no good works, nor amendment of living, though they hear, ye, and can babble
many things of faith, then they fall from the right way, and say, faith only
justifies not, a man must have good works also, if he will be righteous and
safe. The cause is when they hear the gospel or glad tidinges, they feign of
their own strength certain imaginations and thoughts in their hearts,
saying: I have heard the gospel, False and fained faith
I remember the story, lo, I believe, and that they count right faith, which
nevertheless as it is but man's imagination and faining, even so profits it
not, neither follow there any good works, or amendme^t of living.

But right faith is a thing wrought by the holy ghost in us, which changes
us, turns us into a new nature and begets us a new in God, and makes us
the sons of god, as thou read in the first of John, and kills the old
Adam, and makes us altogether new in the heart, mind, will, lust, and in all
our affections and powers of the soul, and brings the holy ghost with her.
Faith is a lively thing, True faith is lively.
mighty in working, valiant and strong, ever doing, ever fruitful, so that it
is impossible, that he which is endued therewith, should not work always good
works without ceasing. He asks Faith is not idle.
not whether good works are to be done or not, but has done them already, ere
mention be made of them, and is always doing, for such is his nature, for quick
faith in his heart and lively mouyng of the sprite, drive him and stir him
thereunto. Whosoever does not good works, is an unbelieving person and
faithles, and looks round about him, groping after faith and good works and
woteth not what faith or good works mean, though he babble never so many
things of faith and good works.

Faith is then a lively and a steadfast trust in the favor of God, wherewith
The true definition of faith.
we commit our selves altogether unto god, and that trust is so surely
grounded, and sticks so fast in our hearts, that a man would not once doubt
of it, though he should die a thousand times therefore. And such trust wrought
by the holy ghost through faith, makes a man glad lusty, chereful, and true
hearted unto God, and unto all creatures. By the means whereof, willingly and
without compulsion he is glad, and ready to do good to every man, to do service
to every man, to suffer all things, yt god may be loved and praised, which
has given him such grace, so that it is impossible to separate good works
from Good worke^ cannot be separate from true faith.
faith, even as it is impossible to separate heat and burning, from fire.
Therefore take heed to thy self, and beware of thine own fantasies and
imaginations, which to judge of faith and good works will seem wise, when in
deed they are stark blind, and of all things most foolish. Pray God that he
will vouchsafe to work faith in thine heart, or else shalt thou remain
evermore faythlesse: feign thou, imagine thou, enforce thou, wrestle with thy
self, and do what thou will or can.

Righteousness is even such faith, Righteousness and how it is to be understand.
and is called Gods righteousness, or righteousness that is of value before
God. For it is gods gift, and it alters a man, and changes him into a new
spiritual nature, and makes him free and liberal, to pay every man his duty.
For through faith a man is purged of his sins, and obteyneth lust unto the
law of God, whereby he gives God his honor, and pays him that he owes him,
and unto men he does service willingly, wherewith soever he can, and pays
every man his duty. Such righteousness can nature, freewill, and our own
strength never bring to pass: for as no man can give himself faith, so can he
not take away unbelief, how then can he take away any sin at all? Wherefore
all is false hypocrisy and sin, whatsoever is done without faith, or in
unbelief, as it is evident in the 14. chapter unto the Romans, though it
appear never so glorious, or beautiful outwardes.

Flesh and sprite may thou not Flesh and spirit what they are, and ^ow to
understand? them.
here understand, as though flesh were only that which pertayneth unto
unchastity, and the spirit that which inwardly pertayneth to the heart: but
Paul calls flesh here as Christ does, John. 3. All that is borne of flesh,
that is to wit, the whole man, with life, soul, body, wit, will, reason, and
whatsoever he is, or does within and without, because that these all, and all
that is in man study after the world, and the flesh. Call flesh therefore
whatsoever (as long as we are without yt spirit of GOD) we think or speak of
God, of faith, of good works, and of spiritual matters. Call flesh also all
How this word flesh is to be understand in the Scripture.
works which are done without grace, and without the working of the sprite,
howsoever good, holy, and spiritual they seem to be, as thou may prove by
the 5. chapter unto the Galathians, where Paul numbreth worshipping of idols,
witchcraft, envy and hate among the deeds of the flesh, and by the 8. unto the
Romans, where he says, that the law by the reason of the flesh is weak,
which is not understand of unchastity only, but of all sins, and
Incredu^^tie is the chief of all sins.
most specially, of unbelief, which is a vice most spiritual, and ground of
all sins.

And as thou call him which is not renewed with the spirit, and borne
Flesh is here well described.
again in Christ, flesh, and all his deeds, even the very motions of his heart,
and mind, his learning, doctrine and contemplation of hye things, his
preaching, teaching, and study in the Scripture, buildyng of Churches, foundyng
of Abbeyes, giving of alms, Mass, matte^s, and what soever he does, though it
seem spiritual, and after the laws of God: So contrariwise call him spiritual
which is renewed in Christ, and all his deeds which spryng of faith, seem
they never so gross, as the washyng of the Disciples feet done by Christ, and
Peter's fishing after the resurrection, yea and all the deeds of matrimony What
so^euer proceeds of faith is spiritual.
are pure spiritual, if they proceed of faith, and what soever is done with in
the laws of God, though it be wrought by the body, as the very wiping of
shoes, and such like, how soever gross they appear outward. With out such
understanding of these words can thou never understand this Epistle of
Paul, neither any other place in the holy Scripture. Take heed therefore, for
who soever understands these words otherwise, the same understands not
Paul, what soever he be. Now will we prepare our selves unto the Epistle.

For as much as it becomes the preacher of Christ's glad tidings, first A
necessary and profitable instruction for all preachers.
through openyng of the law, to rebuke all things, and to prove all things
sin, that proceed not of the spirit, and of faith in Christ, and to prove
all men sinners, and children of wrath by inheritance, and how that to sin
is their nature, and that by nature they can no otherwise do then sin, and
therewith to abate the pride of man, and to bring him unto the knowledge of him
self, and of his misery and wretchedness, that he might desire help. Even so
does S. Paul, and begins in the first Chapter to rebuke unbelief The manner
of S. Pau^les doctrine.
and gross sins, which all men see as the Idolatry, and as the gross sins
of the heathen were, and as the sins now are of all them, which live in
ignorance without faith, and without the favor of GOD, and says. The wrath
of GOD of heaven appears through the Gospel upon all men, for their ungodly,
and unholy living. For though it be known, and daily understand Nature is so
blind that we cannot see nor understand the goodness of God and his mercy
showed unto us in Christ Jesus his ^owne.
by the creatures, that there is but one God, yet is nature of herself, with
out the spirit and grace, so corrupt and so poisoned, that men neither can
thank him, neither worship him, neither give him his due honor, but blind the^
selves, and faule without ceasyng into worse case, even until they come unto
worshipping of Images, and workyng of shameful sins which are abominable
and against nature, and moreuer suffer the shame unrebuked in other, having
delectation and pleasure therein.

In the second Chapter he proceeds further, and rebukes all those holy people
also which without lust, and love to the law, live well outwardly in S. Paul
condemns all hipocrisi^.
the face of the world, and condemn other gladly, as the nature of all
hypocrites is, to think them selves pure in respect of open sinners, and yet
hate the law inwardly, and are full of covetousness and envy, and of all
uncleanness. Math. xxiij. These are they which despise the goodness of GOD, and
according to the hardenes of their hearts, heap together for the^ selves the
wrath of God. Furthermore S. Paul as a How S. Paul rebukes hypocrites.
true expounder of the law, suffers no man to be without sin, but declares
that all they are under sin, which of freewill, and of nature will live
well, and suffers them not to be better the^ the open sinners, yea he calls
them hard hearted, and such as can not repent.

In the third Chapter he mingleth both together, both the Jews and the
Gentiles and says, that the one is as The difference between the Jew and the
Gentile.
the other, both sinners, and no difference between them, save in this only,
that the Jews had the word of God committed unto them. And though many of them
believed not thereon; yet is Gods truth and promise thereby neither hurt, nor
minished: And he takes in his way, and allegeth the saying of the 50. Psalm,
that God might abide true in his words, and overcome when he is judged. After
that he returns to his purpose again, and proves by the All men are sinners.
Scripture, that all men without difference, or exception are sinners, and that
by the works of the law no man is justified: but that the law was given to
utter, and to declare sin only. The^ he begins, and shows the right
way unto righteousness, by what means The way how we must be made righteous.
me^ must be made righteous and safe, and says. They are all sinners and
without praise before God, and must without their own deseruyng be made
righteous through faith in Christ, which has deserved such righteousness for
us, and is become unto us Gods mercystole, for the remission of sins that are
past: thereby prouyng that christ's righteousness which comes on us through
faith, helps us only: which righteousness (says he) is now declared through
the Gospel, and was testified of before, by the law of the Prophets.
Furthermore (says Faith obteineth the fulfillyng of the law.
he) the law is helped and furthered thorough faith, though that the works
thereof, with all their boast are brought to naught.

In the iiij. Chapter (after that now by the 3. first Chapters the sins are
opened, and the way of faith unto righteousness laid) he begins to answer
unto certain objections and cauillations. And first puts forth those blind
reasons, which commonly they that will be justified by their own works are
wont to make, when they hear that faith only without works justifies,
saying, shall men do no good S. Paul au^swereth to the caueling question that
our Papists use against justification of faith only.
works, yea, and if faith only justifies, what needs a man to study for to
do good works? He puts forth therefore Abraham for an ensample, saying, what
did Abraham with his works, was all in vain, came his works to no profit?
And so concludes that Abraham without, and before al works was justified and
made righteous. In so much that before the work of Circumcision he was praised
of the Scripture, and called righteous by his faith only. Gene. xv. So that he
did not the work of Circumcision, for to be helped there by unto
righteousness, which yet God commanded him to do, and was a good work of
obedience. So in likewise no doubt none other works help any thing at all
unto a ma^s iustifiyng, but as Abraham's Circumcision was an outward sign
whereby he declared his righteousness which he had by faith, and his obedience
and readynes unto the will of God, even so are all other good works outward
signs and outward fruits of faith, and Good works are ou^ ward signs of true
faith.
of the spirit, which justify not a man, but that a man is justified already
before god inwardly in the heart, through faith, and through the spirit
purchased by Christ's blood.

Herewith now stablisheth S. Paul his doctrine of faith, before rehearsed in the
third Chapter, and brings also testimony of David in the xij. Psalm, which
calls a man blessed, not of works, in that his sin is not rekened, and in
that faith is imputed for righteousness, though he abide not afterward without
good works, when he is once justified. For we are justified, We are first
justified, the^ follows good works.
and receive the spirit for to do good works, neither were it otherwise
possible to do good works, except we had first the spirit.

For how is it possible to do any thing well in the sight of God, while we
are yet in captivity and bondage under the devil, and the devil possesses
us all together, and holds our hearts, so that we can not once consent unto
the will of God? No man therefore can prevent the spirit in doing good, the
spirit must first come, and wake him out of his sleep, with the thunder of
the law and fear him, and show him his miserable estate and wretchedness, and
make him abhor and hate him self, and to desire help, and then comfort him
again with the pleasant rain of the Gospel, that is to say, with the sweet
promises of God in Christ, and stir up faith in him to believe the promises:
then when he believes Gods mercy moves us to faith in his promises, so that
God in all things works our justification.
the promises, as God was merciful to promise, so is he true to fulfill them,
and will give him the spirit and strength, both to love the will of God, and to
work there after. So see we that God only (which according to the Scripture
works all in all things) woorketh a man's iustifiyng, salvation and health,
yea, and pours faith and belefe, lust to love Gods will, and strength to
fulfill the same into us, even as water is poured into a vessel, and that of
his good will and purpose, and not of our deservings and merits: Gods Gods
mercy saves us, and not we our selves.
mercy in promising, and truth in fulfilling his promises saves us, and not we
ourselves, and therefore is al laud praise and glory, to be given unto God for
his mercy and truth, and not unto us, for our merits and deservings. After
that he stretches his example out against all other good works of the law,
and concludes that the Jews can not be Arahams heirs, because of blood and
kindred only, and much less by the works of the law, but must inherit If we
lack Abraham's faith, we cannot be Abraham's children.
Abraham's faith, if they will be the right heirs of Abraham, for as much as
Abraham before the law, both of Moses, and also of Circumcision, was through
faith made righteous, and called the father of all them that believe, and not of
them that work. Moreover the law causes wrath, in as much as no man can
fulfill it with love and lust, and as long as such grudgyng, hate and
indignation against the law remains in the heart, and is not taken away by the
sprite that comes by faith, so long no doubt the works of the law, Faith
only receaueth the grace that comes by Abraham.
declare evidently that the wrath of god is upon us, and not favor: wherefore
faith only receives the grace promised unto Abraham. And these ensamples were
not written for Abraham's sake only (says he) but for ours also, to whom if
we believe, faith shallbe reckened likewise for righteousness, as he says in
the end of the chapter.

In the 5. chapter he commends the The fruits and works of faith.
fruit and works of faith, as are peace, rejoicing in the conscience, inward
love to God, and man, moreover boldness, trust, confidence, and a strong and a
lusty mind, and steadfast hope in tribulation, and suffering. For all such
follow, where the right faith is, for the abundant graces sake, and gifts of
the sprite, which god has given us in Christ, in that he suffered him to die
for us yet his enemies.

Now have we then that faith only before all works justifies, and that it
Faith before all works justifies.
follows not yet therefore, that a man should do no good works, but that yt
right shape^ works abide not behind, but accompany faith, even as brightness
does the sun, and are called of Paul the fruits of the sprite. Where yt
spirit is, there it is always summer, Good works are the fruits of faith.
and there are always good fruits, that is to say good works. This is Paul's
order, that good works spring of the sprite, ye spirit comes by faith, and
faith comes by hearing the word of God, when the glad tidings and promises
which God has made unto us in Christ are preached truly, and received in the
ground of the heart, with out waueryng or doub^ing, after that the law has
passed upon us, and has damned our consciences. Where the word of God is
preached purely, Where true faith is there are good works.
and received in the heart, there is faith, the spirit of God, and there are
also good works of necessity, whenever occasion is given. Where Gods word
is not purely preached, but men's dreams, traditions, imaginations, inuentio^s,
ceremonies, and superstition, there is no faith, and consequently no spirit
that comes of GOD, and where Gods spirit is not, there can be no good
works, even as where an apple tree is not, there can grow no apples, but there
is unbelief the devils sprite, and evil works. Of this Gods sprite and his
fruits, have our holy hipocrites not once known, neither yet tasted how sweet
they are, though they feign many good works of their own imagination to be
justified withal, in which is not one cromme of true faith, or spiritual Where
faith lacks there is all evil works.
love, or of inward joy, peace and quietness of conscience, for as much as they
have not the word of GOD for them, that such works please GOD, but they are
even the rotten fruits of a rotten tree.

After that he breaks forth, and runs at large, and shows, whence both
sin and righteousness, death and life come. And he compares Adam and Christ
together, thus wise reasonyng and disputyng, that Christ must needs come as a
second Adam, to make us heirs of his righteousness, through a new spiritual
birth, without our deseruinges. Even as the first Adam made us heirs of sin,
through the bodily generation without our deseruyng. Whereby it is evidently
known, and As by ^^a^ came sin, so by Christ came salvation.
proved to the uttermost, that no man can bring himself out of sin unto
righteousness, no more then he could have withstand, that he was borne bodily.
And yt is proved herewith, for as much as yt very law of God, which of right
should have helped, if any thing could have helped, not only came and brought
no help with her, but also increased sin, because that the evil and poisoned
nature is offended, and utterly displeased with the law, and yt more she is
forbid by the law, the more is she provoked, and set a fire to fulfill and
satisfy her lusts. By the law then we see clearly, that we must needs have
Christ to justify us, with his grace, and to help nature.

In the vi. he sets forth the chief and principal work of faith, the
battle The principal work of faith, and the battle between the spirit and
the flesh.
of the sprite against the flesh, how the sprite labors and enforces to
kill the remnaunt of sin and lust: which remain in the flesh, after our
iustifiyng. And this chapter teaches us, that we are not so free from sin
through faith, that we should henceforth go up and down, idle, careless, and
sure of our selves, as though there were now no more sin in us. Yes, there
is sin remaining in us, but it is not reckoned, because of faith and of the
sprite, which fight against it. Wherefore we have enough to do all our lives
long, to tame our bodies, and and to compel the members to obey the sprite,
and not the appetites: that thereby we might be like unto christ's death and
resurrection, and might fulfill our baptism, which signifies the mortifiyng
of sins, and the new life of grace. For this battle cease not in us
until the last breath, and until that sin be utterly slain by the death of
the body.

This thing (I mean to tame the body, and so forth) we are able to do (says
he) seeing we are under grace, and not under the law. What it is, not to be
under the law he himself expounds. For not to be under the law, is not so
to be understand, that every man may do what him lusts. But not to be under
the law is, to have a fre heart What it is not to be under the law.
renewed with the sprite, so that thou have lust inwardly of thine own
accord, to do that which the law commands, without compulsion, yea, though
there were no law. For grace that is to say gods favor, brings us the
sprite, and makes us love the law, so is there now no more sin, neither is
the law now any more against us, but at one, and agreed with us, and we with
it. But to be under the law, is to What it is to be under the law.
deal with the works of the law, and to work without the sprite and grace,
for so long no doubt sin reigns in us through the law, that is to say, the
law declares yt we are under sin, and that sin has power and dominion
over us, seeing we can not fulfill the law, namely within in the heart, for as
much as no man of nature favors the law, consents thereunto, and deliteth
therein, which thing is exceedyng great sin, that we cannot consent to the
law, which law is nothing else save the will of God.

This is the right freedom and liberty The right fredome, and liberty from
sin, and from the law.
from sin, and from the law, whereof he writes unto the end of this
chapter, that it is a freedom to do good only with lust, and to live well
without compulsion of the law. Wherefore this freedom is a spiritual freedom,
which destroys not the law, but ministers that which the law requires, and
wherewith the law is fulfilled, that is to understand, lust and love, wherewith
the law is stilled, and accuses us no more, compels us no more, neither
has ought to crave of us any more. Even as though thou were in debt to an
other man, and were Example.
not able to pay, two manner of ways might thou be losed. One way, if he
would require nothing of thee, and break thine obligation. An other way, if
some other good man would pay for thee, and give thee as much as thou
might satisfy thine obligation with all. On this wise has Christ made us
fre from the law, and therefore is this no wild fleshly liberty, yt should do
naught, but that does all things, and is free from the crauyng and debt of the
law.

In the seventh he confirms yt same, with a similitude of the state of
matrimony. As when the husband dies, the wife is at her liberty, and the one
losed and departed from the other, not that the woman should not have power to
mary unto an other man, but rather now first of all is she free, and has power
to mary unto an other man, which she could not do before, till she was loosed
from her first husband. Even Our consciences bound, and in danger to the law
by old Adam, so long as he lives in us.
so are our consciences bound, and in danger to the law under old Adam, as
long as he lives in us, for the law declares yt our hearts are bound, and
that we cannot disconsent from him, but when he is mortified and killed by the
sprite: then is the conscience free and at liberty, not so that the conscience
shall now naught do, but now first of all cleaves unto an other, that is to
wit, Christ, and brings forth the fruits of life. So now to be under the
law, is not to be able to fulfill the law, but to be detter to it, and not
able to pay that, which the law requires. And to be lose from the law, is to
fulfill it, and to pay that which the law demands, so that it can now
henceforth ask thee naught.

Consequently Paul declares more largely the nature of sin, and of the The
law requires of us that which we cannot pay.
law, how that through the law, sin reuiueth, moves her self, and gathers
strength. For the old man and corrupt nature, the more he is forbidden, and
kept under of the law, is the more offended and displesed therewith, for as much
as he cannot pay yt which is required of the law. For sin is his nature, and
of himself, he cannot but sin. Therefore is the law death to him, torment
and martirdom. Not that the law is evil, but because that the evil nature
can not suffer yt which is good, and cannot abide that the law should require
of him any good thing: like as a sick man cannot suffer that a man should
desire of him to run, to leap, and to do other deeds of an whole man.

For which cause S. Paul concludes, that where the law is understand and
perceived in the best wise, there it does no more, but utter sin, and bring
us unto the knowledge of our selves, and thereby kyl us, and make us bond unto
eternal damnation, and detters of the everlasting wrath of God, even as he
well feels and understands whose conscience is truly touched of the law.
In such danger were we ere The law does utter and declare what sin is.
the law came, that we knew not what sin meant, neither yet know we the wrath
of God, upon sinners, till the law had uttered it. So see thou that a man
must have some other thing, ye and a greater and a more mighty thing the the
law, to make him righteous and safe. They that understand not the law on this
wise, are blind, and go to work presumptuously, supposing to satisfy the law
with works. For they know not that the law requires a free, a willing, a
lusty and a loving heart. Therefore they see not Moses right in yt face, the
veil hangs between, and hides his face, so that they can not behold the
glory of his countenance, how that the law is spiritual, and requires the
heart. I may of mine own strength refrain that I do mine enemy no hurt, but to
love him with all mine heart, and to put away wrath clean out of my What w^
may do of our selves, and what we may not do.
mind, ca^ I not of mine own strength. I may refuse money of mine own
strength, but to put away love unto riches out of mine heart, can I not do of
mine own strength. To abstain from adultery (as concerning the outward deed)
can I do of mine own strength, but not to desire in mine heart, is as
impossible unto me, as is to chose whether I will hungre or thrust, and yet so
the law requires. Wherefore of a man's own strength is the law never fulfilled,
we must have thereunto Gods favor and his spirit, purchased by Christ's blood.

Nevertheless when I say a man may do many things outwardly clean against his
heart, we must understand y^ man is but driven of diverse appetites, and the
greatest appetite overcomes the less, and carries the man away violently
with her.

As when I desire vengeance, and fear also the inconvenience that is like to
follow, if fear be greater I abstain, if the appetite that desires
vengeance be greater, I can not but prosecute the deed, as we see by
experience in many murderers and thieves, which though they be brought into
never so great peril of death, yet after they have Where fear and shame is
away, there all wickedness is committed.
escaped, do even the same again. And common women prosecute their lusts
because fear and shame are away, when other which have the same appetites in
their hearts, abstain at the lest way outwardly, or work secretly being
overcome of fear and of shame, and so likewise is it of all other appetites.

Furthermore he declared, how the spirit, and the flesh fight together in one
man, and makes an ensample of him self, that we might learn to know that
work a right, I mean to kill sin in our selves. He calls both the spirit,
and also the flesh a law, because that like as the nature of Gods law is The
flesh is contrary to the sprite
to drive, to compel, and to crave, even so the flesh drives, compels,
craves and rages, against the spirit, and will have her lusts satisfied. On
the other side drives the spirit, cries and fights against the flesh, and
will have his lust satisfied. And this strife dureth in The sprite lusts
contrary to the flesh.
us, as long as we live, in some more and in some less, as the spirit or the
flesh is stronger, and the very man his own self is both the spirit and the
flesh, which fights with his own self, until sin be utterly slain, and
he all together spiritual.

In the viij. Chapter he comfort such fighters, that they despair not be
cause of such flesh, either think that they are less in favor with God. And
he showed how that the sin remaynyng in us hurts not, for there is no There
is no danger to the^ that are in Christ.
danger to them, that are in Christ which walk not after the flesh, but
fight against it. And he expounds more largely what the nature of the flesh,
and of the spirit is, and how the spirit comes by Christ, which spirit
makes us spiritual, tameth, subdueth, and mortifieth the flesh, and
certifieth us that we are nevertheless the sons of God, and also beloved,
though that sin rage never so much in us, so long as we follow the spirit,
and fight against sin to kill and mortify it. And because the chastisyng of
the flesh, the cross, and sufferyng are nothing pleasant, he comfort us in
our passions and afflictions, by the assistance of the spirit, which makes
intercession to GOD for us mightily with gronynges that pass man's vtteraunce,
man's speech can not comprehe^d them, and the creatures morn also with us of
great desire that they have, that we were loosed from sin, and corruption of
the flesh. So see we that these three Chapters, the vj. vij. viij. do none
othyng The right work of faith, is to mortify the flesh.
so much as to drive us unto the right work of faith, which is to kill the
old man, and mortify the flesh.

In the. ix. x. and. xj. Chapters he treats of Gods predestination, whence it
springs all together, whether we shall believe or not believe, be loosed from
sin, or not be loosed. By which predestination our iustifiyng, and
salvation, are clean taken out of our hands, and put in the hands of God
only, which thing is most necessary of all. For we Predesti^ cion is in the
hands of God.
are so weak and so uncertain, that if it stood in us, there would of a truth
no man be saved, the devil no doubt would deceive us. But now is God sure,
that his predestination can not deceive him, neither can any man withstand or
let him, and therefore have we hope and trust against sin.

But here must a mark be set unto those unquiet, busy, and hye climyng
spirits, how far they shall go: which first of all bring hither their hye
reasons and pregnaunt wits, and begin first from an hye to search the
bottomless secrets of Gods predestination, whether they be predestinate or
not. These must needs either cast them selves down headlong into desperation,
or else commit the^ selves to fre chance careless. But follow thou the order of
How far we may proceed in predestination.
this Epistle, and noosell thy self with Christ, and learn to understand what
the law and yt Gospel mean, and the office of both two, that thou may in
the one know thy self, and how that thou have of thy self no strength but to
sin, and in the other the grace of Christ, and then see thou fight against
sin, and the flesh as the. vij. first Chapters teach thee. After that when
thou art come to the viij. Chapter, and art under the cross, and suffryng of
tribulation, the necessity of prestination will wax sweet, and thou shall
well feel how precious a thing it is. For except thou have borne the cross of
adversity, and temptation, and have felt thy self brought unto the very
brimme of desperation, yea and unto hell gates, thou can never meddle with the
sentence of predestination, without thine own harm, and without secret wrath
and grudgyng in wardly against God, for otherwise it shall not be possible for
thee to think that God is righteous, and just. Therefore Predestin^tion is not
rashly to be disputed of.
must Adam be well mortified, and the fleshely wit brought utterly to naught,
yet that thou may away with this thing, and drink so strong wine. Take heed therefore unto thy self, that thou drink not wine, while thou art yet
but a sucklyng. For every learning has her time measure and age, and in Christ
is there a certain childhode, in which a man must be content with milk for a
season, until he wax strong, and grow up, unto a perfect man in Christ, and
be able to eat of more strong meat.

In the xij. Chapter, he gives exhortations. For this manner observes Paul in
all his Epistles, first he teaches Christ, and the faith, then exhorts he to
good works, and unto continual mortifiyng of the flesh. So here teaches he
good works in deed, and the true seruyng of God, and makes all men Priests,
to offer up, not money and beasts, as the manner was in the time of the law,
but their own bodies Which are good works mete to be done.
with killyng, and mortifiyng the lusts of the flesh. After that he
describes the outward conversation of Christen men, how they ought to behave
them selves in spiritual things, how to teach, preach and rule in the
congregation of Christ, to serve one an other, to suffer all things patiently,
and to commit wreake and vengeance to God: in conclusion how a Christen man
ought to behave him self unto all men to friend, foe, or whatsoever he be.
These are the right works of a Christen man which spryng out of faith. For
faith keeps not holy day, neither suffers any man to be idle, wheresoever
she dwells.

In the. xiij. he teaches to honor the worldly and temporal sword. For
though that man's law, and ordinance make not a man good before God, neither
justify him in the heart, yet are they ordained for the furtheraunce of the
common wealth, to maintain peace, to punish the evil, and to defend the good.
Therefore ought the good to honor the temporal sword, and to have it in
reverence, though as concerning them selves they need it not, but would
abstain from evil of their own accord, yea, and do good without man's law,
but by the law of the spirit which governs the heart, and guides it unto all
that is the will of God. Finally he comprehends and knitteth up all in love.
Love of her own nature bestows all that she has, and even her own self on
that which is loved. Thou Love is y^ fulfilling of the law.
nedest not to bid a kind mother to belouyng unto her only son, much less
spiritual love which has eyes given her of GOD, needs man's law to teach her
to do her duty. And as in yt beginning he did put forth Christ as the cause,
and author of our righteousness and salvation, even so here sets he him
forth, as an ensample to counterfaite that as he has done to us, eue^ so
should we do one to an other.

In the xiiij. Chapter he teaches to deal soberly with the consciences of the
weak in the faith, which yet understand not the liberty of Christ perfectly
enough, and to favor them of We must deal lovingly with our weak brethren.
Christen love, and not to use the liberty of the faith unto hindera^ce, but
unto the furtheraunce and edifiyng of the weak. For where such consideration
is not, there follows debate, and despising of the Gospel. It is better there
to forbear the weak a while, until they wax strong, then that the learning
should come altogether under foot. And such work is singular work of love, ye,
and where love is perfect, there must needs be such a respect unto the weak,
a thing that Christ commanded and charged to be had above all things.

In the 15. Chapter he sets forth Christ again to be counterfaited, that
we also by his ensample should suffer other that are yet weak, as them that
The weakness of our brethren is to be considered.
are frail, open sinners, unlearned, inexpert, and of lothesome manners, and
not to cast the^ away forthwith, but to suffer the^, til they wax better and
exhort them in the mean time. For so delte Christ in the gospel, and now
deals with us daily suffering our imperfectness, weakness, conversation and
manners, not yet fashioned after the doctrine of the Gospel, but smell of the
flesh, ye and sometime break forth into outward deeds.

After that to conclude withal, he wishes them increase of faith, peace, and
joy of conscience, prayseth them and commits them to God and magnifieth his
office and administration in the gospel, and soberly and with great discretion
desires succor, and aid of them for the poor saints of Jerusalem, and it
is all pure love that he speaks or deals withal. So find we In the epistle
to the Romans is contained a sufficient doctrine for a Christen man.
in this Epistle plentuously, unto the uttermost, whatsoever a christen man or
woman ought to know, that is to wit, what the law, the gospel, sum, grace,
faith, righteousness, Christ, god, good works, love, hope, hope, and the cross
are, and even wherein the pith of of all that pertayneth to the Christen faith
stands, and how a christen man ought to behave himself unto every man, be he
perfect, or a sinner, good or bad, strong or weak, friend or foe, and in
conclusion, how to behave our selves both toward God, and toward our selves
also. And all things are profoundly grounded in the Scriptures, and declared
with ensamples of himself, of the fathers and of the prohets, that a man can
here desire no more.

Wherefore it appears evidently, that Paul's mind was to comprehend brieflye
in his Epistle, all the whole learning of Christ's gospel, and to prepare an
introduction unto all the old testament. For without doubt, whosoever has
this Epistle perfectly in his heart, the same has the light, and the effect of
the old Testament with him. Wherefore let every man without exception, exercise
himself therein diligently, and record it night and day continually, until
he be full acquainted therewith.

The last chapter is a chapter of recommendation, wherein he yet mingleth a
good monition, that we should beware of the traditions and doctrine of men,
which beguile the simple with Beware of the traditious of men
sophistry, and learning that is not after the Gospel, and draw them from
Christ, and noosell them in weak and feeble, and (as Paul calls them in the
epistle to the Gallathians) in beggarly ceremonies, for the intent, that they
would live in fat pastures, and be in authority, and be taken as Christ, ye
and above Christ, and sit in the temple of God, that is to wit, in the
consciences of men, where God only, his word and his Christ ought to sit.
Compare therefore all manner doctrine of me^ unto yt scripture, and see whether
they agree or not. And commit thy self whole, and all together unto Christ,
and so shall he with his holy sprite, and withal his fulness dwell in thy soul.

Amen.
The Prologue upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, by
William Tyndall.
THis Epistle declares it self from chapter to chapter, that it needs This
epistle declares it self.
no Prologue, or introduction to declare it, When Paul had converted a great
number at Corinthum, as ye read, Act. 18. and was departed, there came
immediately false Apostels, and sectmakers, and drew every man's disciples after
him, so that the people were whole unquieted, divided, and at variaunce among
themselves, every man for the zeal of his doctor, those new Apostles, not
regardyng what division, what uncleanness of living, or what false opinions
were among the people, as long as they might be in authority, and well at
ease in their bellies. But Paul in the first four chapiters with great wisdom,
and soberness rebuked, first the division and the authors thereof, and calls
the people to Christ again, and teaches how, and for what the preacher is to
be taken.

In the 5. he rebukes the uncleanness that was amongst them.

In he 6. he rebukes the debate and going to law together, pletyng their
causes before the heathen.

In the 7. he reformeth them concerning chastity and marriage.

In the 8. 9. 10. and 11. he teaches y^ Weak and young consciences as to be
stubborn, for the last shall receive the equal reward with the first.
strong to forbear the weak, that yet understand not the liberty of the
gospel, and that with the ensample of him self, which though he were an
apostle, and had authority, yet of love he abstayned to winner other. And he
fears them with the ensamples of the old Testament, and rebukes diverse
disorders that were among them concerning the Sacrament, and the going
barehedded of married women.

In the 12. 13. and 14. he teaches of the manifold gifts of the spirit, and
proves by a similitude of the body, that all gifts are given yt each should
help other, and through love do service Love fulfilleth the law.
to other, and proves that where love is not, there is nothing that pleases
God. For that one should love an other, is all that God requires of us: and
therefore if we desire spiritual gifts he teaches those gifts to be desired
that help our neighbors.

In the 15. he teaches of the resurrection of the body. And in the last he
exhorts to help the poor saints.

A Prologue upon the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, by W.
Tyndall.
AS in the first epistle he rebukes the Corinthians sharply, so in this he
comfort them and prayseth them, and commands him that was excommunicate,
to be received lovingly into the congregation again.

And in the 1. and 2. chapiters, he It is the part of a good shepherd to
ve^ture his life for his sheep.
shows his love to them ward, how that all that he spoke, did, or suffered,
was for their sakes, and for their salvation.

Then in the 3. 4. and 5. he prayseth the office of preaching the gospel,
above yt preaching of the law, and shows that the Gospel grows through
persecution, and through the cross, which makes a man sure of eternal
life: and tribulation for the Gospel sake makes us sure of eternal life.
here and there he touches yt false prophets, which studied to turn the
faith of the people from Christ unto the works of the law.

In the 6. and 7. chapters, he exhorts the^ to suffer with the gospel, and
to live as it becomes the Gospel, and prayseth him in the latter end.

In the 8. and 9. chapters, he exhorts the^ to help the poor saints that
were at Jerusalem.

In the 10. 11. and 12. he inueyegth against the false prophets.

And in the last Chapter he threateneth them that had sinned, and not amended
themselves.

A Prologue upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Gallathians, by W. Tyndall.
AS ye read Act. 15. how certain came from Jerusalem to Antioche, and vexed yt
disciples there, affirming yt they could not be saved except they were
circumcised. Even so, after Paul had converted the Galathians, and coupled them
to Christ, to trust in him only for the remission of sin, and hope of grace
and salvation, and was departed, there came false apostles unto the^, (as unto
the Corinthia^s, and unto all places where Paul had preached) and that in the
name of Peter, James, and John, whom they called the hye Apostles, and preached
circumcision, and the keeping of the law to be saved by, and minished Paul's
authority.

To the confounding of those, Paul magnifieth his office and Apostleship All
that repent, are justified thorough says by Christ, and not by works.
in the two first chapiters, and makes himself equal unto the hie Apostles,
and concludes that every man must be justified without deseruyngs, without
works, and without help of the law: but alone by Christ.

And in the 3. and 4. he proves the same with Scripture, examples and
similitudes, and shows that the law is cause of more sin, and brings the
curse of God upon us: and justifies The law conde^neth, but the beleuyng of
Gods promises justifies.
us not, but that iustifiyng comes of grace promised us of GOD, through the
deseruyng of Christ, by whom (if we believe) we are justified without help of
the works of the law.

And in the 5. and 6. he exhorts unto the works of love, which follow faith
and iustifiyng. So that in all his Epistle, he observes this order. First he
preaches the damnation of the law: then the iustifiyng of faith: and thyrdly
the works of love. For on that condition that we love henceforth and work,
is the mercy given us, or else if we will not work the will of GOD
henceforward, we fall from favor, and grace: and the inheritance that is
freely given us for Christ's sake, through our own fault, we lose again.

A Prologue upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Ephesians.
IN this Epistle, and namely in the three first Chapters, Paul shows that
the Gospel and grace thereof was foresene and predestmate of God, from before
the beginning, and deserved through Christ, and now at the last sent forth,
that all men should believe thereon, thereby to be justified, made righteous,
living and happy, and to be delivered from under the damnation of the law, and
captivity of ceremonies.

And in the fourth he teaches to avoid In sekyng any other satisfaction the^
Christ, we beceau^ our selves.
traditions, and men's doctrine, and to beware of puttyng trust in any thing
save Christ, affirmyng that he only is sufficient, and that in him we have all
things, and beside him need nothing.

In the v. and vj. he exhorts to exercise the faith, and to declare it abroad
through good works, and to avoid sin, and to arm them with spiritual
armor against the devil, that they might stand fast in time of tribulation,
and under the cross.

The Prologue upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Philippians, by W. Tyndall.
Paul prayseth the Philippians, and exhorts them to stand fast in the true
faith, and to increase in love. And because that false Prophets study always
to impugn, and destroy y^ true Hereby are we warned that works save us not,
but the word, that is the promise.
faith, he warns them of such work learners or teachers of works, and
prayseth Epaphroditus. And all this does he, in the first and second Chapters.

In the third he reproves faythles, and man's righteousness, which false
Prophets teach and mainteyne. And he sets him for an ensample, how Man's
righteousness zeal or imagination without Gods word is odious.
that he him self had lived in such false righteousness, and holiness
unrebukable, that was so, that no man could complain on him, and yet now
sets naught thereby, for Christ's righteousness sake. And finally he affirms
that such false Prophets are the enemies of the cross, and make their bellyes
their GOD, for further then they may safely and without all peril and
sufferyng, will they not preach Christ.

A Prologue upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, by W. Tyndall.
AS the Epistle to yt Galathians holds the manner and fashion of the Epistle
to the Romans, briefly comprehendyng all that is therein at length disputed.
Even so this Epistle follows the ensample of the Epistle to the Ephesians,
conteynyng the tenor of the same Epistle with fewer words.

In the first Chapter he praises the^, and wishes that they continue in the
For faith when it is preached brings ye spirit and power to fulfill the law.
faith, and grow perfecter therein, and the^ describes he the Gospel, how that
it is a wisdom that confesses Christ to be the Lord and God, crucified for
us, and a wisdom that has been hyd in Christ, sense before the beginning of
the world, and now first begone to be opened through the preaching of the
Apostles.

In the ij. he warns them of men's doctrine, and describes the false
Prophets to the uttermost, and rebukes them according.

In yt third, he exhorts to be fruitful Who so has a pure faith, can not
but abou^d with good works.
in the pure faith, with all manner of good works one to an other, and
describes al degrees, and what their duties are.

In the fourth he exhorts to pray, and also to pray for him, and saluteth
them.

A Prologue upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to the Thessalonians, by W.
Tyndall.
THis Epistle did Paul write of exceeding love and care, and prayseth them in
the two first chapters, because they did receive the Gospel earnestly, and
had in tribulation and Not the receauyng of the Gospel, but the co^tinuaunce to
the latter end, makes us blessed.
persecution, continued therein steadfastly, and were become an ensample unto all
congregations, and had thereto suffered of their own kinsme^, as Christ and his
apostles did of ye Jews, puttyng them thereto in mind, how purely and godly he
had lived among the^ to their ensample, and thanketh God, that his gospel had
brought forth such fruit among them.

In the third chapter he shows his He means thereby lest they should fall
from the word, they had already received.
diligence and care, least his so great labor, and their so blessed a
beginning should have been in vain, Satan and his apostles vexyng them with
persecution, and destroying their faith with men's doctrine. And therefore he
sent Tymothie to them to comfort them, and strengthen them in the faith, and
thanketh GOD, that they had so constantly endured, and desires God to increase
them.

In the fourth, he exhorts them to keep themselves from sin, and to do good
one to another. And thereto he informs them concerning the resurrection.

In the fifth, he writes of the last day, that it should come suddenly,
exhortyng to prepare them selves thereafter, and to keep a good order
concerning obedience and rule.

The Prologue upon the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Thessalonians, by W.
Tyndall.
BEcause in the fore epistle he had said yt the last day should come suddenly,
the Thessalonians thought that it should come shortly. Wherefore in this
Epistle he declares himself.

And in the first chapter he comfort Patience in persecution for Christ's
sake rewarded with y^ crown of everlasting joy and felicity.
them with everlasting reward of their faith and patience, in sufferyng for the
Gospel, and with the punishment of their persecutours in everlasting pain.

In the second he shows that yt last day should not come till there were
first a departing (as some men think) Hereby have we evident signs, that the
latter day is at hand.
from under ye obedience of yt Emperor of Rome, and that Antichrist should
set up himself in ye same place as god, and deceive the unthankful world
with false doctrine, and with false and lying miracles, wrought by the workyng
of Satan, until Christ should come, and slay him with his glorious coming,
and spiritual preaching of the word of God,

In the third, he gives them exhortation, and warns them to rebuke yt idle
that would not labor with their hands, and avoid their company, if they
would not amend.

A Prologue upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to Tymothe, by W. Tyndall.
THis epistle writes S. Paul to be an ensample to all Bishops what they
should teach, and how they should teach, and how they should govern the
congregation of Christ in all degrees, that it should be no need to govern
christ's flock with the doctrine of their own good meanynges.

In the first Chapter he commands The office of a bishop.
that the bishop shall maynetayne yt right faith and love, and resist false
preachers, which make the law and works equal with Christ and his Gospel.
And he makes a short conclusion of all Christ's learning, whereto the law
serves, and what the end thereof is, also what the Gospel is, and sets
himself for a comfortable ensample unto all sinners, and troubled consciences.

In the second, he commands to pray for all degrees, and charge that women
shall not preach nor wear costly apparel, but to be obedient unto the men.

In the third he describes, what manner persons the Bishop or Priest and their
wives should be, and also the Deacons and their wives, and comme^deth it, if
any man desire to be a Bishop after that manner.

In the fourth he prophesies, and The Pope and his Prelates are here plainly
set forth, for what Christ loosed freely, the Pope did bynd it to lose it
again for money.
shows before of the false Bishops and spiritual officers, that should arise
among the Christen people, and be, do, and preach clean contrary to the fore
described ensample, and should depart from the faith in Christ, and forbid to
marye, and to eat certain meats, teaching to put trust therein, both of
iustifiyng and forgiveness of sins, and also of deseruyng of eternal life.

In the fifth he teaches how a Bishop should use him self toward young and old,
and concerning widows what is to be done, and which should be found of the
common cost, and teaches also Virtuous Bishops are worthy double honor.
how men should honor the virtuous Bishops and Priests, and how to rebuke the
evil.

In the sixth he exhorts yt Bishops to cleave to the Gospel of Christ, and
true doctrine, and to avoid vain questions, and superfluous disputynges which
ge^dre strife, and quench the truth, and by which also the false Prophets get
them authority, and seek to satisfy their insatiable covetousness.

The Prologue upon the second Epistle of Saint Paul unto Timothe. W. Tyndall.
IN this Epistle Paul exhorts Timothe to go forward as he had bego^, and to
preach yt Gospel with all diligence, as it need was, seeing many were fallen
away, and many false spirits and teachers were sprung up already. Wherefore
Bishops must be vigilant in their vocation^
a Bishops part is ever to watch and to labor in the Gospel.

In the third and fourth he shows before and that notably, of the ieoperdous
time toward the end of yt world, in which a false spiritual living should
disceine ye whole world, with outward hypocri^ie, and appearance of holiness,
under which all abhominatio^s should This has already ben fulfilled in, our
spirituality.
have their free passage and course, as we (alas) have seen this prophecy of
S. Paul fulfilled in our spirituality unto the uttermost jot.

The Prologue upon the Epistle of S. Paul to Titus.
THis is a short Epistle, wherein yet is contained all that is needful for a
Christen to know.

In the first Chapter, he shows what manner a man a Bishop or Curate What
manner a man, a Bishop or Curate ought to be.
ought to be, that is to wit, virtuous and learned, to preach and defend the
Gospel, and to confound the doctrine of trustyng in works and men's
traditions, which ever fight against the faith, and carry away the conscience
captive from the fredome that is in Christ, into the bondage of their own
imaginations and inventions, as though the things should make a man good in
the light of God, which are to no profit at all.

In the second he teaches all degrees, old, young, men, women, masters and
servants, how to behave the^ selves, as they which Christ bought with his
blood, to be his proper, or peculiar people, to glorify god with good works.

In the third, he teaches to honor temporal rulers, and to obey the^, and
Good deeds please god, so far forth as they are applied to the keeping of
the commandments, but Christ only justifies
yet brings to Christ again, and to the grace that he has purchased for
us, that no man should think that the obedience of Princes laws, or any other
work, should justify us before God. And last of all he charge to avoid
the company of the stubburne, and of the heretics.

A Prologue upon the Epistle of Saint Paul unto Philemon, by W. Tyndall.
IN this Epistle S. Paul shows a godly ensample of Christen love. Here in we
see how Paul takes poor Onesimos unto him, and makes intercession for him
unto his master, and helps him with all that he may, and behaueth him self
none otherwise then as though he him self were the said Onesimos, which thing
yet he does not with power and authority, as he well might have done: but
puts of all authority, and whatsoever he might of right do, that Philemon
might do likewise toward Onesimos, and with great meekness and wisdom,
teaches Philemon to see his duty in Christ Jesus.

The Prologue upon the first Epistle of Saint Peter, by William Tyndall.
THis Epistle did S. Peter write to the heathen that were converted, and
exhorts them to stand fast in the faith, to grow therein, and wax perfect
through all manner of sufferyng, and also good works.

In the first he declares the iustifiyng of faith through Christ's blood, and
comfort them with the hope of the life to come, and shows that we have not
deserved it, but that the prophets prophesied it should be given us, and as
Christ which redeemed us out of sin, and all uncleanness is holy, so he
exhorts to lead an holy conversation, and because we be richly bought, and
made heirs of a rich inheritance, to take heed that we lose it not again,
through our own negligence.

In the 2. Chapter, he shows that Christ is all to a Christen man.
Christ is the foundation, and head corner stone, whereon al are built through
faith, whether it be Jew or Gentile, and how that in Christ they are made
priests, to offer themselves to GOD (as Christ did himself) and to slay the
lusts of the flesh, that fight against the soul. And first he teaches them
in general to obey the worldly rulers, and than in special he teaches yt
servants to obey their masters be they good or badde, and to suffer wrong of
them, as Christ suffered wrong for us.

In the 3. he teaches the wives to obey their husbands, ye, though they be
unbelievers, and to apparel themselves godly, and as it becomes holiness. And
thereto that the husbands suffer, and bear the infirmity of their Me^ ought to
rule their wives with god^ word.
wives, and live according to knowledge with them. And than in general he
exhorts them to be soft, courteous, patient, and friendly one to an other, and
to suffer for righteousness, after the ensample of Christ.

In the 4. he exhorts to fly sin, and to tame the flesh with soberness,
To watch is not only to abstain from sleep, but also to avoid all, occasions
that may draw us to sin.
watching, and prayer, and to love each other, and to know that all good gifts
are of God, and every man to help his neighbor, with such as he has received
of God, and finally not to wonder, but to rejoice though they must suffer for
Christ's names sake, seeing as they be here partakers of his afflictions, so
shall they be partakers of his glory to come.

In the 5. he teaches the bishops and priests how they should live and feed
Christ's flock, and warns us of the devil, which on every side lies in
wait for us.

A Prologue upon the second Epistle of S. Peter, by William Tyndall.
THis Epistle was written against the^ which As god rejoices not in the deed
it self* so does he not in ^dle faith without works
thought yt thristen faith might be idle, and with out works, when yet the
promise of Christ is made us upon that condition, that we henceforth work the
will of God, and not of the flesh. Therefore he exhorts them to exercise
themselves diligently in virtue and all good works, thereby to be sure that
they have the true faith, Good works are a show of our faith, as the fruit, is
of the tree.
as a man knows the goodness of a tree by his fruit. Then he commends and
magnifieth the gospel, and wills that men harken to that only, and to men's
doctrine not at all. For as he says, there came no prophetical scripture by
the will of man, but by the will of the holy ghost, which only knows the will
of God: neither is any scripture of private interpretation, that is to say, may
be otherwise expounded them agreyng to the open places, and general articles,
and to the couenantes of god, and all the rest of the scripture.

And therefore in the second, he warns them of false teachers, that should
come, and through preaching confidence in false works, to satisfy their
covetousness withal, should deny Christ, Which he threatens with three
terrible examples. With the fall of toe angels, the floude of Noe, and
ouerthrowyng of Sodom and Gomorre, and so describes them with their
insatiable covetousness, pride, stubbornnes He prophesies of the popes
spirituality.
and disobedience to all temporal rule and authority, with their abominable
whoredom, and hypocrisy, that a blind man may see, that he prophesied it of
the Popes holy spirituality, which devoured the whole world with their
covetousness, living in all lust and pleasure, and reigning as temporal
tyrants.

In the third he shows that in the latter days, the people through
unbelief, and lack of fear of the judgment of the last day, shall be even
as Epicures, wholly given to the flesh. Which last day shall yet surely and
shortly come says he: for a thousand years, and one day is with God all one.
And he shows also how terrible that day shall be, and how suddenly it shall
come, and therefore exhorts all men to look earnestly for it, and to prepare
themselves against it with holy conversation, and godly living.

Finally, the first chapter shows how it should go in the time of the pure
The condition of the world shall wax worse and worse.
and true Gospel. The second, how it should go in the time of the Pope and
men's doctrine. The third, how at the last men should believe nothing, nor fear
God at all.

The Prologue upon the three Epistles of S. John, by William Tyndall.
IN this first Epistle of Saint John, is contained the doctrine of a very
Apostle of Christ, and ought of right to follow his Gospel. For as in his
gospel he sets out the true faith, and teaches by it only all men to be
saved, and restored unto the favor of God again, even so here in this
Epistle, he goes against them, that boaste themselves of faith, and yet
continue without Where (...) true faith is, there are also good works.
good works, and teaches many ways, that where true faith is, there the
works tarry not behind, and contrary that where the works follow not, there
is no true faith, but a false imagination and utter darkness.

And he writes sore against a sect of heretics, which then began to deny
that Christ was come in the flesh, and calls the^ very Antichrists, which
sect goes now in her full swinge. For though they deny not openly with the
mouth, yt Christ is come in y^ flesh, yet they deny it in yt heart with their
doctrine and living. For he that will be justified, and Christ's blood
purchases forgeuenes of sins, and not man's works.
saved through his own works, the same does as much as he that denied Christ
to be come in flesh, seeing that Christ came only therefore in the flesh, that
he should iustifye us, or purchase us pardon of our sins, bring us in the
favor of God again, and make us heirs of eternal life, with his works only,
and with his bloudshedyng, without, and before all our works.

So fights this epistle both against them that will be saved by their own
good works, and also against them that will be saved by a faith, that has no
lust to do works at all, and keeps us in yt middle way, that we believe in
Christ to be saved by his works only, and then to know that it is our duty
for that kyndnes, to prepare our selves to do the commandment of God, and
to love every man his neighbor, as Christ loved him, sekyng with our own
works Gods honor and our neighbors wealth only: and trustyng for eternal
life, and for all that God has promised us for Christ's sake.

The two last Epistles though they be short, yet are goodly ensamples of love
and faith, and do savor of the spirit of a true Apostle.

A Prologue upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Hebrews, by William Tyndall.
About this epistle hatheuer ben much doubting Whether this were Paul's epistle
or no great learned men have doubted.
and that among great learned men, who should be the author thereof diverse
affirmyng that it was not Paul's, partly because the style so disagreeth, and
is so unlike his other Epistles, and partly because it stands in the second
Chapter, this learning was confirmed to us ward: that is to say, taught us by
them that heard it them selves of the Lord. Now Paul testifies Gala. 1. that
he received not his Gospel of man, nor by man, but immediately of Christ, and
that by revelation. Wherefore say they, seeing this man confesses that he
received his doctrine of the Apostles, it can not be Paul's, but some Disciple
of the Apostles. Now whether it were Paul's or no I say not, but permit it to
other men's judgments, neither think I it to be an Article of any man's faith,
but that a man may doubt of the author.

Moreover, many there has been which not only have denied this Epistle Some
deny it to have been written by any Apostle, and refuse it as not Catholic.
to have been written by any of the Apostles, but have also refused it all
together as no Catholic or godly epistle, because of certain textes written
therein. For first he says in the sixth it is impossible that they which were
once lighted, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become partakers
of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word of GOD, and of the power
of the world to come, if they fall, should be renewed again to repentance
or conversion. And in the tenth it says: if we sin willingly after we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins, but a fearful lookyng for judgment, and violent fire which shall
destroy the adversaries. And in the xij. it says, that Esau found no way to
repentance or conversion, no, though he sought it with tears. Which textes
say they, sound: that if a man sin any more after he is once Baptized, he can
be no more forgeuen, and that is contrary to all the Scripture, and therefore
to be refused to be Catholic and godly.

Unto which I answer: if we should deny this Epistle for those textes
sakes, so should we deny first A solution of the former doubts
Matthew, which in his xij. Chapter affirms that he which blasphemeth the holy
Ghost, shall neither be forgiven here, nor in the world to come. And then
Mark, which in his third Chapter says, that he that blasphemeth the holy
Ghost, shall never have forgiveness, but shall be in danger of eternal
damnation. And thirdly Luke, which says there shall be no remission to him
that blasphemeth the spirit of God. Moreover John in his first Epistle says,
there is a sin unto death, for which a man should not pray. And ij. Pet. ij.
says if a man be fled from the uncleanness of the world through the knowledge
of our Savior Jesus Christ, and then be wrapped in again, his end is worse
then the beginning, and that it had better for him never to have known the
truth. And Paul ij, Ti. iij. curses Alexander the Coppersmith, desiring the
lord to reward him according to his deeds. Which is a sign that either yt
Epistle should not be good, or that Alexander had sinned past forgiveness, no
more to be prayed for. Wherefore, seeing no Scripture is of private
interpretation, but must be expounded according to the general Articles of our
faith, and agreeable to other open and evident textes, and confirmed This not to
be denied to be Paul's Epistle.
or compared to like sentences, why should we not understand these places with
like reverence as we do the other, namely when all the remnaunt of the Epistle
is so godly, and of so great learning?

The first place in the vj. Chapter, will no more then that they which know
the truth, and yet willingly refuse the light, and choose rather to dwell in
darkness, and refuse Christ, and make a mock of him (as y^ Pharisees, which
when they were overcome with Scripture and miracles, y^ Christ was the very
Messiah, yet had they such lust in iniquity that they forsook him, persecuted
him, slew him, and did all the shame that could be imagined to him) can not
be renewed ((...)) says the Greek, to be converted: that is to say, such
malicious unkindness, which is none other, then the blasphemyng of the holy
Ghost, deserves that the spirit shall never come more at them to convert
them, which I believe to be as true, as any other text in all the Scripture.

And what is meant by that place in the tenth Chapter, where he says, if we
sin willingly after we have received yt knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice, for sin is declared immediately after. For he
makes a comparison between Moses and Christ, saying: if he which despised
Moses law dyed without mercy, how much worse punishment is he worthy of, that
treads the son of God underfoot, and counts the blood of the covenant,
by which blood he was sanctified, as an unholy thing, and blasphemeth the
spirit of grace? By which words it is manifest that he means none other by
the fore words, then the sin of blasphemy of the spirit.

For them that sin of ignorance or infirmity, there is remedy, but for him
that knows the truth, and yet willingly yeldeth him self to sin, and
consents unto the life of sin with soul and body, and had rather lie in
sin, then have his poisoned nature healed, Mercy is locked up from him which
wilfully yeldeth his body (...) soul to sin.
by the help of the spirit of grace, and maliciously persecuteth the truth,
for him I say there is no remedy, the way to mercy is locked up, and the
spirit is taken from him, for his unthankfulness sake no more to be given
him. Truth it is, if a man can turn to God and believe in Christ, he must be
forgiven how deep soever he has sinned: but that will not be without the
spirit, and such blasphemers shall no more have the spirit offered them. Let
every man therefore fear God, and beware that he yield not him self to serve
sin, but how often soever he sin, let him be gyn again and fight a fresh,
and no doubt he shall at the last overcome, and in the mean time, yet be under
mercy for Christ's sake, because his heart works, and would feign be loused
from under the bondage of sin.

And there it says in the. xij. Esau found no way ((...)) to be converted
and reconciled unto God, and restored unto his birth right again, though he
sought it with tears, that text must have a spiritual eye. For Esau in
sellyng his byrthright, despised not only that temporal promotion, that he
should have been Lord over all his brethren, and king of that country: but he
also refused the grace and mercy of GOD, and the spiritual blessyng of Abraham
and Isaac, and all yt mercy that is promised us in Christ: which should have
been his seed. Of this ye see that this Epistle ought no more to be refused
for holy, godly, and Catholic, then the other autentike Scriptures.

Now therefore to come to our purpose again, though this Epistle (as it says
in the sixth) lay not the ground of the faith of Christ, yet it builds
cunnyngly thereon pure gold, silver, and precious stones, and proves the
Priesthode of Christ with Scriptures inevitable. Moreover, there is no work in
No place in the scripture, so plainly describes the significations and figures
of the old testament, as this epistle does.
all the Scripture, that so plainly declares the meaning and significatio^s of
the sacrifices, ceremonies, and figures of the old Testament, as this Epistle:
in so much that if wilful blindness, and malicious malice were not the cause,
this Epistle only were enoughe to wede out of the hearts of the papists, that
cankred heresy of iustifiyng of works, concerning our Sacraments, ceremonies,
and all manner traditions of their own invention.

And finally in that ye see in the tenth that he had been in bonds, and prison
for Christ's sake, and in yt he so mightily drives all to Christ to be saved
thorough him, and so cared for the flock of Christ that he both wrote and
sent, where he heard that they begone to faynte, to comfort, courage, and
strength them with the word of GOD, and in that also that he sent Timothe,
Paul's Disciple, both virtuous, well learned, and had in great reverence, it is
easy to see that he was a faithful servant of Christ's, and of the same
doctrine that Timothe was of, yea, and Paul him This epistle for that it
agrees with the rest of the scripture ought to be of equal authority with the
other.
self was of, and y^ he was an Apostle or in the Apostles time, or nere
thereunto. And seeing the Epistle agrees to all the rest of the Scripture (if
it be indifferently looked on) why should it not be authority and taken for
holy Scripture?

The Prologue upon the Epistle of S. James, by W. Tyndall.
Though this Epistle were refused in the old time, and denied of many to be
the epistle of a very Apostle, and though also it lay not the foundation of
the faith of Christ, but speaks of a general faith in god, neither preaches
his death and resurrection, either the mercy that is laid up in store for us
in him, or everlasting covenant made us in his blood, which is the office, and
duty of a very apostle, as Christ says: John 15. ye shall testifye of me:
yet because it sets up no man's doctrine, but cries to keep the law of God,
and makes love which This epistle is to be taken as holy scripture.
is without parcialitie the fulfillyng of the law, as Christ and all the
Apostles did, and has thereto many good and godly sentences in it: and has
also nothing that is agreeable to the rest of the scripture: if it be looked
indifferently on, me thinks it ought of rigt to be taken for holy scripture.
For as for that place for which happily it was at the beginning refused of holy
men (as it ought, if it had meant as they took it, and for The papists allege
this text for their purpose, thorough misunderstandyng the same.
which place only, for the false understanding, it has been chiefly received
of the Papists) yet if the circumstances be well pondered, it will appear
that the authors intent was far otherwise then they took for.

For where he says in the 2. chapter, faith without deeds is dead in it self,
he means none other thing, then all the scripture does: how that that faith
which has no good deeds following, is a false faith, and none of that faith
justifies, or receives forgiveness of sins. For God promised the^ only
forgeuenes of their sins only, which turn to GOD to keep his laws.
Wherefore they that purpose to continue still in sin, have no part in that
promise, but deceive themselves if they believe that GOD has forgeuen them
their old sins for Christ's sake. And after when he says, that a man is
justified by deeds, and not of faith only, he will no more, then that faith
does not justify every where, that nothing justifies save faith. For deeds
also do justify. And as faith only justifies before God, so do deeds only
justify before the world, whereof is enough spoken, partly in yt Prologue on
Paul to the Romans, and also in other places. For as Paul affirms, Romans 2.
that Abraham was not justified by works before God, but by faith only as Genesis
bears record, so will James that deeds only justified him before Faith only
justifies
the world, and faith wrought with his deeds: that is to say, fa^yth wherewith
he was righteous before God in the heart, did cause him to work the will of God
outwardly, whereby he was righteous before the world, and whereby the world
perceived that he believed in God, loved and feared God. And as Hebr. 11. yt
scripture affirms that Raab was justified before God through faith, so does
James affirm that through works, by which she shows her faith, she was
justified before the world, and it is true.

And as for the Epistle of Judas, though men have, and yet do doubt of the
author, and though it seem also to be drawn out of the second Epistle of S.
Peter, and thereto alleges scripture that is no where found, yet seeing the
matter is so godly, and agreeyng to holy Scripture, I see not but that it ought
to have the authority of holy Scripture.

An exposition upon certain words, and phrases of the new Testament.
INfernus and Gehenna differ much in signification, though we have none
interpretation for either of the^, the^ this english word Hell: for Gehenna
signifies a place of punishment: but Infernus is taken for any manner of place
beneth in the earth, as a grave, sepulcher, or a cave.

Hell it is called in Hebrew the valley of Hennon, a place by Jerusalem, where
they brent their children in fire, unto the Idol Moloch, and is usurped, and
taken now for a place where the wicked, and ungodly shall be tormented both soul
and body, after the general judgment.

Give room to the wrath of God: Romans 12. Wrath is there taken for ve^geaunce,
and the meaning is: let God avenge either by himself, or by the officers that
bear his room.

There tarry and abide till ye go out. It is Mark the 6. chap. whersoeuer ye
enter into an house, there abide till ye go out thence: And Luke. 9. it is.
Into whatsoever house ye enter, there tarry, and go not out thence, that is to
say, whosoever receives you, there abide as long as you are in the city, or
town: and go not shamefully a begging from house to house, as Friars do.

Dust, shake of the dust of your feet. Math. 10. Why are they commanded to
shake of the dust? for a witness says Luke, that that deed may testifye
against them, in the day of judgment, that the doctrine of salvation was
offered for them, but they would not receive the^: ye see also that such
iestures and ceremonies, have greater power with them, the^ have bare words
only, to move the heart, and to stir up faith, as do the laying on of
hands, and annointyng with oil, etc.

Hipocrites can ye discern the face of heaven, and not discern the sign of
the times? that is to say, they could judge by the signs of the sky what
weather should follow, but they could not know Christ by the signs of the
Scripture, and yet other signs might not be given them.

He that says he knows Christ, and keeps not his commandments is a liar.
To know Christ is to believe in Christ: Ergo, he that keeps not the
commandments, believes not in Christ.

The end of such Prologues of the old Testament, and new Testament, as were
made by William Tyndall.
The parable of the wicked Mammon, published in the year 1527. the 8. of May,
by William Tyndall.
That faith the mother of all good works justifies us, before we can bring
forth any good work: as the husband marieth his wife before he can have any
lawful children by her. Furthermore, as the husband marieth not his wife,
that she should continue unfruitful as before, and as she was in the state
of virginity (wherein it was impossible for her to bear fruit) but
contrariwise to make her fruitful: even so faith justifies us not, that is
to say, marieth us not to God, that we should continue unfruitful as before,
but that he should put the seed of his holy sprite in us (as S. John in his
first Epistle calls it) and to make us fruitful. For says Paul, Ephe. 2. By
grace are ye made safe through faith, and that not of your selves: for it is
the gift of God, and comes not of the works, least any man should boast
himself. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has ordained that we should walk in them.

William Tyndale otherwise called Hitchins to the Reader.
GRace and peace with all manner spiritual fcelyng and living, worthy of the
kyndenes of Christ, be with the reader, and with all that trust the will of
God, Amen.

The cause why I set my The cause why W. Tyndall put his name to some books and
left it out in some.
name before this little treatise, and have not rather done it in the new
testament, is, that then I followed the counsel of Christ which exhorts men.
Math. 6. to do their good deeds secretly, and to be content with the
conscience of well doing, and that God sees us, and patiently to abide the
reward of the last day which christ has purchased for us: and now would I
feign have done likewise, but am I compelled otherwise to do.

While I aboade, a faithful companion which now has taken another voyage upon
him, to preach Christ where (I suppose) he was never yet preached (God which
put in his heart thither to go, send his spirit with him, comfort him and
bring his purpose to good effect) one William Roye, a man William Roye a fal^e
Disciple.
somewhat crafty, when he comes unto new acquayntance, and before he be
through known, and namely, when all is spent, came unto me, and offered his
help. As long as he had no money, somewhat I could rule him, but as soon as he
had gotten him money, he became like himself again. Nevertheless I suffered
all things till that was ended, which I could not do alone without one, both
to write, and to help me to copare the textes together. When that was ended, I
took my leave and bade him farewell for our two lives, and as men say, a day
longer. After we were departed he went, and gate him new friends, which thing
to do, he passes all that ever I yet knew. And there, when he had stored him
of money, he gate him to Argentine, where he professed wonderful faculties,
and makes boast of no small things. A year after that, and now xij. months
before y^ printyng of this work, came one Jerome a brother of Grenewich also,
through Jerome a brother of Grenewich
Worms to Argentine, saying y^ he intended to be Christ's Disciple another
while, and to keep (as nigh as God would give him grace) y^ profession of his
baptism, and to get his living with his hands, and to live no longer idly,
and of the sweat and labor of those captives, which they had taught, not to
believe in Christ, but in cut shoes, and russet coats. Which Jerome with all
diligence I warned of Royes boldness, and exhorted him to beware of him, and to
walk quietly, and with all patience and long sufferyng, according as we have
Christ and his Apostles, for an ensample, which thing he also promised me.

Nevertheless when he was coming to Arge^tine, William Roye (whose tongue is
able not only to make fools stark mad, but also to deceive the wisest that
is at the first sight and acquaintance) gate him to him, and set him a work,
to make rymes, while he him self translated a Dialogue out of Latin into
English, in whose Prologue he promises more a great deal, then I fear me he
will ever pay. Paul says. 2. Timo. 2. The servant 2. Timo. 2.
of the Lord must not strive, but be peaceable unto all men, and ready to
teach, and one that can suffer the evil with meekness, and that can inform
them that resist: if God at any time will give them repentance for to know
the troth. It becomes not then the Lords servant to use railing rymes, but
Gods word, which is the right weapon to slay sin, vice and all iniquity.
The Scripture of god is good to teach, and to improve, ij. Timo. iij. and. ij.
These. ij. Paul speaking 2. Timo. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
of Antechrist says, Whom the Lord shall destroy with the sprite or breath of
his mouth, that is, with the word of God. And. ij. Cor. x. 2. Cor. 10.
The weapons of our war are not carnal things (says he) but mighty in God
to cast down strong holds, and so forth, that is, to destroy high buildings
of false doctrine. The word of God is that day whereof Paul speaks. i. Cor.
iij.) which shall declare all thing, 1. Cor 3.
and that fire which shall try every man's work, and consume false doctrine:
with that sword ought men sharply to fight, and not to rail with foolish
rymes. Let it not offend thee, that some walk inordinatly, let not the
wickedness of Judas, cause thee to despise the doctrine of his fellows. No man
ought to think that Stephen was a false preacher, because that Nicolas which
was chosen fellow with him (Act. vj.) to minister unto the Acts. 6.
widows, fell after into great heresies, as histories make mention. Good and
evil go always together, one ca^ not be known without the other.

Mark this also above all things, that Antechrist what it is.
Antechrist is not an outward thing, that is to say, a man that should suddenly
appear with wonders, as our fathers talked of him. No verily, for Antichrist
is a spiritual thing. And is as much to say as against Christ, yt is, one that
preaches false doctrine contrary to Christ. Antechrist was in the old
Testament and fought with the Prophets, he was also in the time of Christ, and
of the Apostles, as thou read in the Epistles of John, and of Paul to the
Corinthians, and Galathians, and other Epistles. Antechrist is now and shall (I
doubt not) endure till the worlds end. But his nature is (when he is uttered
and overcome with the word of God) to go out of the play for a season, and to
disguise himself, and then to come in again with a new name, and new raiment.
As thou see Scribes and Phariseis were very Antechristes.
how Christ rebukes the Scribes, and the Pharisees, in the Gospel (which were
very Antechristes) saying, Woe be to you Pharisees, for ye rob widows houses,
ye pray long prayers under a color, ye shut up the kingdom of heaven, and
suffer the^ not y^ would, to enter in, ye have taken away the keye of The
properties of Antechrist.
knowledge, ye make men break Gods commandments with your traditions, ye
beguile the people with hypocrisy and such like. Which things all our
prelates do, but have yet gotten them new names, and other garments, and are
otherwise disguised. There is difference in the names between a Pope, a
Cardinal, a bishop, and so forth, and to say a Scribe, a Pharisey, a seniour
and so forth: but the thing is all one. Even so now when we have uttered him,
he will change himself once more, and turn himself into an angel of light,
2. Cor. 11. Read the place I 2. Cor. 11.
exhort thee, whatsoever thou art that read this, and note it well. The
Jews look Antechrist has been among us a long time.
for Christ, and he is come xv. hundred years ago, and they not ware: we also
have looked for Antechrist, and he has reigned as long, and we not ware: and
that because either of us looked carnally for him, and not in the places where
we ought to have sought. The Jews had found Christ verily, if they had sought
him in the law and the Prophets, whether Christ sends them to seek: John
John. (...).
5. We also had spied out Antechrist long ago, if we had looked in the doctrine
of Christ, and his apostles, where, because y^ beast sees him self now to be
sought for, he roareth, and seeks new holes to hyde himself in, and changes
himself into a thousand fashions with all manner wiliness, falshode, suttletie
and craft. Because that his excommunications are Antechrist accompteth it
treason to be acquainted with Christ.
come to light, he makes it treason unto the king, to be acquaynted with
Christ. If Christ, and they may not reign together, one hope we have that
Christ shall live ever. The old Antichrists brought Christ unto Pilate, saying
by our law he ought to die, and when Pilate bade them judge him after their
law, they answered, it is not lawful for us to kill any man, which they did
to the intent that they which regarded not the shame of their false
exco^munications, should yet fear to confess Christ, because that the
temporal sword had condemned him. They do all thing of a good zeal they say,
they love you so well, that they had rather burn you, then yt you should have
fellowship with Christ. They are jealous over you amiss (as says S. Paul Gal.
iiij.) They would divide you Gal^ 4.
from Christ and his holy Testament, and join you to the Pope, to believe in
his Testament and promises. Some man will ask (peradventure) why I take the
labor to make this work, in as much as they will burn it, seeing they burnt
the Gospel, I answer, in burning the new Testament they did none other thing
then that I looked for, no more shall they do, if they burn me also, if it be
Gods will it shall so be.

Nevertheless, in translatyng of the Testament I did my duty, and so do I
now, and will do as much more as God has ordained me to do. And as I offered
that, to al men to correct it, who soever could, even so do I this. Who soever
therefore reads this, compare it unto the Scripture. If Gods word bear
record unto it, and thou also feel in thine heart, that it is so, be of good
comfort and give God thanks. If Gods word condemn it, then hold it accursed,
and so do all other doctrines. As Paul counseleth his Galathians. Believe not
every sprite suddenly, but judge the^ by the word of God, which is the trial of
all doctrine and lasts for ever. Amen.

The Parable of the wicked Mammon.
THere was a certain Luke. 16.
rich man, which had a steward that was accused unto him that he had wasted
his goods. And called him, and said unto him. How is it that I hear this of
thee? Give accoumptes of thy stewardshyp. For thou may be no longer my
steward. The steward said with in him self. What shall I do? for my master
will take away from me my stewardshyp. I can not dig, and to beg, I am
ashamed. I wot what to do, that when I am put out of my stewardshyp, they may
receive me into their houses.

Then called he all his masters detters, and said unto the first, how much
owe thou unto my master? And he said, an hundred tonnes of oil, and he said
to him: take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty. Then said he
to an other, what owe thou? And he said, an hundred quarters of wheat. He
said to him. Take thy bill, and write four score. And the Lord commended the
unjust steward, because he had done wisely. For the children of this world, are
in their kind, wiser then the children of light. And I say also unto you, make
you friends of the wicked Mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may
receive you into everlasting habitations. Luke. xvi. Chapter.

For as much as with this, and diverse such other textes, many have enforced to
draw the people from the true faith, and from puttyng their trust in the truth
of Gods promises, and in the merits and deseruyng of his Christ our Lord, and
have also brought it to pass (for many false Prophets shall arise and deceive
many, and much wickedness must also be, says Christ Math. xxiiij. Math. 2^
And Paul says. ij. Timo. iij. Evil me^ and deceauers shall prevail in
evil, 2. Timo. 3.
while they deceive, and are deceived them selves) and have taught them to put
their trust in their own merits, and brought them in belefe, that they shall be
justified in the sight of God, by the goodness of their own works, and have
corrupt the pure word of God, to confirm their Aristotle with all. For though
that ye Philosophers, and worldly wisemen were enemies above all enemies to the
Gospel of God, and though the worldly wisdom can not comprehend the wisdom
of God, as thou may see. i. Corint. j. and. ij. And though worldly
righteousness can not 1. Cor. 1* and. 2.
be obedient unto the righteousness of God. Romans x, Yet what so ever they read
in Aristotle, yt must be first true. Roma. 10*
And to maintain that, they rent and tear the Scriptures with their
distinctions, and expound them violently contrary to the meaning of the text,
and to the circumstaunces that go before and after, and to a thousand clear
and euidente textes. Wherefore I have taken in hand to expound this Gospel,
and certain other places of the new Testament, and (as far forth as God shall
lend me grace) to bring the Scripture unto the right sense, and to dig
again the wells of Abraham, and to purge and cleanse the^ of the earth of
worldly wisdom, where with these Philistenes have stopped them. Which grace
grant me God, for the love that he has unto his son Jesus our Lord, unto
the glory of his name. Amen.

THat faith only before all works and without all merits, but christ's Faith
only justifies
only, justifies and sets us at peace with God, is proved by Paul in the
first chapter to the Roma. I am Roma. 1.
not ashamed (says he) of the Gospel, that is to say, of the glad tidinges
and promises which God has made, and sworn to us in Christ. For it (that is
to say the gospel) is the power of god unto salvation, to all that believe. And
it follows in the foresaid chapter, y^ just or righteous must live by faith.

For in the faith which we have in Christ, and in Gods promises find Faith
brings life.
we mercy, life, favor and peace. In the law we find death, damnation, and
The law brings death.
wrath: moreover, the curse and vengeance of GOD upon us. And it (that is to
say, the law) is called of Paul, 2. Corin. 3. the ministration of 1. Cor. 3.
death and damnation. In the law we are proved to be the enemies of God, and
that we hate him. For how can we be at peace with God and love him, seeing we
are conceived, and borne under the power of the devil, and are his possession
and kingdom, his captives and bondmen, and led at his will, and he holds
our hearts, so that it is impossible for us to consent to the will of God, much
more is it impossible for a man to fulfill the law of his own strength and
power, seeing that we are by birth and of nature, the heirs of eternal
damnation. As says Paul Ephe 2. We (says he) are by nature the Ephe. 2.
children of wrath. Which thing the law does but utter only, and helps us
not, yea requires impossible things of us. The law when it commands that
thou shall not lust, gives thee not power so to do, but damneth thee, because
thou caust not so do.

IF thou will therefore be at peace with God, and love him, thou must turn
to the promises of God, and to yt Gospel, which is called of Paul in the The
Gospel is the ministratio^ of righteousness.
place before rehearsed to the Corinthians, the ministration of righteousness,
and of the spirit. For faith brings pardon, and forgeuenes freely purchased
by Christ's blood, and brings also the sprite, the sprite loses the bonds
of the devil, and sets us at liberty. For where the sprite of the Lord is,
there is liberty says Paul in the same place to the Corinthians, that is to
say, there the heart is free, and has power to love the will of God, and there
the heart mourns that he cannot love enough. Now is that consent of yt heart
unto the law of God eternal life, yea, though there be no power yet in the
members to fulfill it. Let every man therefore (according to Paul's council in
the 6. chapter to the Ephesians.) arm himself with yt armor of god, that is to
understand, with gods promises, and above all thing (says he) take unto you
the shield of faith, wherewyth ye may be able to quench all the fierye darts
of the wicked, that ye may be able Resist the devil with the shield of faith.
to resist in the evil day of temptation, and namely at the hour of death.

See therefore thou have Gods promises in thine heart, and that thou believe them
without waueryng: and when temptation arises, and the devil lays the law,
and thy deeds against thee, answer him, with the promises, and turn to God
and confess thy self to him, and say it is euenso, or else how could he be
merciful? but remember that he is the God of mercy, and of truth, and cannot
but fulfill his promises. Also remember that his sons blood is stronger then
all the sins and wickedness of the whole world, and therewith quiet thy self,
and thereunto commit thy self, and bless thy self in all temptation (namely,
at the hour of death) with that holy ca^dle. Or else perishest Faith is y^ holy
can^de wherewith we must bless our selves at y^ last hour.
thou, though thou have a thou sand holy candels about thee, a C. ton of holy
water, a shipfull of pardones, a clothe sack full of Friars coats, and all
the ceremonies in the world, and all the good works, deseruings and merits of
all the men in the world, be they or were they never so holy, Gods word
only lasts for ever, and that which he has sworn, does abide, when all
other things perish. So long as thou find any consent in thine heart unto
the law of God, that it is righteous and good, and also displesure that thou
can not fulfill it, despair not, neither doubt, but that Gods spirit is in
thee, and that thou art chosen for Christ's sake, to the inheritance of
eternal life.

And again, Romans 3. We suppose Roma. 3.
that a man is justified through faith, without the deeds of the law. And
likewise Romans 4. We say yt says was Roma 4.
reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. Also Romans. v. seeing that Faith is
accounted to us for righteousness. Gal. 3.
we are justified through faith, we are at peace with God. Also Roma. 10. With
the heart does a man believe, to be made righteous. Also Gal 3. Received ye the
spirit by the deeds of the law, or by hearing of the faith? Does he which
ministers the sprite unto you, and works miracles among you, do it of the
deeds of the law, or by hearing of faith? Even as Abraham believed god, and it
was reckoned to him for righteousness. Understand therefore (says he) The
children of faith are the children of Abraham.
that the children of faith are the children of Abraham. For the Scripture saw
before, that God would justify the heathen or Gentiles by faith, and showed
before glad tidings unto Abraham, in thy sede shall all nations be blessed.
Wherefore they which are of faith are blessed, that is to wit, made righteous
with righteous Abraham. For as many as are of the deeds of the law, are under
curse. For it is written, says he: Cursed is every man that continues not in
all things, which are written in the book of the law to fulfill them.

Item Gala. ij. where he resisted Peter in the face he says. We which are
Gal. 2.
Jews by nation, and not sinners of the Gentiles, know that a man is not
justified by the deeds of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, and have
therefore believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the deeds of the law: for by the deeds of the law shall no
flesh be justified. Item in the same place he says, touching yt I now live, I
live in ye faith of the son of God, Faith only justifies us.
which loved me, and gave him self for me, I despise not the grace of GOD. For
if righteousness come by ye law, the^ is Christ dead in vain. And of such like
ensamples are all the Epistles of Paul full. Mark how Paul laboreth with him
self to express the excedyng misteryes of faith, in the epistle to the
Ephesians, and in the Epistle to the Collossians. Of these and many such like
textes, are we sure that the forgiveness of sins, and justifying is
appropriate unto faith only without the addyng to of works.

Take for the also the similitude that Christ makes Math. vij. A good tree
Math. 7.
brings forth good fruit. And a bad tree brings forth bad fruit. There
see thou, that the fruit makes not the tree good, but the tree the fruit,
and that the tree must before hand be good, or be made good: yer it can bring
forth good fruit. As he also says Math. xij. either Mat. ^2.
make the tree good, and his fruit good also, either make the tree bad, and his
fruit bad also. How can ye speak well while ye your selves are evil: So
likewise is this true, and nothing more true, that a man before all good works
must first be good, and that it is impossible that works should make him good,
if he were not good before, yet he did good works. For this is Christ's
principle and (as we say) a general rule. A principle taught by Christ.
How can ye speak well, while ye are evil? so likewise how can ye do good,
while ye are evil.

This is therefore a plain, and a sure conclusion not to be doubted of, that
there must be first in the heart of a man, before he do any good work, a
greater and a preciouser thing then all the good works in the world to
reconcile him to God, to bring the love and favor of God to him, to make him
love God again, to make him righteous, and good in the sight of God, to do a
way his sin, to deliver him, and lose him, out of that captivity where in he
was conceived and borne, in which he could neither love God, neither the will
of God. Or else how can he work any good work that should please God, if
there were not some supernatural goodness in him given of GOD freely, where of
the good work must spryng? even as a sick man must first be healed or made
whole, yer he can do the deeds of an whole man, and as the blind man must first
have sight given him, yer he can see: and he that has his feet in fetters,
gives, or stocks must first be loosed, or he can go, walk or run, and even
as they which thou read of in the Gospel, that they were possessed of the
devils, could not laud God, till the devils were cast out.

That precious thing which must be in the heart, yer a man can work any good
work is y^ word of God, which in the Gospel preaches, profereth and Faith
being joined with the word of God, brings forth good fruit.
brings unto all that repent, and believe, the favor of God in Christ. Who
soever hears the word, and believes it, the same is thereby righteous, and
thereby is given him the spirit of God, which leads him unto all that is the
will of God, and is loosed from the captivity and bondage of the devil, and
his heart is free to love God, and has lust to do the will of GOD. Therefore it
is called the word of life, the word of grace, the word of health, the word of
redemption, the word of forgiveness, and the word of peace, he that hears it
not, or believes it not, ca^ by no means be made righteous before God. This
confirms Peter in the xv. of the Acts, seeing that GOD Acts. 15.
through faith does purify the hearts. For of what nature so ever the word of
God is, of the same nature must the hearts be, which believe thereon and cleave
thereunto. Now is the word living, pure, righteous and true, and even so makes
it the hearts of them that believe thereon.

IF it be said that Paul (when he says in the iij. to the Romans, no flesh
shall be, or can be justified by the deeds of the law) means it of the
ceremonies or sacrifices, it is an untrue saying. For it follows immediately,
by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Now are they not the ceremonies that
utter sin, but the law of commandments. In the iiij. (he says) the law
causes wrath which can not be understand of the ceremonies, for they were
given to reconcile the people to God again after they had sinned. If as they
say the ceremonies The law cannot justify us.
which were given to purge sin and to reconcile, justify not, neither
bless, but temporally only, much more the law of commandments justifies
not. For that which proves a man sick, health him not, neither does the cause
of wrath bring to favor, neither can that which damneth save a man. When the
mother commands her child, but even to rock the cradle, it grudgeth, the
commandment does but utter the poison that lay hid, and sets him at bate
with his mother, and makes him believe she loves him not.

These commandments also (thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou
shall not lust desire or wish after thy neighbors wife, servant, maid ox
or ass, or what soever pertains unto thy neighbor) give me not power so to
do, but utter the poison that is in me and damn me, because I can not so do,
and prove that God is wrath with me, seeing that his will, and mine are so
contrary. Therefore says Paul. Gal. iij. If there had been given Gal. 3.
such a law that could have given life, then no doubt righteousness had come by
the law, but the Scripture concluded all under sin (says he) that the
promise might be given unto them that believe through the faith that is in
Jesus Christ.

The promises when they are believed) Faith in christ's promises does justify us.
are they that justify, for they bring the spirit which loses the heart,
gives lust to the law, and certifieth us of yt good will of God unto us ward.
If we submit our selves unto God, and desire him to heal us, he will do it, and
will in the mean time (because of the consent of y^ heart unto y^ law) count us
for full whole, and will no more hate us, but pity us, cherish us, be tender
hearted to us, and love us as he does Christ him self. Christ is our redemer,
Savior, peace, atonement, and satisfaction, and has made amends or
satisfaction to Godward for all the sin which they that repent (consentyng
to the law and beleuyng the promises) do, have done, or shall do. So that if
through Christ is the storehouse of mercy for us.
fragilitie we fall a thousand times in a day, yet if we do repent again, we
have always mercy laid up for us in store in Jesus Christ our Lord.

WHat shall we say then to those Scriptures which go so sore upon good works?
As we read Math. xxv. I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat. etc. And such
like. Which all sound as though we should be justified, and accepted unto the
favor of God in Christ through good works. To this I answer. Many there are
which when they hear or read of faith, at once they consent thereunto, and have
a certain imagination or opinion of faith, as when a man tells a story or a
thing done in a strange land, that pertayneth not to the^ at all. Which yet
they heleue, and tell as a true thing. And this imagination or opinion they The
definition of true faith.
call faith. They think no further then that faith is a thing which stands
in their own power to have, as do other natural works which men work: but
they feel no manner workyng of the spirit, neither the terrible sentence of
the law, the fearful judgments of God, the horrible damnation and captivity
under Satan. Therefore as soon as they have this opinion, or imagination in
there hearts that says, verily this doctrine seems true, I believe it is eue^
so. Then they think that the right faith is there. But afterward when they
feel in them selves, and also see in other, that there is none alteration, and
that the works follow not, but that they are altogether eue^ as before, and
abide in their old estate: then think they yt faith is not sufficient, but
that it must be some greater thing then faith that should justify a man.

So faule they away from faith again, and cry saying, faith only justifies
not a man, and makes him acceptable to GOD. If thou ask them wherefore. They
answer, see how many there are that believe, and yet do no more then they did
before. These are they which Judas in his Epistle calls dreamers, which
deceive themselves with their own fantasies. For Faith that brings not forth
fruit, is but a dream.
what other thing is their imagination which they call faith, then a dreamyng
of the faith, and an opinion of their own imagination wrought without the
grace of God? These must needs be worse at the latter end the^ at the
beginning. These are the old vessels, that rent, when new wine is poured into
them. Math. ix. that is, they hear Mat. 9.
Gods word, but hold it not, and therefore wax worse, then they were before.
But the right faith spryngeth not of man's fantasy, neither is it in any ma^s
power to obtain it, but is all together Faith is the gift of God.
the pure gift of God poured into us freely, without all manner doing of us,
without deserving and merits, yea and without sekyng for of us. And is (as
says Paul in the second to the Ephesians) even Gods gift and grace Ephe. 2.
purchased through Christ. Therefore is it mighty in operation, full of virtue
and ever working, which also renueth a man and begets him a fresh, alters
him, changes him, and turns him altogether into a new nature and
conversation: so that a man feels his heart all together altered, changed,
and far otherwise disposed then before, and has power to love that which
before he could not but hate, and deliteth in that, which before he abhorred,
and hates that, which before he could not but love. And it sets the soul
at liberty, and makes her free to follow the will of God, and does to the
soul even as health does unto the body, after that a man is pined and wasted
away with a long sokyng disease: the legs cannot bear him, he cannot lift up
his hands to help himself, his taste is corrupt, sugar is bitter in his
mouth, his stomach abhors longyng after slibbersause and swashe, at which a
whole stomach is ready to cast his gorge. When health comes, she changes
and alters him clean, gives him strength in all his members, lust and to do
of his own accord, that which before he could not do, neither could suffer
that any man exhorted him to do, and has now lust in wholesome things, and his
members are free and at liberty, and have power to do of their own accord
all things, which belong to an whole man to do, which before they had no power
to do, but were in captivity and bondage. So likewise in all thing does right
faith to the soul.

The sprite of God accompanies faith, and brings with her light, wherewith a
man beholds himself in the law of God, and sees his miserable bondage and
captivity, and humbles The spirit of God accompanies Faith.
himself, and abhors himself: she brings Gods promises of all good
things in Christ. God works with his word, and in his word. And as his
word is preached, faith rooteth her self in the hearts of the elect: and as
faith enters and the word of God is believed, the power of God loses the
heart from the captivity, and bondage under sin, and knitteth and coupleth
him to God, and to the will of God: alters him, changes him clean,
fashioneth, and forgeth him a new, gives him power to love, and to do that
which before was impossible for him either to love or do, and turns him into
a new nature: so yt he loves that which he before hated, and hates that which
he before loved, and is clean altered, changed, and contrary disposed, and is
knit and coupled fast to Gods will, and naturally brings forth good works,
that is to say, that which God commands to do, and not things of his own
imagination. And that does he of his own accord, as a tree brings forth
fruit of her own accord. And as thou need not to bid a tree to bring forth
fruit, so is there no law Faith of her self brings forth good fruits, that
is, good works.
put unto him that believes, and is justified through faith (as says Paul in
the first Epistle to Timothy the first chapter.) Neither is it nedeful, for
the law of god is written and graued in his heart, and his pleasure is therein.
And as without commandment, but eue^ of his own nature, he eats,
drincketh, sees, hears, talks, and goes, eue^ so of his own nature,
without coaction or compulsion of yt law, brings he forth good works. And as
a whole man when he is a thurst, tarieth but for drink, and when he hungreth
abides but for meat, and then drinks and eats naturally: eue^ so is ye
faithful ever a thurst, and an hungered after the will of God, and tarieth but
for occasion. And whenever an occasion is given, he works naturally the
will of God. For this blessing is given to all them that trust in Christ's
blood, that they thrust and hunger to do gods will. He that has not this
faith, is but an unprofitable babbler of faith and True faith is not with out
good works.
works, and wotteth neither what he bableth, nor what he means, or whereunto
his words pertayne. For he feels not the power of faith, nor ye working of
the spirit in his heart, but enterpreteth the scriptures which speak of faith
and works, after his own blind reason and folish fantasies, and not of any
feeling that he has in his heart: as a man rehearses a tale of an other man's
mouth, and wotteth not whether it be so, or no as he says, nor has any
experience of yt thing it self. Now does the scripture ascribe both faith and
True faith and good works, are the gift of God, and come not of our selves.
works not to us, but to God only, to whom they belong only, and to who^ they
are appropriate, whose gift they are, and the proper work of his spirit.

Is it not a froward and perverse blindness, to teach how a man can do nothing
of his own self, and yet presumptuously take upon them the greatest and highest
work of God, even to make faith in themselves of their own power, and of their
own false imagination and thoughts? Therefore I say we must despair of our
selves, and pray God (as christ's apostles did) to give us faith, and to
increase our faith. When we have that, we need no other thing more. For she
brings the spirit with her, and he not only teaches us all things, but
works them also mightily in us, and carries us through adversity,
persecution, death and hell, unto heaven and everlasting life,

Mark diligently therefore seeing we are come to answer. The Scripture (because
of such dreams and feigned faythes sake) uses such manner of speakinges of
works, not that a man should thereby be made good to Godwarde or justified, but
to declare unto other, and to take of other the difference The difference
between false faith, and right faith.
between false feigned faith, and right faith. For where right faith is, there
brings she forth good works, if there follow not good works, it is (no
doubt) but a dream and an opinion or fained faith.

Wherefore look as the fruit makes not the tree good, but declares and
testifies As the tree is known by his fruit ^o right faith is known by her
fruit.
outwardlye that the tree is good (as Christ says) every tree is known by
his fruit: even so shall ye know the right faith by her fruit.

Take for an e^nsample Mary that anointed Christ's feet. Luke. 7. Example.
When Simo^ which bad Christ to his house had condemned her, Christ defended
her, and justified her saying: Simon, I have a certain thing to say unto thee.
And he said master, say on. There was a certain lender which had two
detters, the one ought v. C. pence, and the other fifty. When they had nothing
to pay, he forgave both. Which of them tell me, will love him most? Simon
answered and said: I suppose that he to whom he forgave most. And he said to
him, thou have truly judged. And he turned him to y^ woman, and said unto
Simon, See thou this woman? I entered into thine house and thou gave me no
water to my fete, but she has washed my feet with tears, and wypte them with
the hears of her head. Thou gave me no kiss, but she since the time I came
in, has The fruits of faith.
not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil thou haste not anointed. And
she has anointed my feet with costly and precious ointment. Wherefore I say
unto thee, many sins are forgeuen her, for she loves much. To whom less is
forgeuen, the same does love less, etc. Hereby see we that deeds and works are
but outward signs of of the inward grace of the bounteous and plenteous mercy
of God, freely received without all merits of deeds, ye and before all deeds.
Christ teaches to know the inwar^ faith and love by the outward deeds. Deeds
are the fruits of love, and love is the fruit of faith. Love and also the
deeds are great or small, according to the proportion of faith. Where faith is
mighty and strong, there is love fervent and deeds plenteous, and done with
excedyng mekenes. Where faith is weak, there is love cold, and the deeds few,
and seldom bear flowers, and blossoms in winter.

Simon believed and had faith, yet but weakly, and according to the proportion
of his faith loved coldly, and had deeds thereafter: he had Christ unto a simple
and a bare feast only, and received him not with any great humanity. But Mary
had a strong faith, and therefore burning love, and notable deeds done with
excedyng profound, and deep mekenes. On the one side she saw her A difference
between true faith and fained faith
self clearly in the law, both in what danger she was in, and her cruel
bondage under sin, her horrible damnation, and also the fearful sentence and
judgment of God upon sinners. On the other side she heard the Gospel of
Christ preached, and in the promises she saw with egles eyes the excedyng
abundant mercy of God, that passes all vtteraunce of spech, which is set
forth in Christ for all meke sinners, which knowledge their sins. And she
believed the word of God mightyly, and glorified God over his mercy and truth,
and being overcome and overwhelmed with yt unspeakable, yea and
incomprehensible aboundat riches of the kyndnes of God, did inflame and burn
in love, yea was so swollen in love, that she could not abide nor hold, but must
break out, and was so dronke in love that she regarded nothing, but even to
utter the fervent, and burning love of her heart only. She had no respect to
her self, though she was never so great and notable a sinner, neither to the
curious hypocrisy of the Phariseis, which ever disdain weak sinners,
neither the costlines of her ointment, but with all humblenes did run unto his
feet. Washed them with the tears of her eyes, and wyped them with the hears
of her head, and anointed them with her precious ointment, yea, and would no
doubt have run into the ground under his feet to have uttered her love
toward him, yea would have descended down into hell, if it had been possible.
Even as Paul in the ix. Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans was drunk in
love, Rome. 9.
and overwhelmed with the ple^teousnes of the infinite mercy of god (which he
had received in Christ unsought for) wished him self banished from Christ and
damned, to save yt Jews, if it might have been. For as a man feels God in him
self, so is he to his neighbor.

Mark an other thing also. We for the most part because of our grossenes, in
all our knowledge proceed from that which is last and hi^^ost, unto that which
is first, beginning at the latter end, disputyng and making our arguments
backward. We begin at the effect and work, and proceed unto the natural
cause. As for an ensample, we first see the Moon dark, and then search the
cause, and find that the puttyng of the earth, between the Sun and the Moon
is the natural cause of the darkness, and that the earth stops Backward
disputations.
the light. Then dispute we backward saying: the Moon is darkened, therefore is
the earth directly between the Sun and the Moon. Now yet is not the darkness
of the Moon the natural cause that the earth is between the Sun and the
Moon, but the effect thereof, and cause declaratiue, declaryng and leadyng us
unto the knowledge, how that the earth is between the Sun and the Moon
directly, and causes the darkness, stopping the light of the Sun from the
Moon. And contrarywyse the being of the earth directly between the Sun, and
the Moon is the natural cause of yt darkness. Likewise he has a son,
therefore is he a father, and yet the soon is not cause of the father, but
contrariwise. Notwithstanding yt son is the cause declaratiue, whereby we know
that the other is a father. After the same manner here, many sins are forgeuen
her, for she loves much, thou may not understand by the word for, that love
is the natural cause of the forgeuyng of sins, but declares it only, and
contrariwise the forgiveness of sins is the natural cause of love.

The works declare love. And love declares that there is some benefit and
kindness showed, or else would there be no love. Why woorketh one, and an other
not? Or one more then an other? Because that one loves and the other not, or
that the one loves more then the other. Why loves one, and an other The
kindness of God moves us to love god.
not, or one more the^ an other? Because that one feels y^ exceeding love of
god in his heart, and an other not, or that one feels it more the^ an other.
Scripture speaks after ye most grossest manner: Be diligent therefore that thou
be not deceived with curiousnes. For me^ of no small reputation have been
deceived with their own sophistry.

Hereby now see thou, that there is great difference between being righteous,
and good in a man's self, and declaryng and vtteryng righteousness and goodness.
The faith only makes Faith only makes us the sons and heirs of God.
a man safe, good, righteous and the friend of GOD, yea and the son and the
heir of GOD, and of all his goodness, and possesses us with the spirit of
God. The work declares the self faith and goodness. Now uses Faith
possesses the spirit of God.
the Scripture the common manner of speaking, and the very same that is among
the people. As when a father says to his child, go, and belouing, merciful
Works declare faith and Gods goodness.
and good, to such, or such a poor man, he bids him not, there with to be
made merciful, kind and good: but to testify and declare the goodness that is
in him already, with the outward deed: that it may break out to yt profit of
other, and that other may feel it which have need thereof.

After the same manner shall thou enterprete the Scriptures which make mention
of works: that God thereby will that we show forth, that goodness, which we have
received by faith, and let it break forth and come to the profit of other,
that the false faith may be known, and weded out by the roots. For God gives
no man his grace, that he should let it lie still, and do no good Gods grace
is to be exercised in us.
with all: but that he should increase it, and multiply it with lendyng it to
other, and with open declaryng of it with the outward works, provoke and draw
other to God, As Christ says in Matthew the v. Chapter: let your light so shine
in the sight of men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
father which is in heaven. Or else were it as a treasure dug in the ground
and hid wisdom, in which what profit is there?

Moreover there with the goodness, favor, and gifts of God which are in thee,
not only shall be known unto other, but also unto thine own self, and thou
shall be sure that thy faith is right, and that the true spirit of God is in
thee, and that thou art called, and chosen of God unto eternal life, and
loosed from the bonds of Satan whose captive thou wast, as Peter exhorts in
yt first of his second Epistle, through good works to make our calling and
election (wherewith we are called and chosen of God) sure. For how dare a man
presume to think, that his faith is right, and that Gods favor is on him, and
that Gods spirit is in him when he feels not the workyng of the spirit,
neither him self disposed to any godly thing? Thou can never Where true
faith is, good works follow.
know or be sure of thy faith, but by the works, if works follow not, yea and
that of love, without lokyng after any reward, thou may be sure that thy
faith is but a dream, and not right, and even the same that James called in
his Epistle the second Chapter dead faith, and not iustifiyng.

Abraham through works Genesis. Gene. 2.
xxij. was sure of his faith to be right, and that the true fear of God was in
him, when he had offered his son (as the Scripture says.) Now know I that
thou fear God, that is to say. Now is it open, and manifest that thou
fear God, in as much as thou have not spared thy only son for my sake.

SO now by this abide sure and fast, that a man inwardly in the heart and before
God is righteous, and good thorough faith only before all works.
Notwithstanding yet outwardly and openly before the people, ye and before
himself, is he righteous through the work, that is, he knows and is sure
through the outward work that he is a true beleuer, and in the favor of GOD,
and righteous, and good thorough the mercy of GOD: that thou may call the one
an open, and an outward The outward righteousness and the inward righteousness
what they are.
righteousness, and the other an inward righteousness of the heart (so yet) that
thou understand by the outward righteousness, no other thing save the fruit that
follows, and a declaryng of the inward justifying and righteousness of the
heart, and not that it makes a man righteous before God, but that he must be
first righteous before him in the heart. Even as thou may call the fruit of the
tree, the outward goodness of the tree, which follows and utters the inward
natural goodness of the tree.

This means James in his Epistle where he says, faith without works is
dead, that is, if works follow not, it is a sure and an evident sign, that
there is no faith in the heart, but a dead imagination and dream, which they
falsely call faith.

Of the same wise is this saying of Christ to be understand. Make you Outward
works declare where true faith is.
friends of the unrighteous Mammo^, that is, show your faith openly, and what
ye are within in the heart, with outward giving and bestowyng your goods on
the poor, that ye may obtayn friends, that is, that the poor on whom thou
have showed mercy may at the day of judgment testify, and witness of thy good
works. That thy faith and what thou waste within in thy heart before God, may
there appear by thy fruits openly unto all men. For unto the right beleuyng
shall all things be comfortable, and unto consolation, at that terrible day.
And contrariwyse unto the unbelieving, all thing shall be unto desperation, and
confusion, and every man shall be judged openly, and outwardly in the presence
of all men, according to their deeds and works. So that not without a cause
thou may call them thy friends, which testifye at that day of thee, that
thou liuedst as a true and a right Christen man, and folowedst the steps of
Christ in showing mercy, Good works are witnesses for us before God.
as no doubt he does which feleth God merciful in his heart. And by yt works is
the faith known, that it was right and perfect. For the outward works can
never please God nor make friend, except they spring of faith. Forasmuch as
Christ himself, Math. 6. and 7. disaloweth Math. vi. and vij.
and casts away the works of the Pharisees, yea, prophesiyng and workyng of
miracles, and castyng out of devils, which we count and esteem for very
excellent virtues. Yet make they no friends with their works, while their
hearts are false and vnpure, and their eye double. Now without faith, is no
heart true or eye single: so that we are compelled to confess that the works
make not a man righteous or good, but that the heart must first be righteous and
good, ereany good work proceed thence.

SEcondarily all good works must be done free with a single eye, with out
respect of any thing, and that no profit be sought thereby.

That commands Christ, where he faith, Mat. 10. freely have ye received,
Math. 10.
freely give again. For look as Christ with all his works did not deserve
heaven, for that was his already, but did us service therewith, and neither
looked, nor sought his own profit, but our profit, and the honor of God the
father only. Even so we with all our works may not seek our own profit,
neither in this world, nor in heaven, but must and ought freely to work, to
honor God withal, and We must of duty do good works without hope of reward.
without all manner respect, seek our neighbors profit, and do him service.
That means Paul Phil. 2. saying: Be minded as Christ was, which being in the
shape of God, equal unto God, and even very God, laid that a part, that is to
say, hid it. And took on him the form and fashion of a servant. That is, as
concerning himself he had enough, that he was full, and had all plentuousnesse
of the Godhed, and in all his works sought our profit, and became our
servant.

The cause is: forasmuch as faith justifies and puts away sin in the
sight of God, brings life, health, and the favor of God, makes us the
heirs of God, pours the spirit of God into our souls, and fills us with
all godly fulness in Christ, it were to great a shame, rebuke, and wrong unto
the faith, ye to christ's blood, if a man would work any thing to purchase
that wherewith faith has endued him already, and God has given him freely.
Even as Christ had done rebuke and shame unto himself, if he would have done
good works, and wrought to have been made thereby Faith makes us the sons
and children of God.
Gods son and heir over all, which thing he was already. Now does faith make
us the sons or children of god. John. 1. he gave them might or power to be yt
sons of God, in that they believed on his name. If we be sons, so are we
also heirs. Roma. viij. and Gala. iiij. How can or ought we then Roma. 8.
to work, for to purchase that inheritance Gala. 4.
withal, whereof we are heirs already by faith?

What shall we say the^ to those scriptures, which sound as though a man
should do good works, and live well for heavens sake, or eternal reward? As
these are, make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon. And Math. vij. Gather
you treasures together in Math. 7.
heaven. Also Math. xix. If thou will Math. 19.
enter into life keep the commandments and such like. This say I, that they
which understand not, neither feel in their hearts what faith means, talk
and think of the reward even as they do of the work, neither suppose they yt
a man ought to work, but in a respect to the reward. For they imagine that it
is in the kingdom of They that seek heau^ for their works are such as
understand not the treasures of Christ.
Christ, as it is in the world among me^, that they must deserve heaven with
their good works. Howbeit their thoughts are but dreams and false
imaginations. Of these men speaks Malachias Chap. i. who is it among you that
shuts a door for my pleasure for naught, yt is, without respect of reward?
These are servants, that seek gaynes and vauntage, hyrelinges and day
laborers, which here on earth receive their rewards, as the Phariseis with
their prayers, and fastings. Math. v. Math. v.


But on this wise goes it with heaven with everlasting life and eternal
reward, likewise as good works naturally follow faith (as it is above
rehearsed) As good works naturally follow faith. So eternal life follows faith
and good living.
so that thou nedest not to command a true beleuer to work, or to compel him
with any law, for it is impossible that he should not work, he taryeth but for
an occasion, he is ever disposed of him self, thou nedest but to put him in
remembrance, and that to know the false faith from the true. Even so naturally
does eternal life follow faith and good living, without sekyng for, and is
impossible that it should not come, though no man thought there on. Yet is it
rehearsed in y^ Scripture, alleged and promised to know the difference between
a false beleuer, and a true beleuer, and that every man may know what follows
good living naturally, and of it self, without taking thought for it.

Take a gross ensample. Hell that As good works follow faith: So hell follows
evil works.
is, everlasting death is threatened unto sinners, and yet follows it sin
naturally without sekyng for. For no man does evil to be damned therefore, but
had rather avoid it. Yet there the one follows the other naturally, and
though no man told or warned him of it, yet should the sinner find it, and
feel it. Nevertheless it is therefore threatened, that men may know what
follows evil living. Now then as after evil living follows his reward
unsought for, even so after good living follows his reward naturally unsought
for, or unthought upon. Even as when thou drinkest wine, be it good or bad, the
taste follows of it self, though thou therefore drink it not. Yet testifies
the Scripture, and it is true, that we are by inheritance heirs of damnation:
Of our selves we are the vessels of y^ wrath of God, and the heirs of
da^natio^.
and that ere we be borne, we are vessels of the wrath of God, and full of that
poison whence naturally all sins spring: and wherewith we can not but sin,
which thing the deeds that follow (when we behold our selves in the glass of
the law of God) do declare and utter, kill our consciences, and show us what we
were and wist not of it, and certifieth us that we are heirs of damnation. For
if we were of God we should cleave to God, and lust after the will of God. But
now our deeds compared to the law, declare y^ contrary, and by our deeds we see
our selves, both what we be, and what our end shall be.

So now thou see that life eternal and all good things are promised unto
faith and belefe: so that he that believes on Christ, shall be safe. Christ's To
believe in Christ is salvation.
blood has purchased life for us, and has made us the heirs of god: so that
heaven comes by Christ's blood. If thou would obtain heaven with the
merits and deseruinges of thine own To seek heaven by good works were to
derogate the dignity of the blood of Christ.
works, so dyddest thou wrong, yea and shamedest the blood of Christ, and
unto thee were Christ dead in vain. Now is the true beleuer heir of God by
Christ's deservings, yea and in Christ was predestinate and ordained unto
eternal life, before the world began. And when the Gospel is preached unto us,
we believe the mercy of God, and in beleuyng we receive the spirit of God,
which is the earnest of eternal life, and we are in eternal life already, and
feel already in our hearts the swetnes thereof, and are overcome with the
kyndnes of God and Christ, and therefore love the will of God, and of love are
ready to work freely, and not to obtain that which is given us freely, and
whereof we are heirs already.

Now when Christ says: Make you friends of unrighteous Mammon. Gather you
treasure together in heaven and such like. Thou see that the meaning and
intent is no other, but that thou should do good, and so will it follow of it
self naturally, without sekyng and taking of thought, that thou shall find
friends, and treasure in heaven, and receive a reward. So let thine eye be
single, and look unto good living only, and take no thought for yt reward:
But be content. For as much as thou know and art sure that the reward and
all thing contained in gods promises, follow good living naturally: and thy good
works do but testify only and certify thee, that the spirit of God is in
thee, whom thou have received in earnest of Gods truth, and that thou art heir
of all the goodness of God, and that all good things are thine already,
purchased by Christ's All that is good is purchased for us by Christ.
blood, and laid up in store against that day when every man shall receive
according to his deeds, that is, according as his deeds declare and testify,
what he is, or was. For they that look unto the reward, are slow, false,
subtle and crafty workers, and love the reward more the^ the work, yea hate
the labor, yea hate God which commands the labor, and are weary both of the
commandment, and also of the commander, and work with tediousnes. But he
that works of pure love without seeking of reward, woorketh truly.

Thirdly, that not the saints, but god Sainte^ can ^ot help us in to heaven.
only receives us into eternal tabernacles, is so plain and evident, that
it needs not to declare, or prove it. How shall the saints receive us into
heaven, when every man has need for him self that God only receive him to
heaven, and every man has scace for himself: As it appears by the five wise
virgins. Math. 25, which would not give of their oil unto the unwise Math. ^5.
virgins. And Peter says in the 4. of his first Epistle, that the righteous
is 1. Pet. 4.
with difficulty saved. So see thou y^ the saying of Christ, make you
friends and so forth, that they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles,
pertayneth not unto the saints which are in heaven, but is spoken of the poor
and nedy which are here present with us on earth, as though he would say. What
buildest thou, churches, foundest Abbeys, chauntries, and colleges in the
honor of saints, to my Mother, S. Peter, Paul, and saints that be dead, to
make of them thy friends? They need it not, ye, they are not thy friends, but
theirs which lived then when they did, of whom they were helped. Thy friends
are the poor which are now in thy time, and live with thee, thy poor
neighbors which need thy help and succor. Them make thy friends with thy
unrighteous Mammon, that they How ^^e may make friends of the wicked Mammon.
may testify of thy faith, and thou may know and feel that thy faith is
right and not feigned.

Unto the second, such receiving into everlasting habitations, is not to be
understand, that men shall do it. For many to whom we show mercy and do good,
shall not come there, neither To do good to such as(...)is ^able
skilleth it, so we meekely and lovingly do our duty, ye, it is a sign of
strong faith and fervent love, if we do well to the evil, and study to draw
them to Christ in all that lies in us. But the poor give us an occasion to
exercise our faith, and the deeds make us feel our faith, and certify us a^nd
make us sure that we are safe, and are escaped and translated from death unto
life, and that we are delivered and redeemed from the captivity and bondage of
Satan, and brought into the liberty of the sons of God, in that we feel
lust and strength in our heart, to work the will of god. And at that day shall
our deeds appear and comfort our hearts, witness our faith and trust, which we
now have in Christ, which faith shall then keep us from shame, as it is
written. None that believes in him shall be ashamed, Romans 9. So that good works
Romans 9.
help our faith, and make us sure in our consciences, and make us feel the
mercy of god. Notwithstanding heaven, everlasting life, joy eternal, faith, the
favor of God, the spirit of God, All our righteouscommeth ^^^ely from Christ.
lust and strength unto the will of God, are given us freely of the bounteous
and plenteous riches of God purchased by Christ, without our deseruings, that
no man should rejoice, but in the Lord only.

FOr a further understanding of this Gospel, here may be made 3. questions.
What Mammo^ is, why it is called unrighteous, and after what manner Christ
bids us counterfeit and follow the unjust and wicked steward, which with his
lords damage provided for his own profit and va^tage, which thing no doubt
is unrighteous and sin.

First, Mammon is an Hebrew word Mammon what it is?
and signifies riches or temporal goods, and namely, all superfluity, and all
yt is above necessity, and that which is required unto our necessary uses,
wherewith a man may help an other, without undoing or hurtyng himself. For
Hamon in the Hebrew speech, signifies a multitude, or abundance, or many. And
therehence comes Mahamon, or Mammon, abundance, or plenteousnes of goods
or riches.

Secondarily, it is called unrighteous Mammon, not because it is gotten
unrighteously, or with vsurye, for of unrighteous gotten goods can no man do
good works, but ought to restore them home again. As it is said, Esaias Esaias.
61.
61. I am a God that hates offering that comes of robbery. And Pro. 3. Prou.
3.
says: Honor the Lord of thine own good. But therefore it is called
unrighteous, because it is in unrighteous use As Paul speaks unto the Ephesians.
5. Ephe. 5.
how that the days are evil though that god has made them, and they are a
good work of gods making. How be it they are yet called evil, because The
days are called evil, because evil men use them.
that evil men use them amiss, and much sin, occasions of evil, peril of
souls are wrought in the^. Eue^ so are riches called evil, because that evil
men bestow the^ amiss, and misuse them. For where riches is, there goes it
after the common proverb. He that has money, has what him lists. And they
cause fighting, stealing, laying awaite, lying, flatering, and all unhappiness
against a man's neighbor. For all men hold on riches part.

But singularly before God is it called unrighteous Mammon, because it is not
bestowed, and ministered unto our neighbors need. For if my neighbor need and
I give him not, neither depart liberally with him, of that which I have: than
withholde I from him unrighteously that which is his own. For as much as I am
bounden to help him by the law of nature, which is, wha^tsoeuer thou would
y^ an other did to thee, that do thou also We are bound by the law of nature
to help our needye neighbor.
to him. And Christ. Math. 5. Give to every man that desires thee. And John in
his first Epistle, if a man have this worlds good, and see his brother need,
how is the love of God in him? And this unrighteousness in our Mammo^ see very
few men: because it is spiritual, and in those goods which are gotten most
truly and justly, which beguile men. For they suppose they do no man wrong in
keepyng them, in that they got them not with stealyng, robbing, oppression, and
usury, neither hurt any man now with them.

Thirdly many have busied themselves in studying what, or who, this unrighteous
steward is, because yt Christ so praises him. But shortly and plainly this is
the answer. That Christ The unrighteous Stuard, who it is.
prayseth not the unrighteous stuard, neither sets him forth to us to
cou^terfait, because of his unrighteousness, but because of his wisdom only,
in that he with unright so wisely provided for himself. As if I would provoke
another to pray, or study, do say. The thieves watch all night to rob and
steal: why can not thou watch to pray and to study? Here praise not I the
thief, and murderer for their evil doing, but for their wisdom, that they
so wisely and diligently wayt on their unrighteousness. Likewise when I say,
miss women tire the^ selves with gold and silk to please their lovers: what
wilt not thou garnish thy soul with faith to please Christ? here praise I not
whoredom, but y^ diligence which the whore misuseth.

On this wise Paul also Roma. v. likeneth Adam and Christ together, saying
that Adam was a figure of Christ. And yet of Adam have we but pure sin, and
of Christ grace only, which are out of measure contrary. But the similitude or
likeness stands in the original birth, and not in the virtue, and vice of the
birth. So that as Adam is father of all sin, so is Christ father of all
righteousness. And as all sinners spryng of Adam: Eue^ so all righteous Christ
is the father of all righteousness.
men and women spryng of Christ. After the same manner is here the unrighteous
stuard an ensample unto us, in his wisdom and diligence only, in that he
provided so wisely for him self, that we with righteousness should be as
dilligent to provide for our souls, as he with unrighteousness provided for his
body.

Likewise may thou soil all other textes which sound as though it were
between us and GOD, as it is in the world where the reward is more looked upon,
then the labor: yea, where men hate the labor, and work falssy with the
body, and not with the heart, and no longer then they are looked upon, that the
labor may appear outward only.

WHen Christ says Math. v. Blessed Math. 5.
are ye when they rail on you, and persecute you, and say all manner evil
sayings against you, and yet lie, and that for my sake, rejoice and be glad,
for your reward is great in heaven. Thou may not imagine that our deeds
deserve the joy and glory that shall be given unto us. For then (Paul says Romans
xi.) favor were not favor, I ca^ not receive it of favor, and of the
bounteous of God freely, and by deseruyng of deeds also. But believe as the
Gospel, glad tidings and promises For Christ's blood sake, only through
faith, God is at one with us.
of God say unto thee, that for Christ's bloudes sake only through faith, God
is at one with thee, and thou received to mercy, and art become the son of
God, and heir annexed with with Christ of all the goodness of God, the earnest
whereof is the spirit of god poured into our hearts. Of which things the
deeds are witnesses, and certify our consciences that our faith is unfeigned,
and that the right spirit of God is in us. For if I patie^tly suffer
adversity and tribulation for conscience of God only, that is to say, because
I know GOD and testify the truth, then am I sure that God has chosen me in
Christ, and for Christ's sake, and has put in me his spirit, as an earnest of
his promises, whose workyng I feel in mine heart, the deeds bearyng witness
unto the same. Now is it Christ's blood only that deserved all the promises of
God, and that which I suffer and do, is partly the curyng, healyng and
mortifiyng of my members, and killing of that original poison, wherewith I was
conceived and borne, that I might be altogether like Christ, and partly the
doing of my duty to my neighbor, whose debtor I am of all that I have
received of God, to draw him to Christ with all suffering, with all patience, and
even with sheading my blood for him, not as an offering or merit for his
sins, but as an ensample to provoke him. Christ's Christ's blood only
puts away all sin.
blood only puts away all the sin that ever was, is or shall be from them
that are elect and repent, beleuyng the Gospel, that is to say, gods promises
in Christ.

Again in the same 5. chapter, love your ennemies, bless them that curse you,
do well to them that hate you, and persecute you, that ye may be the sons of
your father which is in heaven. For he makes his sun shine upon evil, and
on good, and sends his rain upon just and unjust. Not that our works make
us the sons of God, but testify only, and certify our consciences, that we
are the sons of God, and that God has chosen us, and washed us in christ's
blood, and has put his spirit in us. And it follows, if ye love them that
love you, what reward have ye? do not the Publicanes even the same? and if ye
shall have favor to your friends only, what singular thing do ye? do not the
Publicanes even the same? ye shall be perfect therefore, as your father which is
in heaven is perfect. That is to say, if that ye do nothing but that the world
does, and they which have the spirit of the world, whereby shall ye know that
ye are the sons of God, and beloved of God more then the world? But and if ye
counterfeit, and follow God in well We must follow (...) in (...). ^o^ng.
doing, then no doubt it is a sign that the spirit of God is in you, and also
the favor of God, which is not in the world, and that ye are inheritoures of
all the promises of God, and elect unto the fellowship of the blood of Christ

ALso Math 6. Take heed to your alms, that ye do i^ not in the sight Math.
(...).
of men, to the euten^ that ye would be s^ne of them, or else have ye no reward
with your father which is in heaven. Neither cause a trumpet to be blown before
thee when thou do thine alms, We may not do good worken to be praised of
the world.
as the hipocrites do in the sinagoges, and in the streets to be glorified of
the world, but when thou do thine alms, ^et not thy left hand know what
thy right hand does, y^ thy alms may be in secret, and thy father which sees
in secret shall reward thee openly. This puts us in remembrance of our
duty, and shows what follows good works, not that works deserve it, but
that the reward is laid up for us in store, and we thereunto elect through
Christ's blood, which the works testify. For if we be worldly minded, and do
our works as y^ world does, how shall we know that GOD has chosen us out of
the world? But and if we work freely, without all manner worldly respect, to
show, mercy, and to do our duty to our neighbor, and to We must (...) to our
neighbor ^s God is to us.
be unto him as God is to us, then are we sure yt the favor, and mercy of God
is upon us, and that we shall enjoy all the good promises of god through Christ,
which has made us heirs thereof.

ALso, in the same chapter it follows. When thou prayest, be not as the
hipocrites, which love to stand and (...) seek to be praised of men.
pray in the sinagoges, and in the corners of the streets, for to be seen of
men. But when thou prayest enter into thy chamber, and shut thy door to, and
pray to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly. And likewise when we fast (teaches Christ
in the same place) that we should behave our selves that it appear not unto
men how that we fast, but unto our father which is in secret, and our father
which sees in secret, shall reward us openly. These two textes do but declare
what follows good works, for eternal life comes not by the deseruyng of
works, but is (says Paul in y^ 6. to y^ Rom.) the gift of God through Jesus
Christ. Neither do our works justify Romans 6.
us. For except we were justified by faith which is our righteousness, and had
Faith (...)l^ in (...) us and no good ^e can be done without Faith.
the sprite of God in us to teach us, we could do no good work freely, without
respect of some profit, either in this world, or in the world to come, neither
could we have spiritual joy in our hearts in time of affliction, and
mortifiyng of the flesh.

Good works are called the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. for the sprite
works them in us, and sometime fruits Good works are the (...) of Faith.
of righteousness, as in the second Epistle to the Cor. and 9. chapter, before
all works therefore, we must have a righteousness within the heart, the mother of
all works, and from whence they spring. The righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and of them that have y^ spirit of this world, is yt glorious show
and outward shining of works. But Christ (...) (...)
says to us Mar. 5. except your righteousness, exceed the righteousness of the
scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. It is
righteousness in yt world, if a man kyl not. But a Christen perceives
righteousness if he love his enemy, even when he suffers persecution and
torment of him, and the pains of death, and mourns more for his adversaries
blindness, then for his own pain, and prays God to open his eyes and to
forgive him his sins, as did Steven in the Acts of the Apostles the vij.
Chapter Act. 7. Luke. 23.
and Christ Luke xxiij.

A Christen considers him self in the law of GOD, and there puts of him
all manner righteousness. For the law suffers no merits, no deservings, no
righteousness, neither any man to be justified in the sight of God. The law is
spiritual and requires yt heart and commandments to be fulfilled, with such
love and obedience as was in Christ. If any fulfill all that is the will of
God, with such love and obedience, the same may be bold to sell pardons of his
merits, and else not.

A Christen therefore (when he beholds him self in the law) puts of all
manner righteousness, deseruinges and merits, and mekely and unfeignedly
knowledgeth his sin and misery, his captivity and bondage in the flesh, his
trespass and gilte, and is thereby blessed with the pour in spirit. Math. v.
Chap. Then he morneth in his heart, because he is in such bondage that he can
not do the will of God, and is an hungered, and a thyrst after righteousness. For
righteousness (I mean) True righteousness springs out of Christ's blood.
which springs out of christ's blood, for strength to do the will of God. And
turns him self to the promises of God, and desires him for his great mercy
and truth, and for the blood of his son Christ to fulfill his promises, and
to give him strength. And thus his spirit ever prays within him. He fasteth
True fasting, what it (...).
also not one day for a weke, or a Lent for an whole year, but professes in
his heart a perpetual sobernes, to tame the flesh, and to subdue the body to
the spirit, until he wax strong in the spirit, and grow ripe into a full
righteousness, after the fulness of Christ. And because this fulness happens not
till the body be slain by death, a Christen is ever a sinner in the law, and
therefore fasteth, and prays to God in the spirit, the world seeing it not.
Yet in y^ promises he is ever righteous, thorough faith in Christ, and is sure
that he is heir of all Gods promises, the spirit which he has received in
earnest, bearyng him witness, his heart also, and his deeds testifying the same.

Mark this then. To see inwardly that yt law of God is so spiritual, that No
flesh can fulfill the law.
no flesh can fulfill it. And then for to morn and sorrow, and to desire, yea
to hunger and thyrst after strength to do the will of God, from the ground of
the heart, and (notwithstanding all the sutlety of the devil, weakness and
feebleness of the flesh, and wondryng of the world) to cleave yet to yt promises
of God, and to believe that for Christ's blood sake, thou art received to the
inheritance of eternal life, is a wonderful thing, and a thing that the
world knows not of: but who soever feleth that (though he fall a thousand
times in a day) does yet rise again a thousand times, and is sure that the
mercy of God is upon him.

IF ye forgive othermen their trespasses, your heavenly father shall forgive you
yours. Mat. in the vj. Chap. if I forgive, God shall forgive me, not for my
deeds sake, but for his promises We cannot deserve forgeuenes of God, but he of
his mercy pardons us.
sake, for his mercy and truth, and for the blood of his son Christ our Lord.
And my forgeuing, certifieth my spirit that God shall forgive me, yea yt he
has forgiven me already. For if I consent to yt will of God in my heart, though
thorough infirmity and weakness I can not do the will of GOD at all times,
moreover though I can not do the will of God so purely, as the law requires it
of me, yet if I see my fault and mekely knowledge my sin, weeping in mine
heart, because I ca^ not do the will of God, and thyrst after strength, I am
sure that yt sprite of God is in me, and his favor upon me. For the world
lusts not to do the will of God, neither soroweth because he can not, though
he sorrow some time for fear of y^ pain, that he believes shall follow. He
that has the spirit of this world, can not forgive without amends making, or
a greater vauntage. If I forgive now how comes it? verily because I feel the
mercy of God in me. For as a man feels God to him self, so is he to his
neighbor, I know by mine own experience that all flesh is in bondage under
sin, and ca^ not but sin, therefore am I merciful, and desire God to loose
the bonds of sin even in mine enemy.

GAther not treasure together in earth. etc. Math. vj. But gather you Mat.
(...).
treasure in heaven. etc. Let not you^ hearts be glued to worldly things,
study not to heap treasure upon treasure, and riches upon riches, but study
to bestow well that which is gotten already, and let your abundaunce succor
the lack, and need of the power which have not. Have an eye to good A true
bestowing of alms.
works, to which if ye have lust, and also power to do them, then are ye sure
that the spirit of God is in you, and ye in Christ elect to the reward of
eternal life which follows good works. But look that thine eye be single and
rob not Christ of his honor, ascribe not that to yt deseruyng of thy works,
which is given the freely by the merits of his blood. In Christ we are sons.
In Christ we are heirs. In Christ god chose us and elected us before In Christ
we are all in all.
the beginning of the world, created us a new by the word of the Gospel, and
put his spirit in us, for because we should do good works. A Christian man
works because it is the will of his father only. If we do no good work, nor
be merciful, how is our lust therein? If we have no lust to do good works, how
is Gods spirit in us? If the spirit of God be not in us, how are we his
sons? How are we his heirs, and heirs annexed with Christ of the eternal
life, which is promised to all them that believe in him? Now do our works
testify and witness what we are, and what treasure is laid up for us in heaven,
so that our We must do good works because it is Gods will that we should do
them.
eye be single, and look upon the commandment without respect of any thing,
save because it is Gods will, and that God desires it of us, and Christ has
deserved that we do it.

Math. vij. Not all they that say unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.
Though thou can land God with thy lips, and call Christ Lord, and can
babble, and talk of the scripture, and know all the stories of the Bible.
Yet shall thou thereby never know thine election, or whether thy faith be
right. But and if thou feel lust in thine heart to the will of God, and
bring forth the fruits thereof, then have thou confidence and hope, and thy
deeds, and also the spirit whence thy deeds spryng certify thine heart that
thou shall enter, yea art already entered into the kingdom of heaven. For it
follows, he that hears the word and does it, builds his house upon a rock,
and no tempest of temptations can overthrow it. For the spirit of God is in
his heart, and comfort him, and holds him fast to the rock of the merits
of Christ's blood, in whom he is elect. Nothing is able to pluck him out of
the hands of God, god is stronger then all things. And contrariwise We must
hear the word of God and (...).
he that hears the word and does it not, builds on the sand of his own
imagination, and every tempest overthrows his buildyng. The cause is, he
has, not Gods spirit in him, and therefore understands it not a right,
neither works a right. For no man knows the things of God (says Paul in
the i. Epistle to the Corinthians in the second 1. Ce^. 2.
Chapter) save the spirit of God: as no man knows what is in a man, but a
ma^s spirit, which is in him. So then if the spirit be not in a man, he
works not the will of GOD, neither understands it, though he babble never so
much of the scriptures. Nevertheless such a man may work after his own
imagination, but Gods will can he not work, he may offer sacrifice, but to do
mercy knows he not. It is easy to say unto christ, Lord, Lord: but thereby
shall thou never feel or be sure of the kingdom of heaven. But and if thou do
the will of God, the^ art thou sure that Christ is thy Lord in deed, and that
thou in him art also a Lord, in y^ thou felest thy self loosed, and free from
the bondage of sin, and lusty and of power to do the will of God.

Where the spirit is, there is feelyng. For yt spirit makes us feel all
things. Where the spirit is not, there is no feelyng, but a vain opinion or
imagination. A Physician serves but Christ is our only Physician to heal
(...) deliver us of our sins.
for sick men, and that for such sick me^ as feel their sicknesses, and
morn therefore, and long for health. Christ likewise serves but for sinners
only as feel there sin, and that for such sinners, that sorrow and morn in
their hearts for health. Health is power or strength to fulfill the law, or to
keep the commandments. Now he that longs for that health, that is to say,
for to do the law of God, is blessed in Christ, and has a promise that his
lust shall be fulfilled, and that he shall be made whole. Math. v. blessed are they
which hunger and thurst for righteousness sake (that is to fulfill the law) for
their lust shall be fulfilled. This lo^gyng and consent of the heart unto the law
of God, is the woorkyng of the spirit, which God has poured into thine heart,
in earnest that y^ might be sure y^ God will fulfill all his promises that he
has made thee. It is also the seal and mark which God puts on all men
that he choseth unto everlasting life. So long as thou see thy sin, and
mornest, and conse^test to the law, and longest (though thou be never so weak)
yet the spirit shall keep thee in all temptations, from desperatio^, and
certify thine heart, that God for his troth, shall deliver thee and save thee,
yea and by thy good deeds shall thou be saved, not which thou have done, but
which Christ has done for thee. For Christ is thine, and all his deeds are
thy deeds. Christ is in thee, and thou in him knit together inseparably.
Neither can thou be damned, except Christ be damned with thee. Neither can
Christ be saved, except thou be saved with him. Moreover thy heart is Christ is
our ankerhold to salvation.
good, right, holy and just. For thy heart is no enemy to the law, but a friend
and a lover. The law and thy heart are agreed, and at one, and therefore is God
at one with thee. The consent of the heart unto the law, is unite and peace
between God and man. For he is not mine enemy, which would feign do me
pleasure, and morneth because he has not wherewith. Now he that opened thy
disease unto thee, and made thee long for health, shall as he has promised,
heal thee, and he that has loosed thy heart, shall at his godly laysure, lose
thy members. He that has not the spirit has no felyng, neither lusts or
longs after power to fulfill the law, neither abhors the pleasures of
sin, neither has any more certainetie of the promises of God, the^ I have of
a tale of Robinhode, or of some jest that a man tells me was done at Rome. An
other man may lightly make me doubt, or believe the contrary, seeing I have no
experience thereof my self. So is it of them that feel not the workyng of the
spirit, and therefore in time of temptation the buildings of their
imaginations fall.

MAth. x. He that receaueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, that is,
because he is a Prophet, shall receive the reward of a Prophet, and he yt
gives one of these litleones a cup of cold water to drink, in the name of a
Disciple, shall not lose his reward. Note this that a Prophet signifies as A
Prophet what he is?
well him that enterpreteth ye hard places of Scripture, as him that
prophesies things to come. Now he that receaueth a Prophet, a just man, or a
Disciple, shall have the same, or like reward, that is to say, shall have the
same eternal life, which is appointed for the^ in Christ's blood, and
merits. For except thou were elect to yt same eternal life, and had the
same faith and trust in God, and the same spirit, thou could never consent
to their deeds and help them. But thy deeds testify what thou art, and
certify thy conscience that thou art received to mercy, and sanctified in
Christ's passions and sufferynges, and shall hereafter with all them that follow
God, receive the reward of eternal life.

Of thy words you shall be justified, and Math. 12.
of thy words thou shall be condemned. Mat. xij. That is thy words as well as
other deeds shall testify with thee, or against thee at the day of judgment.
Many there are which abstain from the outward deeds of fornication and The
absteinyng from sin outwardly is but hypocrisy.
adultery, nevertheless rejoice to talk thereof and laugh, their words and
laughter testify against them, that their heart is vnpure, and they adulterers,
and fornicatours in the sight of GOD. The tongue and other signs oftymes utter
the malice of the heart, though a man for many causes abstain his hand, from
the outward deed or act.

IF thou will enter into life keep the commandments. Math. xix. First
remember that when God commands Math. 19.
us to do one thing, he does it not therefore, because that we of our selves are
able to do that he commands, but that by the law we might see, and know our
horrible damnation and captivity under sin, and therefore should repent and
come to Christ, and receive mercy and the spirit of God to loose us, strength
us, and to make us able to do Gods will which is the law. Now when he says if
thou will enter into life keep the commandments, is as much to say, as To
believe unfeignedly in Christ is to keep the commandments.
he that keeps the commandments is entered into life, for except a man have
first the spirit of life in him by Christ's purchasyng, it is impossible for
him to keep the commandments, or that his heart should be loose, or at
liberty to lust after them, for of nature we are enemies to the law of God.

As touching that Christ says afterward if thou will be perfect, go and sell
thy substance, and give it to the poor, he says it not, as who should say
that there were any greater perfection then to keep the law of God (for that is
all perfection) but to show the other his blindness, which saw not that the law
The law is spiritual and requires the heart.
is spiritual, and requires yt heart. But because he was not knowing that he
had hurt any man with the outward deed, he supposed that he loved his
neighbor as him self. But when he was bydde to show the deeds of love, and
give of his abundance to them that neded, he departed mournyng. Which is an
euie^dt toke^ that he loved not his neighbor as well as him self. For if he
had need him self, it would not have grieved him to have received succor of
an other man. Moreover he saw not that it was murder and theft, that a man
should have abundance of riches lying by him, and not to show mercy
therewith, and kyndly to If the rich help not y^ poor in their need, they are
but thieves before god.
succor his neighbors need. God has given one man riches to help an other
at need. If thy neighbor need and thou help him not, being able, thou
withholdest his duty from him, and art a thief before God.

That also that Christ says, how that it is harder for a rich man (who loves
his riches so, that he can not find in his heart, liberally and freely to help
the poor and nedy) to enter into the kingdom of heaven, then a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle, declares that he was not entered into the kingdom
of heaven, that is to say, eternal life. But he that keeps the
commandments is entered into life: he has life, and the spirit of life in
him.

THis kind of devils goes not out Math. 27.
but by prayer and fasting. Math. 27. Not that the devil is cast out by
merits of fasting or praying. For he says before, that for their vnbelefes
sake, they could not cast him out. It is faith Faith casts our devils.
no doubt that casts out the devils, and faith it is that fasteth and
prays. Faith has the promises of God, where unto she cleaves, and in all
things thyrsteth the honor of God. She fasteth Faith fasteth.
to subdue the body unto the spirit that the prayer be not let, and that the
spirit may quietly talk with God: she also whenever opportunity is given,
Faith prays.
prays God to fulfill his promises unto his praise and glory. And God which is
merciful in promising, and true to fulfill them, casts out the devils, and
does all that faith desires, and satisfyeth her thyrste.

COme ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the
beginning of the world: for I was a thirst, and ye gave me drink. etc. Math.
xxv. Not that a man with Math. 25.
works delerueth eternal life, as a work man or labourer his hyre or wages.
Thou read in the text, that the kingdom was prepared for us, from the
beginning of the world. And we are blessed and sanctified. In Christ's blood
In Christ's blood we are blessed from y^ curse of the law.
are we blessed from that bitter curse, and damnable captivity under sin,
wherein we were borne and conceived. And Christ's spirit is poured into us, to
bring forth good works, and our works are the fruits of the spirit, and
the kingdom is the deserving of Christ's blood, and so is faith, and the
spirit, and good works also. Notwithstanding the kingdom follows good
works, and good works testify that we are heirs thereof, and at the day of
judgment shall they testify for the elect unto their comfort and glory, and to
the confusion of the ungodly, unbelieving, and faythlesse sinners, which had
not trust in the word of Gods promises, nor lust to the will of God: but were
carried of the spirit of their father the devil unto all abomination, to
work wickedness with all lust, delectation, and gredienes.

MAny sins are forgeuen her, for she loves much. Luke vij. Not Luke. 7.
that love was cause of forgeuenes of sins. But contrariwise the forgeuenes
of sins caused love, as it follows, to who^ less was forgeuen, y^ same
loves less. And before he commended the judgment of Simon, which answered
that he loves most, to whom most was forgeuen: and also said at the last, thy
faith has saved thee, or made thee safe, go in peace. We can not love, except
we see some benefit, and kyndenes. As long as we look on the law of God
only, where we The law conde^neth.
see but sin and damnation, and the wrath of God upon us, yea where we were
damned before we were borne, we can not love God? No, we can not but hate him as
a tyrant, unrighteous, unjust, and flee from him as did Caine. But when the
Gospel, that The Gosspell comforts and makes us sa^e.
glad tidinges and joyful promises are preached, how that in Christ God loves
us first, forgeueth us, and has mercy on us, then love we again, and the
deeds of our love, declare our faith. This is the manner of speaking, as we
say. Summer is nie, for the trees blossom. Now is the blossomyng of the trees
not the cause yt summer draws nie, but the drawyng ni^ of summer is the cause
of ye blossoms, and the blossoms put us in remembrance that summer is at
hand. So Christ here teaches Simo^ by the feruentnes of love in the outward
deeds to see a strong faith within, whence so great love springs. As y^ manner
is to Certain phrases of spech expounded.
say, do your charity, show your charity, do a deed of charity, show your
mercy, do a deed of mercy, meaning thereby, yt our deeds declare how we love
our neighbors, and how much we have compassion on the^ at their need.
Moreover it is not possible to love except we see a cause. Except we see in our
hearts yt love and kyndnes of God to us ward in Christ our Lord, it is not
possible to love God aright.

We say also, he that loves not my dog, loves not me. Nor that a man should
love my dog first. But if a man loved me, the love wherewith he loves me,
would compel him to love my dog, though the dog deserved it not, yea,
though the dog had done him a displeasure, yet if he loved me, the same love
would refrain him from revenging himself, and cause him to refer the
vengeance unto me. Such speakinges find we in scripture. John in the fourth
of his first epistle says: He that says I love John. 4.
God, and yet bateth his brother, is a liar. For how can he that loves not his
brother whom he sees, love God whom he sees not? This is not spoken that a
man should first love his brother, and then God, but as it follows. For this
commandment have we of him, that he which loves God, should love his brother
also. To love my neighbor is the commandment, which commandment, he that
loves not, loves not GOD, The keeping of the commandment, declares what
love I have to God. If I loved Where perfect love to God is, there are all good
works.
God purely, nothing that my neighbor could do, were able to make me either
to hate him, either to take vengeance on him my self, seeing that God has
commanded me to love him, and to remitte all ve^geaunce unto him. Mark now
how much I love the commandment, so much I love God, how much I love God, so
much believe I that he is merciful, kind, and good, yea, and a father unto me,
for Christ's sake, how much I believe that God is merciful unto me, and that he
will for Christ's sake fulfill all his promises unto me: so much I see my
sins, so much do my sins grieve me, so much do I repent, and sorrow that I
sin, so much displeases me that poison that moves me to sin, and so
greatly desire I to be healed. So now by the natural order, first I see my
sin, then I repent and sorrow, then believe I Gods promises, that he is
merciful unto me, and forgeueth me, and will heal me at the last: then love
I, and then I prepare my self to the commandment. Luke. 10. What it is to
love god withal our heart. etc.


THis do, and thou shall live. Luc. x. that is to say, love thy Lord God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. As who should say, if thou do this, or
though thou can not do it, yet if thou ^ealest lust thereunto, and thy
spirit sigheth, mourns, and longs after strength to do it, take a sign
and evident token thereby, that the spirit of life is in thee, and that thou
art elect to life everlasting by Christ's blood, whose gift and purchase is
thy faith, and that spirit that works the will of God in thee, whose gift
also are thy deeds, or rather the deeds of the spirit of christ, and not
thine, and whose gift is the reward of eternal life, which follows good works.

It follows also in the same place of Luke. When he should depart, he
plucked out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take the
charge or cure of him, and what soever thou spendest more, I will recompense it
thee at my coming again. Remember this is a parable, and a parable may not be
expounded word by The true understanding of a parable.
word, but the intent of the similitude must be sought out only in the whole
parable. The intent of the similitude is to show, to whom a man is a neighbor,
or who is a man's neighbor, (which is both one) and what is, to love a man's
neighbor as him self. The Samaritane help him, and showed mercy as long as
he was present, and when he could be no longer present, he left his money
behind him: and if that were not sufficient, he left his credence to make good
the rest, and forsook him not, as long as y^ other had need. The^ said Christ,
go thou and do likewise, that is, without difference or respectio^ of persons:
whosoever needs thy help, him count thy neighbor, and his neighbor be thou,
and show mercy on him, as long as he needs thy succor: and that is to love a
man's neighbor as him self. Neighbor is a word of We must ever be ready to
help our neighbor.
love, and signifies that a man should be ever nigh and at hand, and ready to
help in tune of need.

They that will enterpret parables word by word fall into straights ofttimes,
whence they can not rid themselves. And preach lies in stead of the truth: as
do they which enterpret by the ij. pence, the old testament, and the new, and
by that which is bestowed, Opera supererogationis, (howbeit Superarrogantia,
were a meeter term) that is to say, deeds which are more then the law
requires, deeds of perfection and of liberality, which a man is not bound to
do, but of his free will. And for them he shall have an higher place in heaven,
and may give to other of his merits: or of which the pope after his death
may give pardons from the pains of purgatory.

Against which exposition I answer: first, a greater perfection then the
law, is there not. A greater perfection then to love God, and his will, which
is the commandments, with all thine heart, with all thy soul, with all thy
strength, with all thy mind, is there none. And to love a man's neighbor as
himself, is like the same. It is a wonderful love wherewith a man loves
himself. As glad as I would be to receive pardon of mine own life, (if I had
deserved death) so glad ought I to be, to defend my neighbors life, without
respect of my life, or of my good. A man ought neither to spare his goods, nor
yet himself for his brothers sake, after the ensample of Christ 1. John 3.
John. 3.
Herein (says he) perceive we love, in that he (yt is to say, Christ) gave his
life for us. We ought therefore to bestow our lives for the brethren. Now
says Christ, John xv. John 15.
There is no greater love, then that a man bestow his life for his friend.

Moreover no man ca^ fulfill the law. For (John says i. Chapter of the said
epistle) 1. John. 1.
if we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. If
we knowledge our sins, he is faithful and righteous, to forgive us our
sins, and to purge us from all iniquity. And in the Pater noster also we
say, father forgive us our sins. Now if we be all sinners, none fulfilleth the
law. For he that fulfilleth the Works that the Papists called works, more
then the law requires.
law, is no sinner. In the law may neither Peter nor Paul, nor any other
creature, save Christ only, rejoice. In the blood of Christ, which fulfilled
the law for us, may every parson that repents, believes, loueeth the law,
and mourns for strength to fulfill it, rejoice, be he never so weak a
sinner. The two pence therefore and the credence that he left behind him, to
bestow more (if need were) signifies that he was every where merciful, both
present and absent, without fayning, cloking, complaining, or excusing, and
forsook not his neighbor as long as he had need. Which example I pray God men
may follow, and let opera supererogationis alone.

MAry has chose^ a good part, which shall not be taken from her. Luke x. Luke
10.
She was first chosen of God, and called by grace, both to know her sin, and
also to hear the word of faith, health, and glad tidinges of mercy in Christ,
and faith was given her to believe, and the spirit of God loosed her heart from
the bondage of sin. Then consented she to the will of God again, and above
all things had delectation to hear the word, wherein she had obtained
everlasting health, and namely, of his own mouth which had purchased so great
mercy for her, God chooses us first, and loves us first, and opens our eyes
to see his exceeding aboundaunt love to us in Christ, and then love we again,
and accept his will above all things, and serve him in that office whereunto
he has chosen us.

Sell that ye have and give alms. And make you bags which wax not old, and
treasure which fails not in heaven. Luke. xij. Luke. 12.
This and such like are not spoken that we should work as hyrelinges in
respect of reward, and as though we should obtain heaven with merit. For he
says a little before, fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure
to give you a kingdom. The kingdom comes Whatsoever we have, we receive it
of the mercy and goodness of God.
then of the good will of almighty God thorough Christ. And such things are
spoken partly to put us in remembrance of our duty to be kind again. As is
that saying, let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good
works, may glorify your father which is in heaven. As who should say, if God
has given you so great gifts, see ye be not unthankful, but bestow them
unto his praise. Some things are spoken to move us, The great diversity and
manner of the speaking of the Scriptures.
to put our trust in God, as are these. Behold the Lyllies of the field.
Behold the birds of the air. If your children ask you bread, will ye
proffer them a stone? and many such like. Some are spoken to put us in
remembrance to be sober, to watch, and pray, and to prepare our selves against
temptations, and that we should understand and know, how that temptations, and
occasion of evil come then most, when they are least looked for: least we
should be careless, and sure of our selves, negligent, and unprepared. Some
things are spoken, that we should fear the wonderful and inco^prehensible
judgments of God, lest we should presume. Some to comfort us that we despair
not. And for like causes are all the ensamples of the old Testament. In
conclusion the scripture speaks many things as the world speaks. But they
may not be worldly understand, but ghostly and spiritually, yea the spirit of
God only understands them, and where he is not, there is not the
understanding of the Scripture. But unfruitful disputyng, and braulyng about
words.

The scripture says, God sees, God hears, God smells, God walks, The
sayings of the Scriptures may not be grossly understand.
God is with them, God is not with them, God is angry, God is pleased, God
sends his spirit, God takes his spirit away, and a thousand such like.
And yet is none of them true after the worldly manner, and as the words
sound. Read the second chapter of Paul to the Corinthians: The natural man
understands not the The natural man understands not the things of God.
things of God, but the spirit of God only, and we (says he) have received
the spirit which is of God, to understand the things which are given us of
God. For without the spirit it is impossible to understand them. Read also the
viij. to the Romans. They Romans 8.
that are led with the spirit of God, are the sons of GOD. Now the son
knows his fathers will, and the servant that has not the spirit of Christ
(says Paul) is none of his. Likewise he that has not the spirit of GOD, is
none of gods, for it is both one spirit, as thou may see in the same place.

Now he that is of God, hears the word of God. John. viij. and who is John. 8.
of God, but he that has the spirit of God? Furthermore (says he) ye hear
it not, because ye are not of God, that is, ye have no lust in the word of God,
for ye understand it not, and that because his spirit is not in you.

For as much then as the Scripture is no thing else, but that which the spirit
The scripture is nothing else but that which the spirit of God has spoken.
of GOD has spoken by the Prophets and Apostles, and can not be understand,
but of the same spirit: Let every man pray to God, to send him his spirit to
loose him from his natural blindness and ignorance, and to give him
understanding, and feelyng of the things of God, and of the speaking of the
spirit of GOD. And mark this process. First we are damned of nature, so
conceived and borne, as a Serpent is a Serpent, and a tode a tode, and a snake
a snake by nature. And as thou ^eest a young child, which has pleasure in many
things wherein is present death, as in fire, water and so forth, would slay
him self with a thousand deaths, if he were not waited upon, and kept
therfro. Even so we, if we should live these thousand years could in all that
time delight in no other thing, nor yet seek any other thing, but that wherein
is death of the soul.

Secondarily of the whole multitude of the nature of man, whom God has elect
and chosen, and to whom he has appointed mercy and grace in Christ, to them
sends he his spirit, which opens their eyes, shows them their misery,
and brings them unto the knowledge of them selves, so that they hate and
abhor them selves, are astonyed, and amassed and at their wits ends,
neither wot what to do, or where to seek health. Then lest they should flee
from God by desperation, he comfort the^ again with his sweet promises in
Christ, and certifieth their hearts that for Christ's sake, they are received By
Faith in Christ, we are brought to the state of salvation.
to mercy, and their sins forgiven, and they elect and made the sons of
GOD, and heirs with Christ of eternal life: and thus through faith are they
set at peace with God.

Now may not we axe why GOD chooses one and not an other, either think that God
is unjust to damn us before we do any actual deed, seeing that God works his
own will with all his creatures.
god has power over all his creatures of right, to do with the^ what he list,
or to make of every one of them as he lists. Our darkness can not perceive his
light. God will be feared, and not have his secret judgments known. Moreover
we by the light of faith see a thousand things, which are impossible to an
infidel to see. So likewise no doubt in the light of the clear vision of God,
we shall see things which now God will not have known. For pride ever
acco^panieth hye knowledge, but grace accompanyeth mekenes. Let us therefore
give diligence rather to do the will of GOD, then to search his secrets which
are not profitable for us to know.

When we are thus reconciled to God, made the friends of GOD and heirs of
eternal life, the spirit that GOD has poured into us, testifies that we may
not live after our old deeds of ignorance. For how is it possible, If we
believe in god, we must put of the old man and his works.
that we should repent, and abhor them, and yet have lust to live in them? We
are sure therefore that GOD has created, and made us new in Christ, and put his
spirit in us, that we should live a new life, which is the life of good
works.

That thou may know what are good works, and the end and intent of good
works, or wherefore good works serve, mark this that follows.

The life of a Christen man is inward Good works what they are, and to what
end they serve.
between him and God, and properly is the consent of the spirit to the will of
God, and to the honor of God. And Gods honor is the final end of all good
works.

Good works are all things that are done within the laws of God, in which
God is honored, and for which thanks are given to God.

Fasting is to abstain from surfeting, Fasting, the true use thereof.
or over much eating, from dronkennes, and care of the world (as thou may
read Luke. xxj.) and the end of fasting is to tame the body, that the spirit
may have a free course to God, and may quietly talk with God. For over much
eating and drinkyng, and care of worldly business, press down the spirit,
choke her and tangle her that she can not lift up her self to GOD. Now he that
fasteth for any other intent, then to subdue the body, that the spirit may
wait on God, and freely exercise her self in the things of God: the same is
blind, and wotteth not what he does, erreth and shoteth at a wrong mark, and
his intent and imagination is abominable in the sight of GOD. When thou
fastest from meat, and drinkest true fasting, what it is.
all day, is that a Christen fast? either to eat at one meal, that were
sufficient for four? A man at four times may bear that he ca^ not at ones.
Some Supersticious fasting.
fast from meat and drink, and yet so tangle them selves in worldly business
that they can not once think on God. Some abstain from butter, some from
eggs, some from all manner white meat, some this day, some that day, some in
the honor of this Saint, some of that, and every man for a sundry purpose. Some
for the toth ache, some for the head ache, for fevers, pestilence, for soden
death, for hangyng, drounyng, and to be delivered from the pains of hell. Some
are so mad that the fast one of the Thursdayes between the two S. Mary days in
the worship of that Saint whose day is hallowed, between Christemas and
Candelmas, and that to be delivered from the pestilence. All those me^ fast
without conscience of god, and without knowledge of y^ true intent of fasting,
and do no other then honor Saints, as the Gentiles and heathen worshyped their
Idols, and are drowned in blyndnes, and know not of the Testament that God has
made to ma^ward in Christ's blood. In God have they neither hope nor
confidence, neither believe his promyses, neither know his will, but are yet in
captivity under the prince of darkness.

WAtch is not only to abstain from Supersticious watching.
sleep, but also to be circumspect and to cast all perils: as a man should
watch a Tower or a Castle. We must remember that the snares of the devil are
infinite and innumerable, and that every moment arise new temptations, and that
in all places mete us fresh occasions. Against which we must prepare True
watching.
our selves, and turn to God, and complain to him, and make our move, and
desire him of his mercy to be our shield, our Tower, our Castle, and defense
from all evil, to put his strength in us (for without him we can do naught)
and above all things we must call to mind what promises god has made, and
what he has sworn that he will do to us for Christ's sake, and with strong
faith cleave unto them, and desire him of his mercy, and for y^ love that he
has to Christ, and for his truths sake to fulfill his promises. If we thus
clean to God with strong faith, and believe his words: the^ (as says Paul. j.
Cor. x,) God is faithful, that he will not suffer us to be tempted above that
we are able, or above our might, y^ is to say, if we cleave to his promises,
and not to our own fantasies, and imaginatio^s, he will put might and power
into us, that shall be stronger then all the temptation, which he shall suffer
to be against us.

PRayer is a mournyng, alo^gyng and a desire of the spirit to Godward Prayer
what it i^.
for that which she lacks, as a sick morneth and soroweth in his heart,
lo^gyng for health. Faith ever prays. For after that by faith we are
reconciled to God, and have received mercy, and forgiveness of God, the spirit
longs and thyrsteth for strength, to do the will of God, and that God may be
honored, his name hallowed, and his pleasure and will fulfilled. The spirit
wayteth, and watches on the will of God, and ever has her own fragilitie,
and weakness before her eyes, and when she sees temptation and peril drawnye,
she turns to God, and to the testament that God has made to all that believe
and trust in Christ's blood, and desires God for his mercy, truth, and for the
love he has to Christ, that he will fulfill his promise, that he will succor,
help, and give us strength, and that he will sanctify his name in us and
fulfill his godly will in us, and that he will not look on our sin and
iniquity, but on his mercy, on his truth, and on the love that he owes to his
son Christ, and for his sake to keep us from temptation, that we be not
overcome, and that he deliver us from evil, and what soever moves us contrary
to his godly will.

Moreover of his own experience, True prayer.
he feels other men's need, and no less commends to God the infirmities of
other, then his own, knowing that there is no strength, no help, no succor,
but of God only. And as merciful as he feels God in his heart to himself
ward, so merciful is he to other, and as greatly as he fealeth his own
misery, so great compassion has he on other. His neighbor is no less care to
him, then himself. He feels his neighbors grief, no less then his own.
And whensoever he sees occasion he cannot but pray for his neighbor, as well
as for himself: his nature is to seek the honor of God in all men, and to
draw (as much as in him is) all men unto God. This is the law of love, which
springs out of Christ's blood, into the hearts of all them that have their
trust in him. No man needs to bid a Christen man to pray, if he see his
neighbors need: if he see it not, put him in remembrance only, and then he
can not but do his duty.

Now, as touching we desire one an other to pray for us, that do we to put our
neighbor in remembrance of his duty, and not that we trust in his holiness.
Our trust is in God, in Christ, True prayer is not without faith and charity.
and in the truth of Gods promises, we have also a promise that when ij. or
iij. or more agree together in any thing according to the will of God, God
hears us. Notwithstanding, as God hears many, so hears he few, and so
hears he one, if he pray after the will of God, and desire the honor of God.
He that desires mercy, the same feels his own misery, and sin, and
mourns in his heart for to be delivered, that he might honor God, and God for
his truth must hear him, which says by the mouth of Christ. Mat. v. Blessed
are they that honger and thyrst after righteousness, for they Math. 5.
shall be filled. God for his truths sake must put yt righteousness of Christ
in him, and wash his unrighteousness away in the blood of Christ. And be the
sinner never so weak, never so feeble and frail, sin he never so often and so
grievous, yet so long as this lust, desire, and mourning to be delivered
remains in him, God sees not his sins, reckons them not, for his truths
sake, and love to Christ. He is not a sinner in the sight of God, that would be
no sinner. He yt would He that repents his sin is no sinner before God.
be delivered, has his heart loose already. His heart sins not, but mourns,
repents, and consents unto the law and will of God, and justifies God,
that is, bears record that God which made the law, is righteous and just.
And such an heart, trusting in Christ's blood, is accepted for full righteous.
And his weakness, infirmity, and frailetie is pardoned, and his sins not
looked upon: until God put more strength in him, and fulfill his lust.

When the weak in yt faith, and inexpert in the mysteries of Christ, desire
How we should pray for our neighbor.
us to pray for them, then ought we to lead them to the truth and promises of
God, and teach them to put their trust in the promises of God, in love that God
has to Christ and to us for his sake, and to strength their weak consciences,
showing and proving by the Scripture, that as long as they follow the spirit
and resist sin, it is impossible they should fall so deep that God shall
not pull them up again, if they hold fast by the anchor of faith, having trust
and confidence in Christ. The love that God has to Christ is infinite, and
Christ did and suffered all things, not for himself, to obtain favor or
ought else: for he had ever the full favor of God, and was ever Lord over all
things, but to reconcile us to God, and to make us heirs with him of his
fathers kingdom. And God has promised, that whosoever calls on his name
shall never be confounded or ashamed. Romans ix. If the righteous fall Romans 9.
(says the Scripture) he shall not be broused, the Lord shall put his hand
under him. Who is righteous but he that trusts in Christ's blood, be he
never so weak: Christ is our righteousness, and in him ought we to teach Christ
is our righteousness.
all men to trust, and to expound unto all men the Testament, that God has
made to us sinners in Christ's blood. This ought we to do, and not make a pray
of them to lead them captive, to sit in their consciences, and to teach them
to trust in our holiness, good deeds and prayers, to the intent that we would
feed our idle, and slow bellies of their great labor and sweat, and so to
make our selves Christ's and saviors. For if I take on me to save other by my
merits, make I not my self a Christ and a savior, and am in deed a false
Prophet, and a true Antichrist, and exalt my self, and sit in the temple of
God, that is to wytt, the consciences of men? Among Christen me^, Love among
Christen me^ makes all things common.
love makes all things common: every man is others debtor, and every man is
bound to minister to his neighbor, and to supply his neighbors lack, of that
wherewith God has endued him. As thou see in the world, how the Lords and
officers minister peace in the common wealth, punish murderers, thieves, and
evil doers, and to maintain their order and estate, do the commons minister
to them again, rent, tribute, tole, and custom. So in the Gospel, the
curates which in every parish preach the Gospel, ought of outie to receive an
honest living for them, and their households, and eue^ so ought the other
officers, which are necessarily required in the common wealth of Christ. We
need not to use filthy lucre in the Gospel, to chop and chainge, and to play
the Tauernars, altering the word of God, as they do their wines to their most
aduau^tage, and to fashion Gods word after every man's mouth, or to abuse the
name of Christ, to obtain thereby authority and power, to feed our slow
bellies. Now see thou what prayer is, the end thereof, and wherefore it
serves.

If thou give me a thousand pound to pray for thee, I am no more bound then I
was before. Man's imagination Man's Imagination cannot alter the law of god,
neither make it more or less.
can make the commandment of God neither greater nor smaller, neither can to
the law of God, either add or minishe. Gods commandment is as great as
himself. I am bound to love the Turk with all my might and power, yea, and
above my power, even from the ground of my heart, after the ensample that Christ
loved me, neither to spare goods, body, or life, to win him to Christ. And
what can I do more for thee, if thou gave me all the world? Where I see
need, there can I not but pray, if Gods spirit be in me.

Alms is a greek word, and signifies Almes^ what it is.
mercy. One Christian is debtor to an other at his need, of all that he is
able to do for him, until his need be sufficed. Every Christian man ought to
have Christ always before his eyes, as an ensample to counterfeite and follow,
and to do to his neighbor as Christ has done to him, as Paul teaches in all
his epistles, and Peter in his first, and John in his first also. This order
uses Paul in all his 1. Pet. 1.
Epistles. First he preaches the law, and 1. John. (...)
proves that the whole nature of man is damned, in that the heart lusts
contrary to the will of God. For if we were of God, no doubt we should have
lust in his will. Then preaches he Christ, the Gospel, the promises, and the
mercy that God has set forth to all men in Christ's blood. Which they that
believe, and take it for an earnest thing, turn themselves to God, begin to
love God again, and to prepare themselves to his will, by the working of the
spirit of God in them. Last of al, exhorts he to unity, peace, and sobernes,
to avoid braulinges, sects, opinions, disputing and arguing about words, and
to walk in the plain and single faith, and feeling of the spirit, and to
love one an other after the ensample of Christ, even as Christ loved us, and to
be thankful, and to walk worthy of the Gospel, and as it becomes Christ,
and with the ensample of pure living to draw all to Christ.

Christ is Lord over all, and every Christian is heir annexed with Christ, and
therefore Lord of all, and every one Lord of whatsoever an other has. If thy
brother or neighbor therefore need and thou have to help him, and yet show
not mercy, but withdrawest thy hands from him: then robbest thou him of his
own, and art a thief. A He that is merciful has the spirit of God.
Christian man, has Christ's spirit. Now is Christ a merciful thing: if
therefore thou be not merciful, after y^ ensample of Christ, then have thou
not his spirit. If thou have not Christ's spirit, the^ art thou none of his.
To. 8. Romans (...)
nor have any part with him. Moreover, though thou show mercy unto thy
neighbor, yet if thou do it not with such burning love, as Christ did unto
thee, so must y^ knowledge thy sin, and desire mercy in Christ. A Christian
man has naught to rejoice in concerning his deeds. His rejoicing is that
Christ dyed for him, and that he is washed in Christ's blood. Of his deeds
rejoices he not, neither counts his merits, neither gives pardons of them,
neither seeks an hyer place in heaven of them, neither makes himself a
savior of other men, thorough his good works. But gives all honor to God,
and in his greatest deeds of mercy, knowledgeth himself a sinner unfeignedly,
and is aboundauntly content with y^ place that is prepared for him of Christ,
and his good deeds are to him a sign only that Christ's spirit is in him,
and he in Christ, and through Christ elect to eternal life.

The order of love or charity Love seeks not her own profit.
which some dream, the Gospel of Christ knows not of, that a man should
begin at himself, and serve him self first, and then descend I wot not by
what steps. Love seeks not her own profit. ij. Cor. xij. but makes 2. Cor.
12.
a man to forget him self, and to turn his profit to an other man, as Christ
sought not him self, or his own profit, but ours. This term my self is not
in the Gospel, neither yet father, mother, sister, brother, kinsman, that one
should be preferred in love above an other. But christ is all in all things,
Christ is all in all things.
Every Christen man to an other is Christ him self, and thy neighbors need
has as good right in thy goods, as has Christ him self, which is he^re and
Lord over all. And look what thou owe to Christ, that thou owe to thy
neighbors need. To thy neighbor owe thou thine heart, thy self, and all
that thou have and can do. The love that springs out of Christ, excludes
no man, neither puts difference between one and an other. In Christ we are
al of one degree, without respect of persous. Notwithstanding though a Christen
man's heart be open to all me^, and receaueth all men, yet because that his
ability of goods extends not so far, this provision is made, that every
man shall care for his own household, Every one must care for their own
housholdes.
as father and mother, and thine elders that have helped thee, wife, children
and servants. If thou should not care, and provide for thine household,
then were thou an infidele, seeing thou have taken on thee so to do, and for as
much as that is thy part committed to thee of the congregation. When thou First
look to thine own household, and then to the poor.
have done thy duty to thine household, and yet have further abundance of the
blessyng of GOD, that owe thou to the poor that ca^ not labor, or would
labor and can get no work, and are destitute of fre^des, to the poor I mean
which thou know, to them of thine own parish. For that provision ought to
be had in the congregation, that every parish care for there poor. If thy
neighbors which thou know be served, and thou yet have superfluity, and
hear necessity to be among the brethren a thousand mile of, to the^ art
thou detter. Yea, to y^ very infidels we be detters, if they need, as farforth
as we maynteine the^ not against Christ, or to blaspheme Christ. Thus is every
man that needs thy help, thy father, mother, sister, and brother in Christ:
even as every man that does the will of the father, is father, mother, sister,
and brother unto Christ.

Moreover if any be an infidele and a false Christen, and forsake his
household, his wife, children, and such as can not help them selves, then art
thou bound to them, and have wherewith, even as much as to thine own household.
And they have as good right in thy goods, as thou thy self. And if thou
withdraw mercy from them, and have wherewith to help them: then are thou a
thief. If thou show mercy, so do thou thy duty, and art a faithful
minister in the household of Christ, and of Christ shall thou have thy reward We
must for christ's sake show our compassion and charity to all men, so far as
our ability will extend.
and thank. If the whole world were thine, yet has every brother his right in
thy goods, and is heir with thee, as we are all heirs with Christ. Moreover
the rich and they that have wisdom with them, must see the poor set a work,
that as many as are able may feed them selves, with the labor of their own
hands, according to the Scripture and commandment of God.

Now see thou what alms deed means, and wherefore it serves. He that
seeks with his alms more then to be merciful to a neighbor, to succor his
brothers need, to do his duty to his brother, to give his brother that he
owes him, the same is blind, and sees not what it is to be a Christen man,
and to have fellowship in Christ's blood.

As pertaining to good works, understand yt all works are good which Good
works what they ar^.
are done within the law of GOD, in faith and with tha^kesgeuyng to God, and
understand that thou in doing the^ please God, what so ever thou do with
in the law of God, as when thou make water. And trust me if either wind or
water were stopped, thou should feel what a preciouse thing it were to do
either of both, and what thanks ought to be given God therefore. Moreover put
no difference between works, but what soever comes into thy hands that do,
as time, place, and occasion gives, and as god has put thee in degree hie or
low. For as touching to please God, there is no work better then an other. GOD
looks not first on thy work as the world does, as though the bewtyfulnes of
the work pleased him, as it does the world, or as though he had need of them.
But God looks first on thy heart, what faith thou have to his words, how thou
beleuest him, trustest him, and how thou love him for his mercy that he has
showed there, he looks with what heart thou workest, and not what thou workest,
how thou acceptest the degree that he has put thee in, and not of what degree
thou art, whether thou be an Apostle, or a shoemaker. Set this ensample before
thine eyes. Thou art a kechinpage and washest thy masters dishes, an other is
an Apostle, and preaches the word of God. Of this Apostle hark what Paul
says in the. 2. Corinthians. ix. If I preach (says he) I have naught to rejoice
2. Cor. 9.
in, for necessity is put unto me as who should say, God has made me so, woe
is unto me if I preach not. If I do it willingly says he) then have I my
reward, that is, then am I sure that Gods spirit is me, and that I am elect to
eternal life. If I do it against my will an office is committed unto me, that
is, if I do it not of love to God, but to get a living thereby and for a
worldly purpose, and had rather otherwise live, then do I that office which
GOD has put me in, and yet please not God my self. Note now if this Apostle
preach not (as many do not, which not only make them selves Apostles, but
also compel men to take the^ for greater then Apostles, yea for greater the^
Christ him self) the^ woe is unto him, that is, his damnation is just: If he
preach and his heart not right, yet ministers he the office that GOD has put
him in, and they that have the spirit of God hear the voice of God, yea
though he speak in an Ass. More over how soever he preaches he has not to
rejoice, in that he preaches. We must do good works and yet put no trust in
them.
But and if he preach willyngly, with a true heart, and of conscience to God:
then has he his reward, that is, then feels he the earnest of eternal life
and the woorkyng of the spirit of God in him. And as he feels Gods goodness
and mercy, so be thou sure he feels his own infirmity, weakness and
unworthiness, and morneth and knowledgeth his sin, in that the heart will not
arise to work with that full lust, and love that is in Christ our Lord. And
nevertheless is yet at peace with God, through faith and trust in Christ Jesus.
For the earnest of the spirit that works in him, testifies and bears
witness unto his heart, that God has chosen him, and that his grace shall
suffice him, which grace is now not idle in him. In his works puts he no
trust.

Now thou that ministrest in the kechen, and art but a kechenpage, receauest
God is no accepter of persons, but receaueth all that submit them selves unto
him.
all thing of the hand of God, know that God has put thee in that office,
submittest thy self to his will, and seruest thy master, not as a man, but as
Christ him self with a pure heart, according as Paul teaches us, put thy
trust in God, and with him sekest thy reward. Moreover there is not a good deed
done, but thy heart rejoices therein, yea when thou hear that the word of
God is preached by this Apostle, and see the people turn to God, thou
consentest unto the deed, thine heart breaks out in joy, springs and
leapeth in thy breast, that God is honored. And in thine heart do the same
that y^ Apostle does, and happily with greater delectatio^, and a more fervent
spirit. Now he that receaueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive
the reward of a Prophet. Math. x. that is, he that consents to the deed Math.
^0.
of a Prophet and maintains it, the same has the same spirit, and earnest
of everlasting life, which the Prophet has, and is elect as the Prophet is.

Now if thou compare deed to deed, there is difference betwixt washyng of
dishes, and preaching of the word As all deeds are acceptable to God, that are
done in faith, so no deed to allowed good in Gods sight (how glorious to the
world soever it appear) if it be without faith.
of God, but as touching to please God none at all. For neither that, nor this
pleases, but as farforth as God has chosen a man, has put his spirit in
him, and purified his heart by faith and trust in Christ.

Let every man therefore wait on the office, wherein Christ has put him and
therein serve his brethren. If he be of low degree let him patiently therein
abide, till God promote him, and exalte him hyer. Let kings and head ofcers
seek Christ, in their offices and ministre peace and quietness unto the
brethren, punish sin, and that with mercy, even with the same sorrow and grief
of mind, as they would cut of a finger or ioynte, a leg, or arm of their
own body, if there were such disease in them, that either they must be cut of,
or else all the body must perish.

Let every man of what soever craft or occupation he be of, whether bruer,
Every man to walk truly in his vocation, is the right service of God.
baker, tailor, vitailer, merchaunt, or husbandman refer his craft and
occupation unto the common wealth, and serve his brethren as he would do
Christ him self. Let him bye and sell truly, and not set dice on his brethren,
so shows he mercy, and his occupation pleases God. And when thou receauest
money for thy labor, or ware, thou receauest thy duty. For wherein so ever
thou minister to thy brethren, thy brethren are dettours to give thee wherewith
to maintain thy self, and household. And let your superfluities succor the
poor, of which sort shall ever be some in all towns and cities, and
villages, and that I suppose the greatest number. Remember that we are We must
be merciful one to an other.
members of one body, and ought to minister one to an other mercifully. And
remember that whatsoever we have, it is given us of God, to bestow it on our
brethren. Let him that eats, eat and give God thanks, only let not thy
meat pull thine heart from God. And let him that drinks do likewise. Let him
yt has a wife give God thanks for his liberty, only let not thy wife
withdraw thine heart from God, and then please thou God, and have the word of
God for thee. And in all things look on the word of God, and therein put thy
trust, and not in a visure, in a disguised garment, and a cut shoe.

Seek the word of God in all things, and without the word of God do
nothing, though it appear never so glorious. What soever is done without the
word of God, that count idolatry. The kingdom of heaven is within us. Luke
xvij. Wonder Luke. 17.
therefore at no monstrous shape, nor at any outward thing without the word.
For the world was never drawn from God, but with an outward show, and
glorious appearaunce, and Ipocrites are vain glorious in in all their works.
shining of hipocrisy, and of feigned and visured fasting, praying, watching,
singing, offering, sacrificing, halowing of superstitious ceremonies, and
monstrous disguising.

Take this for an ensample. John Baptist which had testimony of Christ and of
the Gospel, that there never rose a greater among wemens children, with his
fasting, watching, praying, raiment, and stra^ight living, deceived the Jews,
and brought them in doubt, whether John were very Christ or not, and yet no
Scripture or miracle testifiyng it, so greatly y^ blind nature of man looks
on the outward shining of works, and regards not the inward word, which
speaks to the heart. When they sent to John asking him whether he were Christ,
he denied it. When they asked him what he was, and what he said of himself, he
answered not, I am he that watches, prays, drinks no wine, nor strong
drink, eats neither fish nor flesh, but live with wild honey, and
Grasshoppers, and wear a coat of camels hear, and a gyrdle of a skin: but
said I am a voice of a cryar. My voice only pertains to you. Those outward
things which ye wonder at, pertayne to my self only, unto the taming of my
body. To you am I a voice only, and that which I preach. My preaching (if it
be received into a penitent or repenting heart) shall teach you how to live and
please God, according as God shall shed out his grace on every man. John
preached repentance, True preachers must preach repentance.
saying, prepare y^ Lords way and make his paths straight. The Lords way is
repentance, and not hipocrisy of man's imagination, and invention. It is not
possible yt the Lord Christ should come to a man, except he know himself, and
his sin, and truly repent. Make his paths straight: the paths are the
law, if thou understand it a right, as God has given it. Christ says in the
xvij. of Mat. Helias shall Math. 17.
first come, that is, shall come before Christ, and restore all things, meaning
of John Baptist. John Baptist did restore the law, and the Scripture unto the
right sense and understanding, which the Pharisees partly had darckned, and made
of none effect, thorough their own traditions. Math. xv. where Math. 17.
Christ rebukes them saying: why transgress ye the commandments of God
thorough your traditions: and partly had corrupt it with gloses, and false
interpretations, that no man could understand it. Wherefore Christ rebukes
them Mat. 23. saying: woe be to you Pharisees, hipocrites, which shut Math. (...)
up the kingdom of heaven before me^: ye enter not your selves, neither suffer
them that come, to enter in: and partly did beguile the people and blind their
The manner and doctrine of hipocrites.
eyes in disguising themselves, as thou read in the same 23. chap. how they
made broad and large Philacteries, and did all their works to be seen of
men, that the people should wonder at their disguisinges and visuring of
themselves, otherwise then God had made them: and partly mocked them with
hipocrisy of false holiness in fasting, praying, and alms giving Mat. Math. 6.
6. and this did they for lucre to be in authority, to sit in the
consciences of people, and to be counted as God him self, that people should
trust in their holiness, and not in God, as thou read in the place above
rehearsed Mat. 23. woe be to you Pharisees, hipocrites, Math. 23.
which devour widows houses under a color of long prayer. Counterfeit
therefore nothing without yt word of God, when thou understand that it shall
teach thee all things, how to apply outward things, and whereunto to
refer them. Beware of thy good intent, good mind, good affection or zeal as
they call it. Peter of a good mind, and of a good affection or zeal chidde
Christ, Math. 16. because Math. 16.
he said that he must go to Jerusalem, and there be slain. But Christ
called him Satan for his labor, a name that belongs to the devil. And said,
that he perceived not godly things, but worldly. Of a good intent and of a
fervent affection to Christ, the sons of Zededei would have had fire to come
down from heaven to consume the Samaritans Luke 9. But Luke. 9.
Christ rebuked them, saying that they wist not of what sprite they were: that
is, that they understood not how that they were altogether worldly and fleshly
minded. Peter smote Malchus of a good zeal: but Christ condemned his deed.
The very Jews of a good intent, and of a good zeal slew Christ, and
persecuted the Apostles, as Paul bears them record, Romans x. I bear Romans 10.
them record (says he) that they have a fervent mind to Godward, but not
according to knowledge. It is an other No zeal without knowledge (...) good.
thing then to do of a good mind, and to do of knowledge. Labor for
knowledge, that thou may know Gods will, and what he would have thee to do.
Our mind, intent, and affection or zeal, are blind, and all that we do of
them is damned of god, and for that cause has God made a testament between him
and us, wherein is contained both what he would have us to do, and what he would
have us to ask of him. See therefore that thou do nothing to please God
withal, but that he commands, neither ask any thing of him, but that he
has promised thee. The Jews also (as it appears Act. vij) slew Steue^ of a
good zeal: because he proved by the scripture, that God dwells not in
Churches or temples made with hands. The Churches at the beginning were
Churches why they were first ordained.
ordained that the people should thither resort to hear the word of God
there preached only, and not for the use wherein they now are. The temple
wherein God will be worshipped, The true Temple of God is the heart of man.
is the heart of man. For God is a spirit (says Christ Ioh. 4.) and will be
worshipped in yt spirit and in truth: that is, when a penitent heart consents
unto the law of God, and with a strong faith lo^geth for the promises of God.
So is God honored on al sides, in that we count him righteous in all his laws
and ordinances, and also trust in all his promises. Other worshipping of God
is there none, except we make an Idol of him.

IT shall be recompensed thee at the rising again of the righteous. Lu. xiiij.
Read the text before, and thou Luke. 14.
shall perceive that Christ does here that same that he does Math. v. that
Math. 5.
is, he puts us in remembrance of our duty, that we be to the poor as
Christ is to us, and also teaches us how that we can never know whether our
love be right, and whether it spring of Christ or no, as long as we are but
kind to them only which do as much for us again. But and we be merciful to
the poor, for conscience to God, and of compassion and hearty love, which
compassion and love spring of the love we have to God in Christ, for the pure
mercy and love that he has showed on us: then have we a sure token that we are
beloved of God, and washed in Christ's blood, and elect by Christ's deserving
unto eternal life.

The scripture speaks as a father does to his young son, do this, or The
manet of the speaking of the Scripture.
that, and then will I love thee, yet the father loves his son first, and
studieth with all his power and wit to overcome his child with love, and
with kindness, to make him do that which is comely, honest, and good for it
self. A kind father, and mother love their children, even when they are
evil, that they would shed their blood to make them better, and to bring the^
into the right way. And a natural child studieth not to obtain his fathers
love with works, but considers with what love his father loves him with
all, and therefore loves again, is glad to do his fathers will, and studieth
to be thankful.

The spirit of the world understands The wise of this world do not
understand the speaking of God in his scriptures.
not the speaking of God, neither the spirit of the wise of this world,
neither the spirit of Philosophers, neither y^ spirit of Socrates, of Plato,
or of Aristotle's Ethikes, as thou may see in the first and second chapter of
the first to the Corint. Though that many are not ashamed to rail and
blaspheme, saying, how should he understand the scripture, seeing he is no
Philosopher, neither has seen his metaphisike? Moreover they blaspheme,
saying, how can he be a divine and woteth not what is subiectum in theologia?
Nevertheless as a man without the spirit of Aristo tell or Philosophy, may by
the spirit of God understand scripture: Even so by the spirit of God,
understands he that god is to be sought in all the Scripture, and in all
things and yet wotteth not what means Subiectum in Theologia, because The
Papists arguments.
it is a term of their own making. If thou should say to him, that has ye
spirit of god, the love of god is the keeping of the commandments, and to
love a man's neighbor is to show mercy, he would without arguyng or disputyng
understand, how that of the love of God springs the keeping of his
commandments, and of the love to thy neighbor spryngeth mercy. Now would
Aristotle deny such speaking, and a Duns man would make xx. distinctions. If
thou should say (as says John the 4. of his Epistle) how can he that loves
not his neighbor, whom he sees, love God whom he sees not? Aristotle would
say lo, a man must first love his neighbor and the^ God, and out of the love
to thy neighbor spryngeth the love to God. But he that feels the working of
the spirit of God, and also from what vengeance the blood of Christ has
delivered him, understands how that it is impossible to love either father or
mother, sister, brother, neighbor, or his own self a right, except it spryng
out of the love to God, and perceaueth that the love to a man's neighbor, is a
sign of the love to God, as good fruit declares a good tree, and that the
love to a ma^s neighbor accompanies, and follows the love of God, as heat
acco^panieth and follows fire.

Likewise when the Scripture says. Christ shall reward every man at the
resurrection or vprisyng again according to his deeds, the spirit of
Aristotle's ethikes would say, lo with yt multitude of good works may thou,
and Aristotle's and Papists doctrine.
must thou obtain everlasting life, and also a place in heaven hye or low,
according as thou have many or few good works, and yet wotteth not what a
good work means, as Christ speaks of good works, as he that sees not the
heart, but outward things only. But he that has Gods spirit understands it.
He feels that good works are nothing but fruits of love, compassion,
mercyfulnes, and of Good works are the fruits of love.
a tenderness of heart, which a Christen has to his neighbor, and that love
springs of that love which he has to god, to his will and commandments,
and understands also that the love which man has to God, springs of the
infinite love, and bottomless mercy^, which God in Christ showed first to us,
as says John in the Epistle and Chap. above rehearsed. In this (says he)
appeared the love of GOD to usward, because that God sent his only begotten
son into the world that we might live thorough him. Herein is love, not that
we loved God, but that God first loved us, and not (...) him.
he loved us, and sent his son to make agreement for our sins. In
conclusion a Christian man feels, that that unspeakable love and mercy which
god has to us, and that spirit which works all things that are wrought
according to the will of God, and that love wherewith we love God, and that
love which we have to our neighbor, and that mercy and compassion which we
show on him, and also that eternal life which is laid up in store for us in
Christ, are altogether the gift of God, through Christ's purchasyng.

If the Scripture said always Christ shall reward thee according to to thy
faith, or according to thy hope, and trust thou have in God, or according to
the love thou have to god, and thy neighbor, so were it true also as thou
see. 1. Pet. 1. receauyng the end or reward of your faith, y^ health or
salvation of your souls. But yt spiritual things could not be known save by
their works, as a tree can not be known, but by her fruit. How could I know
that I loved my neighbor, if never occasion were given me to show mercy unto
him: how should I know that How we understand the love of God to be in us.
I loved GOD, if I never suffered for his sake? how should I know that God
loved me, if there were no infirmity, temptation, peril and ieoperdy whence
God should deliver me?

THere is no man that forsakes house, either father, or mother, either
brethren, or sisterne, wife, or children for the kingdom of heavens sake,
which shall not receive much more in this world, and in the world to come
everlasting life. Luke. xviij. Luke. 18.


Here see thou that a Christen man in all his works has respect to
nothing, but unto the glory of god only, and to the mainteining of the truth
of god, and does and leueth undone all things of love, to the glory and honor
of god only, as Christ teaches in the Pater noster.

Moreover when he says, he shall receive much more in this world, of a truth,
yea he has received much more already. For except he had felt the infinite
mercy, goodness, love and kindness of God, and the fellowship of the blood of
Christ, and the comfort of the spirit of Christ, in his heart, he could never
have forsaken any thing for gods sake. Notwithstanding (as says Mark. x.) Who
soever for Christ's sake and the Whosoever for Christen sake loses any thing,
sh^l receive an hundredth fold.
gospels forsakes house, brethren or sisters etc. He shall receive an hundred
fold, houses, brethren etc. that is spiritually. For Christ shall be all things
unto thee. The angels, all Christen and who soever does the will of the
father, shall be father, mother, sister and brother unto thee, and all theirs
shall be thine. And god shall take the care of thee, and minister all things
unto thee, as long as thou sekest but his honor only. Moreover if thou were
Lord over all the world, yea often worlds before thou knew god: yet was not
thine appetite quenched, thou thyrstedest for more. But if thou seek his
honor only, then shall he slake thy If we once possess Christ by faith, then
have we all in all, and are content with that we have.
thyrst, and thou shall have all that thou desire, and shall be content: yea if
thou dwell among insidels, and among the most cruelest nation of the world, yet
shall he be a father unto thee, and shall defend thee, as he did Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and all Saints whose lives thou read in the Scripture. For all
that are past and gone before, are but ensamples to strength our faith, and
trust in the word of god. It is the same god, and has sworn to us all that he
swear unto them, and is as true as ever he was, and therefore can not but
fulfill his promises to us, as well as he did to them, if we believe as they did.

The hour shall come when all they that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, that is to say Christ's voice, and shall come forth, they that have done
good into the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, into the
resurrection of damnation, John. v. This Here note what follows of good works.
and all like textes declare what soloweth good works, and that our deeds
shall testify with us, or against us at that day, and puts us in
remembrance to be diligent, and fervent in doing good. Here by may thou not
understand that we obtain the favor of god, and the inheritance of life
thorough the merits of good works, as hyrelynges do their wages. For then
should thou rob Christ, of whose fulness we have received favor for
favor, Ioh. i. that is, gods favor was John. (...).
so full in Christ, that for his sake he gives us his favor, as affirms
also Paul Ephe. i. he loved us in his beloved by whom we have (says Paul)
redemption through his blood, and forgeuenes of sins. The forgeuenes of
sins then is our rede^ptio^ in Christ, and not yt reward of works. In who^
(says he in the same place) he chose us before the making of y^ world, that
is long before we did good works. Through faith in Christ, are we also By
faith in Christ we are made the sons of God.
the sons of god, as thou read Io. i. in that they believed on his name, he
gave them power to be the sons of god. God with all his fulness and riches
dwells in Christ, and out of Christ must we fetch all things. Thou read
also John. iij. he that believes on John. 3.
the son has eternal life. And he that believes not, shall see no life, but
the wrath of god abides upon him. Here see thou that the wrath and vengeance
of God possesses every man till faith come. Faith and trust in Christ,
expels Faith does expel the wrath of God.
the wrath of god, and brings favor, yt spirit power to do good, and
everlasting life. Moreover until Christ has given thee light, thou know
not wherein stands the goodness of thy works, and until his spirit has
loosed thine heart* thou can not consent unto good works. All that is good
in us, both will and works, comes of the favor of GOD, through Christ to whom
be the laud. Amen.

IF any man will do his will (he means the will of the father) he shall know
of the doctrine, whether it be of god, or whether I speak of my self. John.
vij. This text means not that John. 7.
any man of his own strength, power and free will (as they call it) can do the
will of god, before he has received the spirit, and strength of Christ
through says. But here is meant that, which is spokenin the third of John, when
Nicodemus marueiled how it were possible, that a man should be borne again.
Christ answered, that which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is
borne of the spirit is spirit, as who should say, he that has the spirit
thorough faith, and is borne again, and made a new in Christ, understands
the things of the spirit, and what he that is spiritual means. But he that
is flesh, and as Paul says. i. Cor. ij. a 1. Cor. 2.
natural man, and led of his blind reason only, can never ascend to the
capacity of the spirit. And he gives an ensample, saying, the wind blows
where he lysteth, and thou hear his voice, and wottest not whence he
comes, nor whether he will. So is every man that The natural man which is
but flesh, sauoureth not those things that are of the spirit.
is borne of the spirit, he that speaks of the spirit, can never be
understand of the natural man, which is but flesh and sauoreth no more the^
things of y^ flesh. So here means Christ, if any man have the spirit, and
consents unto the will of God, this same at ones wotteth what I mean.

IF ye understand these things, happy are ye if ye do them John. xiij. A John.
13.
Christen man's heart is with the will of God, with the law and commandments
of God, and hongreth and thyrsteth after strength to fulfill them, and mourns
day and night, desiring God according to his promises, for to give him power to
fulfill the will of God with love and lust: then testifies his deed that he
is blessed, and that the spirit which blesses us in Christ, is in him, and
ministers such strength. The outward deed testifies what is within us, as
thou read John. v. The deeds which I John. 5.
do testify of me says Christ. And Ioh. 13. hereby shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples (if ye love one an other. And Ioh. 14. he that has John. 14.
my commandments, and keeps the^, the same it is that loves me. And
again, he that loves me keeps my commandments, and he that loves me
not, keeps not my commandments, the outward deed testifiing of the
inward heart. And Ioh. xv. If ye shall keep my commaundeme^ts, ye shall
continue in my love, as I keep my fathers commandment, and continue in his
love. That is, as ye see the love that I have to my father, in that I keep his
commandments, so shall ye see the love that ye have to me, in that ye keep my
commandments.

Thou may not think that our We are blessed by God only in Christ our
savior, and not by our works.
deeds bless us first, and that we prevent God and his grace in Christ, as
though we in our natural gifts, and being as we were borne in Adam, looked on
the law of God, and of our own strength fulfilled it, and so bebecame
righteous, and then with that righteousness obtained the favor of God. As
Philosophers write of righteousness, and as the righteousness of temporal law
is, where the law is satisfied with the hipocrisy of the outward deed. For
contrary to y^, read thou Ioh. xv. Ye have not chosen me John. 15.
(says Christ) but I have chosen you, that ye go and bring forth fruit, and
that your fruit remain. And in the same chapter. I am a vine, and ye the
branches, and without me can ye do nothing. With us therefore so goes it. In
Adam are we all as it were wild crab trees, of which God chooses whom he will,
and plucketh them out of Adam, and planteth them in the garden of his mercy,
and stocketh the^, and grafteth the spirit of Christ in them, which brings
forth the fruit of the will of God, which fruit testifies that God has
blessed us in Christ. Note this also, that as long as we live we are yet partly
carnal, and fleshly (notwithstanding, that we are in Christ and though it be
not imputed unto us for Christ's sake) for there abides, and remains in us
yet of the old Adam, as it were the stock of the crabe tree, and ever among
when occasion is given him, shoteth forth his branches and leaves, budde,
blossom, and fruit. Against whom we must fight and subdue We must wrestle with
our old man, that we may put o^ Christ. Mat. 13.
him, and chaynge all his nature by little a and little, with prayer, fasting,
and watching, with virtuous meditation and holy works, until we be altogether
spirit. The kingdom of heaven says Christ Math. 13. is like leven which a
woman takes and hides in three peckes of meal, till all be leuened. The
leven is the spirit, and we the meal which must be seasoned with y^ spirit
by a little and a little, till we be throughout spiritual.

Which shall reward every man according to his deed, Romans 2. that is, Roma. 1.
according as the deeds are; so shall every man's reward be, the deeds
declare what we are, as the fruit the tree, according to the fruit shall the
tree be praised. The reward is given of the mercy and truth of God, and by the
deseruyng and merits of Christ. Whosoever repents, believes the Gospel, and
puts his trust in Christ's merits, the same is heir with Christ of
eternal life, for assurance whereof the spirit of God is poured into his heart
as an earnest, which loses him from the bonds of Satan, and gives him lust
and strength every day more and more, according as he is diligent to ask of
God for Christ's sake. And eternal life follows good living. I suppose
(says S. Paul in the same epistle the viij. chapter) that Roma. 8.
the afflictions of this world are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed
on us, that is to say, that which we here suffer, can never deserve that
reward, which there shall be given us.

Moreover, if the reward should depend, and hang of the works, no man should
be saved. For as much as our best deeds, compared to the law, are Our best
works are damnable in the sight of god with out Christ.
damnable sin. By the deeds of the law is no flesh justified, as it is
written in the third chapter to the Romans The law justifies not, but utters
the sin only, and compels and drives the penitent, or repentyng sinner
to flee unto the sanctuary of mercy in the blood of Christ. Also repent we
never so much, be we never so well willing unto the law of God, yet are we so
weak, and the snares and occasions so innumerable, that we fall daily and
hourly. So that we could not but dispeire, if the reward hanged of the
work. Whosoever ascribes eternal life unto the deserving, and merit of
works, must faule in one of two inco^ueniences, either must he be a blind
Pharisey, not seeing that the law is spiritual and he carnal, and look and
rejoice in the outward shining of his deeds, despising the weak and in
respect of them, justify himself. Or else (if he see how that the law is
spiritual, and he never able to ascend unto yt which yt law requires) he must
needs despair. Let every Christen man therefore Christ is our hope and
righteousness.
rejoice in Christ our hope, trust, and righteousness, in whom we are loved,
chose^, and accept unto yt enheritaunce of eternal life, neither presuming in
our perfectnes, neither despayring in our weakness. The perfecter a man is, the
clearer is his sight, and sees a thousand things which displease him, and
also perfectnes that can not be obtained in this life. And therefore desires
to be with Christ, where is no more sin. Let him that Let no man despair,
but put his hope in Christ and he shall be safe.
is weak, and can not do that he would feign do, not despair, but turn to
him that is strong, and has promised to give strength to all that ask of him
in Christ's name, and complain to GOD, and desire him to fulfill his promises,
and to God commit him self. And he shall of his mercy and truth strength
him, and make him feel with what love he is beloved for Christ's sake, though
he be never so weak.

THey are not righteous before god which hear the law, but they which do the
law shall be justified. Romans ij. This text is playner tha^ that Roma. 2.
it needs to be expounded. In the chapter before, Paul proves that the law
natural, help not the Gentiles, (as appears by the laws, statutes, and
ordinances which they made in their cities) yet kept they them not. The great
keep the small under, for their own profit with the violence of the law.
Every man prayseth the law as far forth as it is profitable and pleasant
unto himself. But when his own appetites should be refrayned, then grudgeth he
against the law. Moreover he proves that no knowledge help the Gentiles. For
though the learned me^ (as the Philosophers) came to the knowledge of God, by
the creatures of the world, yet had they no power to worship God. In this
second chapter proves he yt the Jews (though they had the law written) yet
it help them not: they could not keep it, but were idolaters, and were also
murderers, adulterers, and whatsoever the law forbad. He concludes therefore
that yt Jew, is as well damned as the Gentill. If hearing of the law only
might have justified, the^ had the Jews been righteous. But it required that a
man do the law, if he will be righteous. Which because y^ Jew did not, he is
no less damned the^ the Ge^till. The publishing and declaring of ye law, does
but utter a ma^s sin, and gives neither strength, nor help to fulfill the law.
The law kills thy conscience, and gives No man can fulfill ye law but he
that believes in Christ.
thee no lust to fulfill the law. Faith in christ, gives lust and power to do
ye law. Now is it true, yt he which does ye law is righteous, but yt does no
man save he yt believes and puts his trust in Christ.

IF any man's work that he has builte upon, abide, he shall receive a reward.
1. Cor. 2. 1. Cor. 2.
The circumstance of the same chapter, that is to wit, that which goes
before, and that which follows, declares plainly what is meant. Paul talks
of learning, doctrine or preaching. He says that he himself has laid the
foundation, Christ is ye sure foundation.
which is Jesus Christ: and that no man can lay any other. He exhorts
therefore every man to take heed what he builds upon, and boroweth a
similitude of y^ goldsmith, which tries his metalles with fire, saying, that
the fire (that is) the judgment of yt scripture, shall try every man's work,
that is, every ma^s preaching and doctrine. If any build upon the foundation
laid of Paul, I mean Jesus Christ, gold, silver, or precious stone, which
are all one thing, and signify true doctrine, which when it is examined, the
scripture aloweth, then shall he have his reward, that is, he shall be sure
that his learning is of God, and that Gods spirit is in him, and that he shall
have the reward that Christ has purchased for him. On the other side, if any
man build there on timbre, heye, or stubble, which are all one, and signify
doctrine of man's imagination, traditions, and fantasies, which stand not with
Christ when they are examined, and judged by the Scripture, he Man's foundation
is feeble.
shall suffer damage, but shall be saved himself, yet as it were through fire,
that is, it shall be payneful unto him, that he has lost his labor, and to
see his buildyng perish, notwithstanding if he repent, and embrace the truth in
Christ, he shall obtain mercy and be saved. But if Paul were now a live, and
would defend his own learning, he should be tried thorough fire, not thorough
fire of the judgment of Scripture (for that light men now utterly refuse) but
by the popes law, and with fire of Fagots.

WE must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, for to receive
every man according to the deeds of his body. 2. Corinthians. v. 2. Cor. 5.
As thy deeds testify of thee so shall thy reward be. Thy deeds be evil, then
is ye wrath of God upon thee, and thine heart is evil, and so shall thy reward
be, if thou repent not. Fear therefore and cry to God for grace, that thou
may love his laws. And when thou love them cease not til thou have
obtained power of God to fulfill them: so shall thou be sure that a good reward
shall follow. Christ rewards his own works in us.
Which reward not thy deeds, but christ's have purchased for thee, whose
purchasing also is that lust which thou have to Gods law, and that might where
with thou fulfillest them. Remember also, that a reward is rather called that
which is given freely, then that which is deserved. That which is deserved, is
called (if thou will give him his right name) hyre or wages. A reward is given
freely to provoke unto love and to make friends.

Remember that what soever good thing any man does, that shall he receive of ye
Lord. Ephesians. vj. Ephe. 6.
Reme^bryng that ye shall receive of the Lord the reward of inheritance. Col.
iij. These ij. textes are excedyng plain. Paul means Collos. 3.
as Peter does. i. Pet. ij. that servants should obey their masters with all
their hearts, and with good will, though they were never so evil. We must obey
the magistrates, because God will have it so.
Yea he will that all that are under power obey, even of heart, and of conscience
to God, because God will have it so, be ye rulers never so wicked. The children
must obey father and mother, be they never so cruel or unkind, likewise the
wife her husband, the servant his master, the subjects and commons their Lord
or King. Why? For ye serve the Lord says he in the Collos. iij. We are
Christ's, and Christ has bought us, as thou read. Romans xiiij. i. Cor. vj.
i. Pet. i. Romans 14. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Pet. 1.
Christ is our Lord and we his possession, and his also is the commandment.
Now ought not the cruelnesse and churlishness of father and mother, of
husband, master, Lord, or King, cause us to hate the commandment of our so
kind a Lord Christ, which spared not his blood for our sakes, which also has
purchased for us with his blood, that reward of eternal life, which life shall
follow the patience of good living, and whereunto our good deeds testify that we
are chosen. Furthermore we are so carnal, that if yt rulers be good, we can
not know whether we keep the commandment for the love that we have to
Christ, and to god through him or no. But and if thou can find in thine heart
do good unto him that A good lesson to teach us to know when we have the
spirit of God.
rewards the evil again, then art thou sure that ye same spirit is in
thee, that is in Christ. And it follows in the same Chapter to the
Collossians. He that does wrong shall receive for the wrong that he has done.
That is God shall avenge thee abundantly, which sees what wrong is done unto
thee, and yet suffers it for a time, that thou might feel thy patience,
and the workyng of his spirit in thee, and be made perfect. Therefore see that
thou not once desire vengeance, but remit ^emit all vengeance to God.
all vengeance unto GOD, as Christ did. Which (says Peter. i. Pet. ij.) when
he was reviled, reviled not again, neither threatened when he suffered. Unto
such obedience, unto such patience, unto such a poor heart, and unto such
feelyng, is Paul's meaning to bring all men, and not unto the vain disputyng
of them, that ascribe so hye a place in heaven unto their peelde merits. Which
as they feel not the workyng of Gods spirit, so obey they no man. If the king
do unto them but right, The fury of the Popish Clergy.
they will interdicte the whole Realm, curse, excommunicate and send the^ down
far beneath the bottom of hell, as they have brought the people out of their
wits, and made them mad to believe.

THy prayers and alms are come up into remembrance in the presence of GOD,
(in the Acts. x.) That Acts. 10
is God forgets thee not, though he come not at the first calling, he
looks on, and beholds thy prayers and alms. Prayer comes from the heart.
God looks first on the heart, and then on the deed. As thou read Gene.
iiij. God beheld or looked first on Abell, and then on his offering. If the
heart be vnpure, the deed verily pleases not, as thou see in Cain. Mark the
order. In the beginning of the chapter thou read, there was a certain man
named Cornelius which feared god, gave much alms, and prayed God always. He
feared God, that is he trembled and quaked, to break the commandments of
god. Then prayed he always. Prayer Prayer is the fruit of faith.
is the fruit, effect, deed or act of faith and is nothing but the longing of
the heart for those things, which a man lacks and which god has promised to
give him. He does also alms. Alms is y^ fruit, effect or deed of compassion
and pity, which we have to our neighbor. Oh a glorious faith and a right,
which so trusts God, and believes his promises, that she fears to break
his commandments, and is also merciful unto her neighbor. This is that
faith whereof thou read namely in Peter, Lively ^ayth to not without works,
Paul and John, that we are thereby both justified and saved. And who soever
imagines any other faith, deceaueth him self, and is a vain disputer, and a
brauler about words, and has no feelyng in his heart.

Though thou consent to the law, that it is good, righteous, and holy, sorowest
and repentest because thou have broken it, mornest because thou have no
strength to fulfill it: yet art not thou Faith makes us at one with God.
thereby at one with GOD. Yea thou should shortly despair, and blaspheme
God, if the promises of forgiveness and of help were not there by, and faith in
thine heart to believe them. Faith therefore sets thee at one with God.

Faith prays always. For she has always her infirmities and weaknesses before
her eyes, and also Gods promises, for which she always longs, and Faith
prays always and in all places.
in all places. But blind vnbeleffe prays not always nor in all places, but in
the Church only, and that in such a Church, where it is not lawful to
preach gods promises, neither to teach men to trust therein. Faith when she
prays sets not her good deeds before her, saying: Lord for my good deeds
do this or that. Nor bargaineth with god, saying, Lord grant me this or do
this or that, and I will do this or that for thee, as mumble so much daily, go
so far, or fast this, or that fast, enter in this Religion or that, with such
other points of infidelity, yea rather Idolatry. But she sets her
infirmities, and her lack before her face, The prayer of a faithful man.
and Gods promises saying: Lord for thy mercy and truth, which thou have
sworn be merciful unto me, and pluck me out of this prison, and out of this
hell. And loose the bonds of Satan, and give me power to glorify thy name.
Faith therefore justifies in the heart, and before GOD, and the deeds justify
outwardly before the world, that is, testify only before me^, what we are
inwardly before God.

Who soever looks in the perfect law of liberty and continues therein, (if
he be not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work) he shall be happy in his
deed. James. i. The law of liberty, Iaco*
that is, which requires a free heart, or (if thou fulfill it) declares a free
heart lowsed from the bonds of Satan. The preaching of the law makes no man
free, but binds. For it is the key that byndeth all consciences unto eternal
damnation, when it is preached: as the promises or Gospel is the keye, that
lowseth all consciences that repent, when they are bound through preaching of
the law. He shall be happy in his deed, that is, by his deed shall he know,
that he is happy, and blessed of God, which has given him a good heart, and
power to fulfill the law. By hearing the law thou shall not know that thou art
blessed, but if thou do it, it declares yt thou art happy and blessed.

WAs not Abraham justified of his deeds, when he offered his son James. 3.
Isaac upon the altar? James. iij. his deed justified him before the world,
that is, it declared and uttered the faith which both justifies him before
God, and wrought that wonderful work, as James also affirms.

Was not Raab the harlot justified when she received the messengers, and sent
them out another way? James. iij. that is likewise outwardly, but before GOD
she was justified by faith, which wrought that outward deed, as thou may see
Iosue. ij. She had heard what God had done in Egypt, in the red Sea, in the
desert, and unto the two kings of the Amorreans, Seo^, and Og. And she
confessed saying: your Lord God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth
beneath. She also believed that God as he had promised the children of Israel,
would give the^ the land wherein she dwelt, and consented thereunto, submitted
her self unto the will of God, and help GOD (as much as in her was) and saved
his spies and messengers. The other feared that which she believed, but
resisted God with all their might, and had no power to submite themselves unto
the will of God. And therefore perished they, and she was saved, and that
through faith, as we read Heb. 11. where thou may see how the holy fathers
were saved through faith, and how faith wrought in them. Faith is the goodness
of all the deeds that are done Faith is y^ goodness of all y^ deeds that are
done within the law of God.
within the law of God, and makes the^ good and glorious, seem they never so
vile, and unbelief makes the^ damnable, seem they never so glorious.

AS pertaining to that which James in this 3. chapter says. What avails
though a man say that he has faith, Iaco. 3.
if he have no deeds? can faith save him? And again, faith without deeds is
dead in it self. And the devils believe and tremble. And as the body without
the spirit is dead, even so faith without deeds is dead. It is manifest and
clear, that he means not of the faith whereof Peter and Paul spoke in their
epistles: John in his Gospel and first epistle, and Christ in the Gospel when
he says, thy faith has made thee safe, be it to thee according to thy faith,
or great is thy faith, and so forth, and of which James himself speaks in
the first Chapter saying: of his own will begat he us with the word of life,
that is, in believing the promises wherein is life, are we made the sons of
God.

Which thing I also this wise prove. Paul says, how shall or can they believe
without a preacher? how should they preach except they were sent? Now I pray
you when was it heard that god sent any man to preach unto y^ devils, or that
he made them any good promise? He threatens them often, but never sent
ambassadors to preach any atoneme^t between him and them. Take an ensample An
example.
that thou may understand. Let there be two poor men both destitute of
raiment in a cold winter, the one strong, that he feleth no grief, the other
grievously mournyng for pain of the cold. I then come by and moved with pity
and compassion, say unto him that feels his disease, come to such a place,
and I will give thee raiment sufficient. He believes, comes, and obtayneth
that which I have promised. That other sees all this and knows it, but is
partaker of naught. For he has no faith, and that is because there is no
promise made him. So is it of the devils. The devils have no faith. For faith
is but earnest believing of gods promises. Now are there no promises made unto
the devils, but sore threatninges. The old Philosophers knew that there was
one God, but yet had no faith, for they had no power to seek his will, neither
to worship him. The Turks and the Turks have no faith(...)know then is a God.
Saresons know yt there is one God, but yet have no faith. For they have no
power to worship God in spirit, to seek his pleasure, and to submit the^ unto
his will. They made an Idol of God (as we do for the most part) and worshipped
him every man after his own imagination, and for a sundry purpose. What we will
have done, that must God do, and to do our will worship we him, and pray unto
him: but what God will have done, that will neither Turk nor Sareson, nor the
most part of us do. What soever we imagine righteous, that must God admit. But
Gods righteousness, will not our hearts admit. Take an other ensample. Let
there betwo such as I An example.
spoke of before, and I promise both, and the one because he feels not his
disease comes not. So is it of Gods promises. No man is help by them but
sinners yt feel their sins, mourn and sorrow for them, and repent with all
their hearts. For John Baptist went before Christ, and preached repentance,
that is, he preached the law of God, right, and brought the people into
knowledge of themselves, and unto the fear of God, and then sent them unto
Christ to be healed. For in Christ and for his sake only, has god promised to
receive us unto mercy, to forgive us, and to give us power to resist sin. How
shall God save thee, when thou know not thy damnation? How shall Christ
deliver thee from sin, when thou will not knowledge thy sin? Now I pray
thee how many thousands are there of them that say, I believe that Christ was
borne of a Virgin, that he dyed, that he rose again, and so forth, and thou
can not bring them in belief, that they have any sin at all? How many are
there of the same sort which thou can not make believe that a thousand things
are sin, which God damneth for sin all the scripture throughout? As to bye as
Sins that are ac^empted no sins.
good cheepe as he can, and to sell as dear as he can, to raise the market of
corn and victuale, for his own vauntage, without respect of his neighbor, or
of the poor of the common wealth, and such like. Moreover how many hundred
thousands are there, which when they have sinned, and knowledge their sins:
yet trust in a balde ceremony, or in a lowsy Friars coat and merits, or in
the prayers of them that Faithless fruits.
devour widows houses, and eats the poor out of house and harbor, in a
thing of his own imagination, in a foolish dream, and a false vision, and
not in Christ's blood, and in the truth that God has sworn? All these are
faythlesse, for they follow their own righteousness, and are disobedient unto
all manner righteousness of God: both unto the righteousness of Gods law,
wherewith he damneth all our deeds (for though some of them see their sins for
fear of pain, yet had they rather that such deeds were no sin) and also
unto the righteousness of the truth of God in his promises, whereby he saves
all that repent and believe them. For though they believe that Christ dyed, yet
believe they not that he dyed for their sins, and that his death is a
sufficient satisfaction for their sins, and that God for his sake will be a
father unto them, and give them power to resist sin.

Paul says (to the Romans in Romans 10.
the x. chap. if thou confess with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and
believe with thine heart that God raised him up from death, thou shall be safe.
That is, if thou believe he raised him up again for thy salvation. Many believe
that God is rich and almighty, but not unto themselves, and that he he will be
good unto them, and defend them, and be their God.

Pharao for pain of the plague, Pharao confessed his sins.
was compelled to confess his sins, but had yet no power to submit himself
unto yt will of God, and to let the children of Israel go, and to loose so
great profit for Gods pleasure. As our Prelates confess their sins, saying,
though we be never so evil, yet have we the power. And again, the Scribes and
the Pharisees (say they) sat in Moses seat, do as they teach, but not as they
do, thus confess they that they are abominable. But to the second I answer,
if they sat on Christ's sear, they would preach Christ's doctrine, now preach
they their own traditions, and therefore not to be heard. If they preached
Christ, we ought to hear them though they were never so abominable, as they
of themselves confess, and have yet no power to amend, neither to let loose
Christ's flock to serve God in the spirit, which they hold captive,
compelling them to serve their false lies. The devils The devils confessed
Christ to be the son of God.
felt the power of Christ, and were compelled against their wills to confess
that he was the son of God, but had no power to be content therewith, neither
to consent unto the ordinance and eternal council of the everlasting God, as
our Prelates feel the power of God against them, but yet have no grace to give
room unto Christ, because that they (as the devils nature is) will themselves
sit in his holy temple, that is to wit, the consciences of men.

Simon Magus believed, Acts. 8. Simon Magus faith.
with such a faith as the devils confessed Christ, but had no right faith, as
thou see in the said chapter. For he repented not, consenting unto the law
of God. Neither believed the promises, or longed for them, but wondered only at
y^ miracles which Philip wrought, and because tha^ he himself in Philips
presence had no power to use his witchcrafte, sorcery and art magike,
wherewith he mocked and deluded the wits of yt people. He would have bought
the gift of God, to have sold it much dearer, as his successors now do, and
not the successors of Simon Peter. For were they Simon Peter's successors,
they would preach Christ, as he did, but they are Simon Magus his successors,
of which Simo^ Peter well proved in yt second chapter of his second epistle,
saying, there were false Prophets among the people 2. Pet. 2.
(meaning of the Jews) even as there shall be false teachers or doctors among
you, which privily shall bring in sects damnable (sects is part taking as one
holds of Fraunces, another of Dominyck, which thing also Paul rebukes. 1.
Corin. 1. and 3.) eue^ (...). Cor. 1. 3.
denying the Lord that bought them (for they will not be saved by Christ,
neither suffer any man to preach him to other). And many shall follow their
damnable ways (thou will say, shall God suffer so many to go out of the right
ways so long? I answer many must follow their damnable ways, or else must
Peter be a false Prophet) by which the way of truth shall be evil spoken of (as
it is now at this present time, for it is heresy to preach the truth) and
through covetousness shall they with feigned words, make merchaundise of you, of
their merchaundise and covetousness it needs not to make rehearsal, for they
that be blind see it evidently.

Thus see thou that James when An Epitome, or brief recital of that which
is entreated of before.
he says faith without deeds is dead, and as the body without the spirit is
dead, so is faith without deeds: and the devils believe, that he means not of
the faith, and trust that we have in the truth of Gods promises, and his holy
Testament, made unto us in Christ's blood, which faith follows repentance,
and the consent of the heart, vnthe law of God, and makes a man safe, and
sets him at peace with god. But speaks of that false opinion and
imagination wherewith some say, I believe that Christ was borne of a virgin,
and that he dyed, and so forth. That believe they verily, and so strongly that
they are ready to slay who soever would say the contrary. But they believe not
that Christ dyed for their sins, and that his death has peased the wrath of
God, and has obtained for them all that God has promised in the Scripture.
For how can they believe that Christ dyed for their sins, and that he is their
only and sufficient Savior, seeing that they seek other Saviors of their
own imagination, and seeing that they feel not their sins neither repent,
except that some repent (as I above said) for fear of pain, but for no love,
nor consent unto the law of god, nor lo^ging that they have, for those good
promises which he has made them in Christ's blood. If they repented, and loved
the law of God, and longed for that help which God has promised to give to
all that call on him for Christ's sake, then verily must Gods truth give them
power, and strength to do good works, when so ever occasion were given, either
must God be a false God. But let God be true, and every man a lier as Scripture
says. For the truth of God lasts ever, to whom only be all honor and
glory for ever.

Amen. The end of the Parable of the Wicked Mammon.
The obedience of a Christen man, and how Christen rulers ought to govern,
Wherein also (if thou mark diligently) thou shall find eyes to perceive the
crafty conueyaunce of all iugglers.
Set forth by William Tyndall. 1528. October. 2.
William Tyndall otherwise called Hitchins to the Reader.
GRace, peace, and increase of knowledge in our Lord Jesus Christ, be with thee
reader, and with all that call on the name of the Lord unfeignedly, and with a
pure conscience. Amen.

Let it not make thee despair, neither yet discourage thee (O Reader,) that it
is forbidden thee in pain of life and goods, or that it is made breaking of
the Kings peace, or treason unto his highness to read the word of thy souls
health: but much rather be bold The nature of Gods word is to be persecuted.
in the Lord, and comfort thy soul, for as much as thou art sure, and have an
evident token through such persecution, that it is the true word of God:
which word is ever hated of the world, neither was ever without persecution,
(as thou see in all the stories of the Bible, both of the new Testament, and
also of the old) neither can be, no more then the Sun can be without his
light. And The Pope is received and receaueth and per secuteth.
forasmuch as contrariwise thou art sure that the popes doctrine is not of God,
which (as thou see) is so agreeable unto the world, and is so received of the
world, or which rather so receaueth the world, and the pleasures of the world,
and seeks nothing but the possessions of the world, and authority in the
world, and to bear a rule in the world, and persecuteth the word of God, and
with all wiliness drives the people from it, and with false and sophistical
reasons makes them afeard of it: he curses them, and excommunicateth them,
and brings them in belief that they be damned if they look on it: and that
it is but doctrine to deceive men: and moves the blind powers of the world to
slay with fire, water, and sword, all that cleave unto it: For the Love of the
world is hatred of God and his holy Gospel.
world loves that which is his, and hates that which is chosen out of the
world to serve God in the spirit, as Christ says to his Disciples. John. 15.
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but I have chosen you
out of the world, and therefore the world hates you.

An other comfort have thou, that as the God defends his doctrine him self.
weak powers of the world defend the doctrine of the world: so the mighty
power of God, defends the doctrine of God. Which thing thou shall euidentlye
perceive, if thou call to mind the wonderful deeds which God has ever
wrought for his word in extreme necessity, since the world began, beyond all
man's reason. Which are written (as Paul says, Roma. 15.) for our learning,
(and not for our deceauing) that we through patience, and comfort of the
scripture might have hope. The nature of Gods word Gods word sighteth against
hipocrites.
is to fight against hypocrites. It began at Abell, and has ever since
continued, and shall (I doubt not) until the last day. And the hypocrites
have always the world on their sides, as thou see in the time of Christ. They
had the elders, that is to wit, the rulers Now our master Christ was
entreated^
of the Jews, on their side. They had Pilate, and the Emperors power on their
side: They had Herod also on their side. Moreover, they brought all their
worldly wisdom to pass, and all that they could think* or imagine, to
serve for their purpose. First, to fear the people withal, they excommunicated
all that believed in him, and put The craft o^ the hypocrites.
them out of the temple, as thou see John. 9. Secondly, they found the
means to have him condemned by the Emperors power, and made it treason to
Caesar, to believe in him. Thirdly, they obtained to have him hanged as a
thief, or a murderer, which after their belly wisdom, was a cause above all
causes, that no man should believe in him: For the Jews take it for a sure
token of everlasting damnation, if a man be hanged. For it is written in their
law, Deutero. 21. Cursed is whosoever hangs on tree. Moses also in the same
place commands, if any man be hanged, to take him down the same day, and
bury him, for fear of polluting or defiling the country, that is, least they
should bring the wrath and curse of God upon them. And therefore the wicked
Jews themselves, which with so venomous hate persecuted the doctrine of
Christ, and did all the shame, that they could do unto him, (though they would
feign have had Christ to hang still on the cross, and there to rotte, as he
should have done by the Emperors law, yet for fear of defiling their
Sabbath, and of bringing the wrath and curse of God upon them,) begged of
Pilate to take him down. Ioh. 19. which was against them selves.

Finally, when they had done all they could, and that they thought sufficient,
and when christ was in the heart of the earth, and so many bills and pollares
about him, to keep him down, and when it was past man's help, then help God
when man could not bring Gods truth works w^ ders and makes the wisdom of
the hypocrites foolishnes.
him again, Gods truth fetched him again. The oath that God had sworn to
Abraham, to David, and to other holy fathers and Prophets, raised him up
again, to bless, and save all that believe in him. Thus became the wisdom
of the hypocrites foolishnes. Lo, this was written for thy learning and
comfort.

How wonderfully were the children of The captivity of the Israelit^^ under
(...).
Israel locked in Egypt? In what tribulation. combraunce, and adversity were
they in? The land also that was promised them, was far of, and full of great
cities, walled with high walls up to the sky, and inhabited with
If(...)with(...)who can be (...).
great giantes: yet Gods truth brought them out of Egypt, and planted them in
the land of the giantes. This is also written for our learning: For there is no
power against Gods, If God be with us, who can be against us? Pharao s^aieth
the men children.
neither any wisdom against Gods wisedome^ he is stronger and wiser, then all
his enemies. What help it Pharao, to drown the men children? So little (I
fear not) shall it at the last help the pope, and his bishops, to burn our
men children, which manfully confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, and
that there is no other name given unto men, to be saved by: as Peter
testifies, Acts. 4.

Who dried up the red sea? Who slew Golias? How Moses comfort the Israelites.
Who did all those wonderful deeds, which thon read in the Bible? Who
delivered the Israelites evermore from thra^dom and bondage, as soon as they
repented, and turned to God? Faith verily, and Gods truth, and the trust in the
promises which he had made. Read the xj. to the Hebrews, for thy consolation.

When the children of Israel were ready to despair, for the greatness and the
multitude of the Giantes, Moses comforted them ever, saying: Remember what
your Lord God has done for you in Egypt, his wonderful plagues, his miracles,
his wonders, his mighty hand, his stretched out arm, and what he has done for
you hitherto. He shall destroy them, he shall take their hearts from them, and
make them fear, and fly before you. He shall storm them, and stir up a
tempest among them, and scatter them, and bring them to naught. He has sworn,
he is true, he will fulfill the promises that he has made unto Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. This is written Gods truth fights for us.
for our learning: for verily he is a true God, and is our God as well as
theyres, and his promises are with us, as well as with them, and he present
with us, as well as he was with them. If we ask, we shall obtain: if we knock,
he will open: if we seek, we shall find: if we thyrst, his truth shall
fulfill our lust. Christ is with us until the worlds end. Math. y^ last.
Let this little flock be bold therefore: for if God be on our side, what matter
makes it who be against us, be they bishops, cardinals, popes, or what so
ever names they will?

Mark this also, if God send thee to the sea, and promise to go with thee,
and to bring God tries the faith of his children.
thee safe to land, he will raise up a tempest against thee, to prove whether
thou will abide by his word, and that thou may feel thy faith, and perceive
his goodness. For, if it were always fair weather, and thou never brought into
such ieoperdy, whence his mercy only delivered thee, thy faith should be but a
presumption, and thou should be ever unthankful to God, and merciless
unto thy neighbor.

If God promise riches, the way thereto is God works backward.
poverty. Whom he loves, him he chasteneth: whom he exalts, he casts
down: whom he saves, he damneth first: he brings no man to heaven, except
he send him to hell first: if he promise life, he slays first: when he
builds, he casts all down first: he is no patcher; he can not build on an
other man's foundation: he will not work, until all be past remedy, and
brought unto such a case, y^ men may see, how that his hand, his power, his
mercy, his goodness, and truth has wrought all together: he will let no man
be partaker with him of his praise, and glory: his works are wonderful, and
contrary unto man's works. Who ever (saving he) delivered his own son, his
only son, his dear son unto the death, and that for his enemies sake, to
win his enemy, to ouercomme him with love, that he might see love, and love
again, and of love to do likewise to other men, and to overcome them with well
doing?

Joseph saw the Sun and the Moon, and xj. stars worshipping him.
Nevertheless Joseph.
ere that came to pass, God laid him where he could neither see sun, nor
moon, neither any star of the sky, and that many years, and also
undeserved, to norture him, to humble, to meek, and to teach him Gods ways,
and to make him apt and meet for the room and honor, against he came to it,
that he might perceive and feel, that it came of God, and that he might be
strong in the spirit to minister it godly.

He promised the children of Israel a Israelites.
land with rivers of milk and honny. But brought them for the space of forty
years, into a land, where not only rivers of milk and honny were not, but
where so much as a drop of water was not, to nourture them, and to teach them,
as a father does his son, and to do them good at the latter end, and that
they might be strong in their spirit, and souls, to use his gifts and
benefits, godly, and after his will.

He promised David a kingdom, and immediately David.
stirred up king Saul against him, to persecute him, to hunt him as men do
hares with greyhoundes, and to ferret him out of every hole, and that for the
space of many years to tame him, to meek him, to kill his lusts, to make him
feel other men's diseases, to make him merciful, to make him understand that
he was made king, to minister, and to serve his brethren, and that he should
not think that his subjects were made to minister unto his lusts, and that
it were lawful for him to take away from them life and goods, at his pleasure.

Oh that our kings were so nourtured How Bishops instruct kings.
how a days, which our holy bishops teach of a far other manner, saying:
Your grace shall take your pleasure: yea, take what pleasure you list, spare
nothing: we shall dispense with you, we have power, we are Gods vicars: and let
us alone with the realm, we shall take pain for you, and see that nothing be
well: your Grace shall but defend the faith only.

Let us therefore look diligently whereunto Whereunto a christian is called.
we are called, that we deceive not our selves. We are called, not to dispute
as the popes disciples do: but to dye with Christ, that we may live with him,
and to suffer with him, that we may reign with him. We be called unto a
kingdom, that must be won with suffering only, as a sick man wins health.
Our fighting is to suffer while God fights for us.
God is he that does all thing for us, and fights for us, and we do but
suffer only. Christ says, John xx. As my Father sent me, so send I you. and
John xv. If they persecute me, then shall they persecute you. and Christ says
Math. x. I send you forth, as sheep among wolves. The sheep fight not: but
the shepherd fights for them, and cares for them. Be harmeles as Doves
therefore, says Christ, and wise as serpents. The doves imagine no defense,
nor seek to avenge themselves. The wisdom of the Serpent.
The serpents wisdom is, to keep his head, and those parts wherein his
life rests. Christ is our head, and Gods word is that wherein our life
rests. To cleave therefore fast unto Christ, and unto those promises which God
has made us for his sake, is our wisdom. Beware of men (says he) for they
shall deliver you up unto their counsels, and shall scourge you, and ye shall
be brought before rulers, and kings for my sake: the brother shall betray, or
deliver the brother to death, and the father, the son: and the children shall
rise against father and mother, and put them to death. Hear what Christ says
more, The disciple is not greater the^ his master, neither the servant
greater or better then his Lord: if they have called the goodman of the house
Beelzebub, how much rather shall they call his household servants so? And Luke
xiiij. says Christ, Which of you disposed to build a tower, sits not down
first, and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to perform it? lest
when he has laid the foundation, and then not able to perform it, all that
behold it, begin to mock him, He makes a mock of him self, that casts not
the end ^re he begin
saying: this man began to build, and was not able to make an end: so
likewise none of you that forsakes not all that he has, can be my disciple.
Whosoever therefore casts not this aforehand, I must ieoberd life, goods,
honor, worship, and all that there is, for Christ's sake.) deceaueth him self,
and makes a mock of himself, unto the godles hipocrites and infidels. No man
can serve two masters, God, and Mammon (that is to say) wicked riches also.
Matthew. vj. Thou must love Christ above all thing: but that do thou How is
the Pope ^ure which takes all for Christ's sake but forsakes naught.
not, if thou be not ready to forsake all for his sake: if thou have forsaken
all for his sake, then art thou sure, that thou love him. Tribulation is our
right baptism, and is signified by plunging into the water. We that are
baptized in the name of Christ (says Paul Romans vj.) are baptized to dye with
him. Tribulation is ou^ Baptism.


The spirit through tribulation purges us, and kills our fleshly wit, our
worldly understanding, and belly wisdom: and fills us full of the wisdom
of God. Tribulation is a blessing that comes of God, as witnesses Christ,
Math. v. Blessed are they that Tribulation is a blessing
suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theyrs is the kingdom of
heaven. Is not this a comfortable word? Who ought not rather to choose and
desire to be blessed with Christ in a little tribulation, then to be cursed
perpetually with the world for a little pleasure?

Prosperity is a right curse, and a thing Prosperity is a curse.
that God gives unto his enemies. Woe be to you rich: (says Christ; Luke.
vj.) lo, ye have your consolation: woe be to you that are full, for ye shall
hunger: woe be to you that laugh, for ye shall weep: woe be to you when men
praise you, for so did their fathers unto the false prophets: yea, and so have
our fathers done unto the false hypocrites. The hipocrites with worldly
preaching, have not gotten the praise only, but even the possessions also, and
the dominion, and rule of the whole world.

Tribulation for righteousness, is not a Tribulation in the gift of God.
blessing only: but also a gift that God gives unto none save his special
friends. The Apostles, Act. v. rejoiced, that they were counted worthy, to
suffer rebuke for Christ's sake. And Paul in the second epistle and third
chapter to Timothe, says: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution. And Philip. j. he says: Unto you it is given not only to believe
in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake. Here see thou, that it is Gods
gift, to suffer for Christ's sake. And in the 1. Pet. 4. says: Happy are ye,
if ye suffer for the name of Christ, for the glorious spirit of God rests in
you. Is it not an happy thing, to be sure, that thou art sealed with Gods
spirit unto everlasting life? And verily thou art sure thereof, if thou suffer
patiently for his sake. By suffering art thou sure: but by persecuting can
thou never be sure. For Paul Romans 5. says: Tribulation makes feeling, Whereby
the are the pope and bishops sure?
that is, it makes us feel the goodness of God, and his help, and the
working of his spirit. 2. Cor. 12. the Lord said unto Paul: My grace is
sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect through weakness. Lo,
Christ is never strong in us, till we be weak. As our strength abateth, so
grows the strength The weake^ to the world the stronger to Christ.
of Christ in us: when we are clean emptied of our own strength, then are we
full of Christ's strength: and look how much of our own strength remains in
us, so much lacks there of y^ strength of Christ. Therefore says Paul, 2.
Cor. 12. Very gladly will I rejoice in my weakness, that the strength of Christ
may dwell in me: therefore have I delectation (says Paul) in infirmities, in
rebukes, in need, in persecutions, and in anguish for Christ's sake: for when I
am weak, Weakness of the flesh a the strength of the spirit
then am I strong. Meaning, that the weakness of the flesh, is the strength of
the spirit. And by flesh understand, wit, wisdom, and all that is in a man,
before the spirit of God Flesh.
come, and whatsoever springs not of the spirit of God, and of Gods word.
And of like testimonies is all the scripture full.

Behold, God sets before us a blessing and also a curse. A blessing verily,
and that a glorious and an everlasting, if we will suffer In ij. things we are
put to our chois^
tribulation and adversity with our Lord, and savior Christ. And an
everlasting curse, if for a little pleasure sake, we withdraw our selves from
the chastysing and nurture of God, wherewith he teaches all his sons, and
fashioneth them after his godly will, and makes them perfect (as he did
Christ,) and makes them apt, and meet vessels to receive his grace, and his
spirit, that they might perceive and feel the exceeding mercy which we have
in Christ, and the innumerable blessings, and the unspeakable inheritance,
whereunto we are called, and chosen, and sealed in our savior Jesus Christ,
unto whom be praise for ever. Amen.

Finally, whom God chooses to reign everlastingly with christ, him seals he
with his mighty spirit, and pours strength into The difference between the
children of God and of the devil.
his heart to suffer afflictions also with Christ, for bearing witness unto the
truth. And this is the difference between the children of God and of salvation,
and between the children of the devil, and of damnation: that the children of
God have power in their hearts, to suffer for Gods word, which is their life
and salvation, their hope, and trust, and whereby they live in the soul, and
spirit before God. And the children of the devil in time of adversity fly
from Christ, whom they followed faynedly, their hearts not sealed with his
holy and mighty spirit, and get them to the standerde of their right father
the Devil, and take his The devils wages.
wages, the pleasures of this world, which are the earnest of everlasting
damnation: which conclusion the xij. chap. to the Hebrews, well confirms
saying, My son despise not thou the chasticing of the Lord, neither faint
when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord All Gods children are under
chasticing.
loves, him he chasticeth: yea, and he scourges every son whom he
receaueth. To, persecution and adversity for the truths sake is Gods scourge,
and Gods rod, and pertains unto all his children indifferently: for when he
says, he scourges every son, he makes none exception. Moreover says the
text: If ye shall endure chasticing, God offreth himself unto you, as unto
sons: what son is it that the father chasticeth not? If ye be not under
correction (whereof all are partakers) then are ye bastardes, and not sons.

Forasmuch then as we must needs be baptized in tribulations, and through the
red sea, and a great, and a fearful wilderness, and a land of cruel Giantes,
into our natural country* yea, and in as much as it is a plain earnest, that
there is no other way into the kingdom Which way go the Bishops to heaven then?
of life, then through persecution, and sufferyng of pain, and of very death,
after the ensample of Christ: therefore let us arm our souls with the
comfort of the Scriptures: How that God is ever ready at hand in time of need
to help us: and how that such tyrants and persecutors, are but gods scourge,
and his rod to chastise us. And as the father has always in time of correction
the rod fast in his hand, so that the rod does nothing, but as the father
moves it: even so has God all tyrants The tyra^tes have not power to do
what they would.
in his hand, and lets them not do whatsoever they would, but as much
only, as he appoynteth them to do, and as far forth as it is necessary for
us. And as when the child submits himself unto his fathers correction and
nurture, and humbles himself altogether unto the will of his father, the^ the
rod is taken away: even so when we are come unto the knowledge of the right
way, and have forsaken our own will, and offer our selves clean unto the
will of God, to walk which way soever he will have us: then turns he the
tyrants: or else, if they enforce to persecute us any further, he puts them
out of the way, according unto the comfortable ensamples of the scripture.

Moreover, let us arm our souls with the promises both of help and
assistance, and The promises of God are comfortable, yea they are all comfort.
also of the glorious reward that follows. Great is your reward in heaven,
says Christ, Math. 5. And he that knowledgeth me before men, him will I
knowledge before my father that is in heaven. Math. 10. and, Call on me in time
of tribulation, and I will deliver thee. Psalm. 65. and, Behold the eyes of the
Lord are over them thet fear him, and over them, that trust in his mercy: to
deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in time of hunger. Psalm. 46.
And in Psalm. 47. says David, The Lord is nygh them that are troubled in their
hearts, and the meek in spirit will he save. The tribulations of the
righteous are many, and out of them all will the Lord deliver them. The Lord
keeps all the bones of them, so that not one of the^ shall be bruised. The Lord
shall redeem the souls of his servants. And of such like consolation are all
the Psalms full: would to God, when ye read them, ye understood them. And
Math. 10. When they deliver you, take no thought what ye shall say: it shall be
given you the same hour what ye shall say: for it is not ye that speak, but
the spirit of your Father which speaks in you. The very hears of your
heads are numbered, says Christ also Math. 10. If God care for our hears, he
much more cares for our souls, which he has sealed with his holy spirit.
Therefore says Peter, 1. Pet. 4. Cast all your care upon him: for he cares
for you. And Paul 1. Cor. 10. says: God is true, he will not suffer you to be
tempted above your might. And Psalm. 71. Cast thy care upon the Lord.

Let thy care be to prepare thy self with A Christen man's care.
all thy strength, for to walk which way he will have thee, and to believe that
he will go with thee, and assist thee, and strengthen thee against all
tyra^tes, and deliver thee out of al tribulation. But what way, or by what
means he will do it, that commit unto him, and his godly pleasure, and
wisdom, and cast that care upon him. And though it seem never so unlikely,
or never so impossible unto natural reason, yet believe steadfastly that he will
do it: and then shall he (according to his old use) chainge the course of the
world, even in the twinkling of an eye, and come suddenly upon our Gyantes, as
a thief in the night, and compass them in their wyles, and worldly wisdom,
when they cry peace, and all is safe, then shall their sorrows begin, as
the panges of a woman that traueileth with child: and then shall he destroy
them, and deliver thee, unto the glorious praise of his mercy and truth. Amen.

ANd as pertaining unto them that despise Gods word, counting it as a
fantasy, or The despisers, persecutors and they that fall from the word are
threatened.
a dream, and to them also that for fear of a little persecution fall from
it, set this before thine eyes: how God since the beginning of the world,
before a general plague, ever sent his true prophets, and preachers of his
word, to warn the people, and gave them time to repent. But they for the
greatest part of the^, hardened their hearts, and persecuted the word that was
sent to save them. And then God destroyed them utterly, and took them clean
from the earth. As thou see what followed the preaching of Noe in y^ old
world, what followed the preaching of Loath among N^. Loath. Moses and Aaron.
the Sodomites, and the preaching of Moses, and Aaron among the Egiptians, and
that suddenly against all possibility of man's wit. Moreover as often as the
children of Israel fell from God to the worshipping of images, he sent his
prophets unto them: and they persecuted The Prophets.
and waxed hard hearted: and then he sent them into all places of the world
captive. Last of all he sent his own son unto them: and they waxed more.
hard hearted then ever Christ.
before: And see what a fearful example of his wrath, and cruel vengeance he
has made of them unto all the world, now almost fifteen hundred years.

Unto the old Britains also (which dwelled where our nation does now)
preached ^ildas,
Gildas, and rebuked them of their wickedness, and prophesied both unto the
spiritual ^hey be spi^tuall: that (...) de^ilishe: ^r the de^ll is a spi^t^.
(as they will be called,) and unto the lay men also, what vengeance would
follow, except they repented. But they waxed hard hearted: and God sent his
plagues, and pestilences among them, and sent their enemies in upon them on
every side, and destroyed them utterly.

Mark also how Christ threateneth the^ that forsake him, for whatsoever cause
it be: whether for fear, either for shame, either for loss of honor,
friends, life, or goods* He that denies me before men, him will I de^y before
my father, that is in heaven. He that loves, father or mother more then me, is
not worthy of me, all this he says Math. 10. And in Mark. 8. he says:
Whosoever is ashamed of me, or my words, among this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the
glory of his father, with his holy We must in no case deny Christ.
Angels. And Luke 9. also: None that lays his hand to the plowe, and looks
back, is meet for the kingdom of heaven.

Nevertheless yet, if any man have resisted God receaueth them that come
again.
ignorantly as Paul did, let him look on the truth which Paul wrote after he
came to knowledge. Also if any man clean against his heart (but overcome with
the weakness of the flesh) for fear of persecution, have denied as Peter did,
or have delivered his book, or put it away secretly: let him (if he repent)
come again, and take better hold, and not despair or take it for a sign that
God has forsaken him: for God ofttimes takes his Why God lets his elect
fall.
strength even from his very elect, when they either trust in their own
strength, or are negligent to call to him for his strength. And that does he
to teach the^, and to make the^ feel that in that fire of tribulation for his
words sake, nothing can endure and abide, save his word, and that strength
only, which he has promised. For the which strength he will have us to pray
unto him night and day, with all instance.

THat thou may perceive how that y^ scripture That the Scripture ought to be
in the English tongue.
ought to be in the mother tongue: and that the reasons which our sprites make
for the contrary, are but sophistry and false wiles to fear thee from the
light, that thou might follow them blindfolde, and be their captive to honor
their ceremonies, and to offer to their belly.

First God gave the children of Israel a law by the hand of Moses, in their
mother tongue, and all the prophets wrote in their mother tongue, and all the
Psalms were in the mother tongue. And there was Christ but figured, and
described in ceremonies, in riddles, in parables, and in darck prophecies. What
is the cause that we may not have the old Testament, with the new also, which
is the light of the old, and wherein is openly declared before the eyes, that
there was darckly prophesied? I can imagine no cause verily, except it be that
we should not see the work of Antechrist, and iugglyng of hipocrites: what
should be the cause, that we which walk in the broad day, should not see, as
well as they that walked in the night, or that we should not see as well at
noone, as they did in y^ twylight? Came Christ to make the world more blind?
By this means, Christ is the darkness of the world, and no^ the light, as he
says him self, John. 8.

Moreover Moses says, Deuteronomy. 6. Hear Israel, let these words which I
command thee this day stick fast in thine heart, and whet Whette the on thy
children that is exercise thy children in them, and put them (...) ^re.
the^ on thy children, and talk of the^ as thou sit in thine house, and as
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up,
and bind them for a token to thine hand, and let them be a remembrance
between thine eyes, and write the^ on the pos^es and gates of thine house. This
was commanded generally unto all men: How comes it that gods word pertains
less unto us, the^ unto the? Yea, how comes it, that our Moysesses forbid
us, and command us the contrary, and threaten us if we do, and will not that
we once speak of Gods word. How can we whette Gods word (that is, to put it
in practice, use, and exercise) upon our children and household, when we are
violently kept from it, and know it not? How can we (as Peter commands)
give a reason of our hope, when we wot not what it is that God has promised,
or what to hope? Moses also commands in the said chapter: If the son ask
what the testimonies, laws, and obseruaunces of the Lord mean, that the
father teach him. If our children ask what our ceremonies (which No nor sy^
John his ghostly children.
are more then the Jews were) mean: no father can tell his son. And in the
xj. chapter, he repeteth all again for fear of forgetting.

They will say happily, the scripture requires a pure mind, and a quiet
mind. And therefore the lay man because he is altogether combred with worldly
business, can not understand them. If that be the cause, then it is a plain
case, that our prelates understand not the Scriptures them selves: for no lay
man is so tangled with worldly business as they are. The great things of the
world are ministered by them: neither do the lay people any great thing, but at
their assignement.

If the Scripture were in the mother tongue, they will say, then would the lay
people understand it, every man after his own ways. Wherefore serves the
Curate, but to teach him the right way? Wherefore were the holy days made, but
that the people should Holy days
come and learn? Are ye not abominable scholemaisters, in that ye take so
great wages Our Schole masters take great wages but teach not.
if ye will not teach? If ye would teach, how could ye do it so well, and with
so great profit, as when the lay people have the scripture before them in
their mother tongue? for then should they see by the order of the text, whether
thou iugledest or not: and then would they believe it, because it is y^
scripture of god, though thy living be never so abominable. Why the preachers
are not beloved when they say troth.
Where now, because your living, and your preaching are so contrary, and
because they grope out in every sermon your open, and manifest lies, and smell
your insatiable covetousness, they believe you not when you preach truth. But
alas, the Curates them selves (for the The curates wotte not what a Bible
means
most part) wot no more what the new or old Testament means, then do the
Turks: neither know they of any more then that they read at mass, mattens,
and euensong, which yet they understand not: neither care they, but even to
mumble up so much every day (as the Pie and Poymgay speak, they wot not what)
to sill up their bellies withal. If they will not let the lay man have the
word of God in his mother tongue, yet let the priests have it, which for a
great part of them do understand The Priests understand ^o Latin.
no latin at all: but sing, and say, and patter all day with the lips only,
that which the heart understands not.

Christ commands to search the scriptures. Search the Scriptures.
John. 5. Though that miracles bare record unto his doctrine, yet desired he
no faith to be given either unto his doctrine, or unto his miracles, without
record of the scripture. When Paul preached Act. 17. the other searched the
scriptures daily, whether they were as he alleged them. Why shall not I
likewise see, whether it be the scripture y^ thou alleagest: yea, why shall I
not see the scripture and the circumstaunces, and what goes before and after,
that I may know whether thine interpretation be y^ right sense, or whether
thou iuglest, and drawest the scripture violently unto thy carnal and fleshlye
purpose? or whether thou be about to teach me, or to disccaue me.

Christ says, that there shall come false prophets in his name, and say that
they themselves are Christ, that is, they shall so preach christ that me^ must
believe in the^, in their holiness, and things of their imagination without gods
word: yea, and that against Christ or Antechrist that shall come, is nothing
but such false prophets that shall iuggle with the scripture, and beguile the
people with false interpretatio^s, as all the false prophets, scribes, and
pharisees did in yt old Testament. How shall I know whether ye are against
Christ, or falls prophets, or no, seeing ye will not let me see how ye allege
the scriptures? Christ says: By their deeds ye shall know them. Now Against
Christ is known by his deeds. A several kingdom.
when we look on your deeds, we see that ye are all sworn together, and have
separated yourselues from the lay people, and have a several kingdom among
your selves, and several laws of your own making, wherewith ye violently
bind the lay people that never Several laws. What christ lowseth ^rely the
Pope byndeth to lowse it again for money. A secret counsel.
consented unto the making of them. A thousand things forbid ye, which
Christ made free, and dispense with them again for money: neither is there any
exception at all, but lack of money. Ye have a secret counsel by your selves.
All other men's secrets and counsels know ye, and no man yours: ye seek but
honor, riches, promotion, authority, and to reign over all, and will obey no
man. If the father give you ought of courtesy, ye will compel the son to
give it violently, whether he will or not, by craft of your own laws. These
deeds are against Christ.

When a whole parish of us hyre a scholemaister to teach our children, what
reason is it, that we should be compelled to pay this scholemaister his wages,
and he should have license to go where he will, and to dwell in an other
country, and to leave our children untaught? Does not the pope so? Have we not
given up our tithes of courtesy unto one, for to teach us Gods word? and
comes not the pope, and compels us to pay it violently to them that never
teach? Makes he not one Parson, which never comes at us? Person.
yea, one shall have v. or vj. or as many as he can get, and wotteth oftentimes
where never one of them stands. Another is made Vicare, Vicare.
to whom he gives a dispensation to go where he will, and to set in a parish
priest which can but minister a sort of dumme ceremonies. Parish Priest.
And he because he has most labor and least profit, polleth on his part, and
fetteth here a mass peuy, there a trentall, yonder dirige money, and for his
beadroule with a confession penny, and such like. And thus are we never taught,
and are yet nevertheless compelled: ye compelde to hyre many costly
scholemasters. These deeds are verily against Christ. Shall we therefore judge
you by your deeds, as Christ commands? So are ye false Prophets, and the
Disciples of Antechrist, or against Christ.

The Sermons which thou read in the Acts of the Apostles, and all that the
Apostles preached, were no doubt preached in the mother tongue. Why then might
they not be written in the mother tongue? As if one of us preach a good sermon,
why may it not be written? Saint Hierome also translated the Bible into his
mother tongue: Why may not we also? They will say it can not be translated into
our tongue it is so rude. It is not so rude as they are false liars. For the
Greek tongue agrees more with the English then with the Latin. And the
properties of the The prop^ties of the Hebrew tongue agree with the English.
Hebrew tongue agrees a thousand times more with the English, then with the
Latin. The manner of speaking is both one, so that in a thousand places thou
need not but to translate it into the English, word for word, when thou
must seek a compass in the Latin, and yet shall have much work to translate
it welfauouredly, so that it have the same grace and sweetness, sense and pure
understanding with it in the Latin, and as it has in the Hebrew. A thousand
parts better may it be translated into the English, the^ into the Latin. Yea,
and except my memory fail me, and that I have forgotten what I red when I was
a child, thou shall find in the English cronicle, how that king Adelstone
caused King Adelston.
the holy Scripture to be translated into the tongue that then was in England,
and how the Prelates exhorted him thereunto.

Moreover seeing that one of you ever Contrary preaching.
preaches contrary to an other: and when two of you meet, the one disputes
and brauleth with the other, as it were two scoldes. And forasmuch as one
holds this Doctor, and an other that: One follows Duns, an Contrary Doctors.
other Saint Thomas, an other Bonauenture, Alexander de hales, Raymond, Lyre,
Brygot, Dorbell, Holcot, Gorram, Trumbett, Hugo de sancto victore, De monte
regio, De noua uilla, De media villa, and such like out of number. So that if
thou had but of every author one book, thou could not pyle them up in
any ware house in London, and every author is one contrary unto an other. In
so great diversity of spirits, how shall I know who lies, and who says
truth? Whereby shall I try the^ and judge them? Verily by Gods word which
only is true. But how shall I that do, when thou will not let me see scripture?

Nay say they, the scriptures is so hard that thou could never understand
it but by the Doctors. That is, I must measure the mete yard by the cloth.
Here be twenty clothes of diverse lengthes and of diverse bredthes. How shall I
be sure of the length of the mete yard by them? I suppose rather I must be
first sure of the length of the mete yard, and thereby measure, and judge the
clothes. If I must first believe the Doctor, then is the Doctor first true,
and the truth of the scripture depends of his truth, and so the truth of God
springs of the truth of man. Thus Antechrist turns the rotes of the trees
upward. What is the cause that we damn Antechrist turns the roots of the
tree upward.
some of Origenes works, and allow some? How know we that some is heresy, and
some not? By the scripture I trow. How know we that Saint Augustine (which is
the best or one of the best that ever wrote upon the Scripture) wrote many
things amiss at the beginning, as many other Doctors The Scripture is the
trial of all doctrine, and the right touch stone.
do? Verily by the Scriptures, as he himself well perceived afterward when he
looked more diligently upon them, and revoked many things again. He wrote of
many things which he understood not when he was newly converted, yer he had
thoroughly seen the Scriptures: and followed the opinions of Plato, and the
common persuasions of man's wisdom, that were then famous. Philosophy


They will say yet more shamefully, that no man can understand the Scriptures
without Philautia, that is to say, Philosophy. A man must first be well seen
in Aristotle, yer he ca^ understand the Scripture say they. Aristotle.
Aristotle's doctrine is, that the world was without beginning, and shall be
without end, and that the first man never was, and the last shall never be.
And that God does all of necessity, neither cares what we do, neither will
ask any accomptes of that we do. Scripture.
Without this doctrine how could we understand the Scripture that says, God
created the world of naught, and God works all thing of his free will, and
for a secret purpose, and that we shall all rise again, and that God will have
accomptes of all that Aristotle.
we have done in this life. Aristotle says. Give a man a law, and he has
power of himself to do or fulfill the law, and becomes righteous with
workyng righteously. Paul.
But Paul and all the scripture says, that the law does but utter sin
only, and helps not. Neither has any man power to do the law, till the
spirit of God be given him through faith in Christ. Is it not a madness then to
say that we could not understand the Scripture without Aristotle? Aristotle.
Aristotle's righteousness, and all his virtues spring of man's free will. And a
Turk and every Infidel and Idolater may be righteous, and virtuous with that
righteousness and those virtues. Moreover Aristotle's felicity and blessedness
stands in avoiding of all tribulatio^s, and in riches, health, honor,
worship, friends and authority, which felicity pleases our spiritualty well.
Now without these and a thousand such like points, could thou not
understand Scripture, which (...).
says that righteousness comes by Christ, and not of man's will, and how that
virtues are the fruits, and the gift of Gods spirit, and that Christ blesses
us in tribulations, persecution, and adversity. How, I say, could thou
understand the scripture without Philosophy, in as much as Paul in the
Philosophy Paul.
second to the Collossians warned them to beware least any man should spoil
them (that is to say, rob them of their faith in Christ) thorough Philosophy
and deceitful vanities, and thorough the traditions of men, and ordinances
after ye world, and not after Christ*

By this means then, thou will that no man teach an other, but that every man
take the Scripture, and learn by himself. Nay When no man will teach, if we
desire* God will teach.
verily, so say I not. Nevertheless, seeing that ye will not teach, if any man
thyrst for the truth, and read the Scripture by himself, desiring God to open
the door of knowledge unto him, god for his truths sake will, and must teach
him. Howbeit my meaning is, that as a master teaches his prentice to know all
the points of the mete yard, first how many inches, how many feet, and the
half yard, the quarter, and the nail, and then teaches him to mete other
things thereby: even so will I that ye teach the people The order of teaching.
Gods law, and what obedience God requires of us unto father and mother,
master, Lord, King, and all superiors, and with what friendly love he
commands one to love an other. And teach them to know that natural vename,
and birth poison, which moves the very hearts of us to rebel against the
ordinances and will of God, and prove that no man is righteous in the sight of
God, but that we are all damned by the law. And then (when thou have meeked
them, and feared them with the law) teach them the testament, and promises
which God has made unto us in Christ, and how much he loves us in Christ. And
teach them the principles, and the ground of the faith, and what the
sacraments signify, and then shall the spirit work with thy preaching, and
make the^ feel. So would it come to pass, that as we know by natural wit,
what follows of a true principle of natural reason: eue^ so by ye principles
of ye faith, and by y^ plain scriptures, and by the circumstances of the text,
should we judge all men's exposition, and all men's doctrine, and should receive
the best, and refuse the worst. I would have you to teach them also the
properties, and manner of speakinges of the scripture, and how to expound
proverbs and similitudes. And then if they go abroad, and walk by the
fields, and meadows of all manner doctors and Philosophers, they could catch
no harm. They should discern the poison from the hoonny, and bring home
nothing, The disorder or over thwar^ order of our (...) men. The schole
doctrine (...) they call (...) corrupts the judgments o^ youth.
but that which is wholesome.

But now do ye clean contrary, ye drive them from Gods word, and will let no
man come thereto, until he have been two years master of art. First they nosel
them in sophistry, and in benefundatum. And there corrupt they their
judgments with apparent arguments, and with alleging unto them textes of
Logike, of natural P^ia. of metaphisike, and moral Philosophy, and of all
manner books of Aristotle, and of all manner Doctors which they yet never saw.
Moreover one holds this, an other that. One is real, an other nominall. What
wonderful dreams have they (...).
of their Predicamentes, vniversals, second intentions, Quidities, Hecseities.
and Relatiues? And whether Species sundata in chimerae, be ^aspecies. And
whether this proposition be true, (...) eus est aliquid. Whether eus be
^quiuocum, or (...). ^ns is a voice only say some. Ens is (...) says an
other, and descends into ens crea^* and into e^s increatum per mod^s in^s^os.
when they have this wise brauled viij. x. or xij. or moo years, and after that
their judgments are utterly corrupt: then they begin their divinity. Not
at the scripture: (...).
but every man takes a sundry Doctor, which Doctors are as sundry, and as
diverse, the one contrary unto the other, as there Yet in this they all agree,
that no(...)is saved (...)* (...). (...) the(...)^er* and that the
Pope(...)C^st (...) me(...)to who (...) will and take them ^^om whom (...)
will. (...): ye (...).
are diverse fashions and monstrous shapes, none like an other, among our secres
of religion. Every religion, every university, and almost every man has a
sundry divinity. Now what soever opinions every man fyndeth with his Doctor,
that is his Gospel, and that only is true with him, and that holds he all
his life long, and every man to maintain his Doctor with all, corrupts the
Scripture and fashioneth it after his own imagination, as a Potter does his
claye. Of what text thou prouest hell, will an other prove purgatory, an other
Lymbo p^trum, and an other the assumption of our Lady: And an other shall prove
of the same text that an Ape has a tail. And of what text the Graye Friar
proves that our Lady was without original sin, of the same shall the black
Friar prove that she was conceived in original sin. And all this do they
with apparent reasons, with false similitudes, and likenesses, and with
arguments and persuasions of man's wisdom. Now there is no other diuisio^n or
heresy in the world save ma^s (...) simi(...).
wisdom, and when man's folishe wisdom interprets the scripture. Man's
wisdom (...).
^^atereth, divides and makes sects, while the wisdom of one is that a
white coat is best to serve God in, and an other says a black, an other a
graye, an other a blew: And while one says that God will hear your prayer in
this place, an other says in that place: And while one says this place is
holyer, and an other, that place is holyer, and this religion Place.(...)(...).
^s wise(...) ^s (...)^ol^t^y. that ^od (...).
is holyer then that, and this Saint is greater with God then that, and an
hundred thousand like things. Man's wisdom is plain idolatry, neither is
there any other idolatry the^ to imagine of God after man's wisdom. God is not
man's imagination, but that only which he says of himself. God is nothing but
his law, and his promises, that is to say, that which he bids thee to do,
and that which he bids thee believe and hope. God is but his word: as Christ
says John. 8. I am that I say unto you, that is to say, that which I preach am
I. My words are spirit and life. God is that only which he testifies of
himself, and to imagine any other thing of God then that, is damnable
idolatry. Therefore says the 118. Psalm. Happy are they which search y^
testimonies of the Lord, that is to say, that which God testifies, and
witnesses unto us. But how shall I that do, when ye will not let me have his
Then think the papists their wicked life will show it self to their shame
and confusion.
testimonies, or witnesses in a tou^ge which I understand? Will ye resist God?
Will ye forbid him to give his spirit unto the lay as well unto you? Has he
not made ye English tongue? Why forbid ye him to speak in the English
tongue then, as well as in the Latin?

Finally that this threatening and forbidding the lay people to read the
Scripture The Pope licenced the people to read and say what they would save the
truth.
is not for love of your souls (which they care for, as the Fox both for the
Geesse) is evident and clearer then the Sun, in as much as they permit and
suffer you to read Robbin Hode and Beuis of Hampton, Hercules, Hector, and
Troylus, with a thousand histories and fables of love and wantones, and of
rybaudry, as filthy as heart can think, to corrupt the minds of youth withal,
clean contrary to the doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles. For Paul
(Ephesians. v.) says: see that fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness be
not once named among you, as it becomes Saints: neither filthiness, neither
foolish talking, nor gesting which are not comely. For this ye know that no
whoremonger either unclean person or covetous person (which is the worshipper
of images) has any enheritaunce in the kingdom of Christ and of God. And
after says he, thorough such things comes the wrath of God upon the children
of unbelief. Now seeing they permit you freely to read But the one
forbids not their pomp and be^^y cheat, as the other does.
those things which corrupt your minds, and rob you of the kingdom of God
and Christ, and bring the wrath of God upon you, how is this forbidding, for
love of your souls?

A thousand reasons more might be made (as thou may see in Paraclesis Erasmi,
and in his preface to the paraphasis of Matthew) unto which they should be
compelled to hold their peace, or to give shameful aunsweres. But I hope that
these are sufficient unto them that thyrst the truth. God for his mercy and
truth shall well open them more: yea, and other secrets of his Godly wisdom,
if they be diligent to cry unto him, which grace grant God. Amen.

The Prologue unto the book.
FOr as much as our holy Prelates and our ghostly religious, which ought
Prelates not professors but p^phaners of Gods word.
to defend gods word, speak evil of it and do all the shame they ca^ to it,
and rail on it and bear their captives in hand, that it causes insurrectio^
and teaches the people to disobey their heads and governors, and moves the^
to rise against their Princes, and to make all common and to The obedience of
mo^^ not (...). (...) they (...) no^ of(...)but(...)(...) sayuyng.
make hauoke of other men's goods: therefore have I made this little treatise
that follows co^teinyng all obedience, that is of god. In which (who soever
reads it) shall easly perceive, not the contrary only and that they lie: but
also the very cause of such blasphemy, and what stirs the^ so furiously to
rage and to belie the truth?

Howbeit, it is no new thing unto the word of God to be rayled upon, neither is
this the first time that hypocrites have ascribed to Gods word the vengeance
The hyppocrites lay that to Gods word which they themselves o^e cause of. God
warns ere he strike.
where of they the^ selves were ever cause. For the hypocrites with their false
doctrine and Idolatry have evermore led the wrath and vengeance of God upon
the people, so sore that God could no le^ger forbear nor differ his
punishment. Yet God, which is always merciful, before he would take
vengeance, has ever sent his true Prophets and true Preachers, to warn the
people that they might repent. But the people for the most part, and namely the
heads and rulers through comfort and persuadyng of the hyopcrites, have ever
waxed more hard hearted then before, and have persecuted the word of God and his
Prophets. The^ God which is also righteous, has always poured his plagues
upon them without delay. Which plagues the hypocrites ascribe unto Gods word
saying: see When God punishes ^oo^ry of the hipocrites: then say they: that
new learning is the cause thereof.
what mischeue is come upon us sense this new learning came up and this new
sect and this new doctrine. This see thou Hieremias. xliiij. Where the
people cried to go to their old Idolatry again saying: sense we left it, we
have been in all necessity and have been consumed with war and hunger. But
the Prophet answered them, that their Idolatry went unto the heart of God, so
that he could no longer suffer the maliciousnes of their own imaginations or
inue^tions, and that the cause of all such mischieues was, because they would
not hear the voice of the Lord and walk in his law, ordinances and
testimonies. The Scribes and the Christ was (...) of ^tion.
Phariseis laid also to Christ's charge (Luke. xxiij.) that be moved the people
to sedition. And said to Pylate, we have found this fellow peruertyng the people
and forbiddyng to pay tribute to Caesar, and says that he is Christ a king.
And again in the same Chapter, he moves the people (said they) teaching
throughout Jury and began at Galile even to this place. So likewise laid they
to the Apostles charge, as thou may see in the Acts. S. Cyprian also and S.
Augustine and many other mo made works in defense of the word of God against
such blasphemies: So that thou may see, how that it is no new thing, but an
old and accustomed thing with the hypocrites to wit Gods word and the true
Preachers of all the mischieue which their lying doctrine is the very cause of.

Never the later in very deed, after the preaching of Gods word, because it is
Why trouble follows the preaching of the Gospel.
not truly received, God sends great trouble into the world: partly to avenge
him self of the tyrauntes and persecutours of his word: and partly to
destroy those worldly people which make of Gods word nothing but a cloak of
their fleshly liberty. They are not all good that follow the Gospel. Christ
(Math. xiij.) like neth the kingdom of heaven unto a net cast in the Sea that
katcheth fishes both good and bad The kingdom of heaven is the preaching of
the Gospel, unto which come both good and bad. But the good are few. Christ
calls them Christ's flock, a little flock.
therefore a little flock. Luke xij. For they are ever few that come to the
Gospel of a true intent seeking therein nothing but the glory and praise of
God, and offering the^ selves freely and willingly to take adversity with
Christ for the Gospels sake and for bearyng record unto the As our Prelates
do not take their vocation to seek Gods glory and honor, but to live easily,
and promote themselves to dignity.
truth, that al men may hear it. The greatest number come and ever came and
followed even Christ him self for a worldly purpose. As thou may well see
(John vj.) how that almost five thousand followed Christ and would also have
made him a king, because he had well fed them. Whom he rebuked saying: ye
seek me not, because ye saw the miracles: But because ye eat of the bread and
were filled, and drove them away from him with hard preaching.

Even so now (as ever) the most part seek liberty. They be glad when they
Liberty.
hear the insatiable covetousness of the spiritualitie rebuked: When they hear
their falsehood and wiles uttered: When tyranny and oppression is preached
against: When they hear how kings and all officers should rule christenly and
brotherly, and seek no other thing save the wealth of their subjects: and when
they hear that they have no such authority of God so to pylle and polle, as
they do and to raise up taxes and gatherynges to maynteine their fantasies
and to make war they wot not for what cause. And therefore because the
heads will not so rule, will they also no longer obey, but resist God
destroys one wicked with an other. Gods word is not the cause of evil.
and rise against their evil heads. And one wicked destroys an other. Yet
is Gods word not the cause of this, neither yet the preachers. For though that
Christ him self taught all obedience, how that it is not lawful to resist
wrong (but for the officer that is appointed thereunto) and how a man must
love his very enemy, and pray for them that persecute him and bless them that
curse him, and how that all vengeance must be remitted to God, and that a man
must forgive, if he will be forgeuen of God. Yet the people for the most part
received it not. They were ever ready to rise, and to fight. For ever when the
Scribes and Phariseis went about to take Christ, they were afraid of the
people. Not on the holy day (said they Math. xxvj.) lest any rumor arise
among the people. And Math. xxi. They would have taken him, but they feared the
people. And Luke. xx. Christ asked the Phariseis a question unto which they
durst not answer, lest the people should have stoned them.

Last of all for as much as the very Disciples Christ's Disciples were long
weak, and worldly minded.
and Apostles of Christ, after so long hearing of Christ's doctrine, were yet
ready to fight for Christ clean against Christ's teaching. As Peter (Math.
xxvi.) drew his sword but he was rebuked. And Luke. ix. James and John would
have had fire to come from heaven, to consume the Samaritanes, and to avenge
the injury of Christ: but were likewise rebuked, if Christ's Disciples were so
long carnal what wonder is it, if we be not all perfect the first day? Yea in
as much as we be What the Popes doctrine causes: he commands murder.
taught even of very babes, to kill a Turk, to slay a Jew, to burn an
heretic, to fight for the liberties and right of the Church as they call it:
yea, and in as much as we are brought in belefe, if we shed the blood of our
even Christen, or if the son shed the blood of his father that begat him, for
the defense, not of the Popes Godhead only, but also for what so ever cause it
be, yea though it be for no cause, but that his holiness commands it only,
that we deserve as much as Christ deserved for us, when he dyed on the cross:
or if we be slain in the quarrel, that our souls go, nay fly to heaven, and
be there ere our blood be cold. In as much (I say) as we have sucked in such
bloody imaginatio^s into the bottom of our hearts, even with our mothers milk,
and have been so long hardened therein, what wonder were it, if while we be yet
young in Christ, we thought that it were lawful to fight, for the true word of
god? Yea and though a man were thoroughly persuaded that it were not lawful to
resist his king, though he would wrongfully take away life and goods: Yet
might he think that it were lawful to resist the hipocrites and to rise, not
against his king: but with his king to deliver his king out of bondage and
captivity, wherein the hipocrites hold him with wyles and falsehode, so that no
man may be suffered to come at him, to tell him the troth.

This see thou, that it is the bloody doctrine of the Pope, which causes
disobedience, The popes doctrine is bloody.
rebellion and insurrectio^. For he teaches to sight, and to defend his
traditions, and what soever he dreameth with fire, water and sword, and to
disobey Father, Mother, Master, Lord, King and Emperor: Yea, and to invade
what Christ's doctrine to peaceable.
so ever la^d or nation that will not receive and admit his Godhead. Where the
peaceable doctrine of Christ teaches to obey, and to suffer for the word of
God, and to remit the vengeance and the defense of the word to god, which is
mighty and able to defend it, which also as soon as God auengeth his doctrine
him self.
the word is once openly preached, and testified or witnessed unto the world,
and when he has given them a season to repent, is ready at once to take
vengeance of his enemies, and shoteth arrows with heads dipte in deadly
poison at them, and pours his plagues from heaven down upon them, and
sends the moren and pestilence among them, and sinketh the Cities of them,
and makes the earth swalow them, and co^passeth them in their wyles, and
takes them in their own trappes and snares, and casts the^ into the pittes
which they dug for other men, and sends them a dasyng in in the head, and
utterly destroys them with their own subtle council. Prepare How a man
ought to behave him self in readyng of doctors, and also in the Scripture.
thy mind therefore unto this little treatise and read it discretly, and judge
it indifferently, and when I allege any Scripture, look thou on the text,
whether I interpret it right: which thou shall easily perceive, by the
circumstance and process of the^, if thou make Christ the foundation and
ground, and build all on him, and referrest all to him, and find also that
the exposition agrees unto the common Articles of the faith, and open
scriptures. And GOD the father of mercy, which for his truths sake raised our
Savior Christ up again to justify us, give thee his spirit to judge what is
righteous, in his eyes, and give the strength to abide by it, and to maintain
it withal patience, and long sufferyng, unto the example and edifying of his
congregation, and glory of his name.

Amen.
The obedience of all degrees proved by Gods word and first of children unto
their elders.
GOd (which works all in all things) for a secret judgment and purpose and
for his godly pleasure, provided an hour that thy father and mother should
come together, to make thee through them. He was present with thee in thy
mothers womb and fashioned thee and brethed life into thee, and for yt great
love he had unto thee, provided milk in thy mothers breasts for thee against
thou were borne: moved also thy father and mother and all other to love thee,
to pity thee and to care for thee.

And as he made thee through them, so has he cast thee under the power and
authority of them, to obey and serve them in his stead, saying: honor thy
father and mother. Exo. xx. Which is not Our fathers and mothers are to us in
Gods stead.
to be understand in bowyng the knee and puttyng of the cappe only, but that
thou love them with all thine heart and fear and dread them and wait on their
commandments, and seek their worship, pleasure, will and profit in all
things, and give thy life for them, counting them worthy of all honor,
remembryng that thou art their good and possession, and that thou owe unto
the^ thine own self, and all thou art able, yea and more then thou art able
to do.

Understand also that what soever What we do to our fathers and mothers, that
we do to God.
thou do unto the^ (be it good or bad) thou do unto God. When thou
please them, y^ please god: when thou displeasest the^, thou displeasest
God: when they are angry with thee, god is angry with thee: neither is it
possible for thee to come unto y^ favor of God again (no though all the
angels of heaven pray for thee) until thou have submitted thy self unto thy
father and mother again.

If thou obey (though it be but carnally The reward of obedience.
(either for fear, for vain glory or profit) thy blessyng shall be long life
upon the earth. For he says, honor thy father and mother, that thou may
live long upon the earth. Exodus xx. Contrariwise The reward of disobedience.
if thou disobey them, thy life shall be shortened upon the earth. For it
follows. Exodus xxj. He that smites his father or mother shall be put to death
for it. And he that curses (that is to say, rayleth or dishonored his father
or mother with opprobrious words) shall be slain for it. And Deuteronomy. xx^. If any
man have a son stubburne and disobedient, which hears not the voice of his
father and the voice of his mother, so that they have taught him nurtoure and
he regards them not, then let his father and mother take him, and bring him
forth unto the Seniours, or elders of the City and unto the gate of the same
place. And let them say unto the Seniours of that City: this our son is
stubburne, and disobedient. He will not harken unto our voice: he is a rioter,
and a dronkard. The^ let the men of the City, stone him with stones unto
death: so shall ye put away wickedness from among you, and all Israel shall
hear and shall fear.

And though that the temporal officers (to their own damnation) be negligent
in punishing such disobedience (as the spiritual officers are to teach it)
and wink at it or look on it thorough the fingers: yet shall they not escape
unpunished. For the vengeance God auengeth disobedience him self though the
officer will not.
of God shall acco^panie them (as thou may see Deuteronomy. xxviij.) With all
misfortune and evil luck, and shall not depart from them until they be
murdered, drownde or hanged, either until by one mischaunce or an other they
be utterly brought to naught. Yea and the world often times hangs many a man
for that they never deserved, but God ha^geth them because they would not obey
and harke^ unto their elders: as the consciences of many well find when they
come unto the galowes. There can they preach and teach other, that which they
the^ selves would not learn in season.

The Marriage also of the children Marriage.
pertains unto their elders, as thou may see. i. Cor. vij. and throughout
all the Scripture, by the authority of the said commandment, child obey
father and mother. Which thing the heathen and gentiles have ever kept and to
this day keep, unto thee great shame and rebuke of us Christian: in as
covetousness makes our spiritualitie that they cannot see that which a Turk is
ashamed of.
much as the weddyngs of our virgins (shame it is to speak it) are more like
unto the saute of a bitche, then the mariyng of a reasonable creature. Se not
we daily three or four calengyng one woman before the Commissary or Official,
of which not one has the consent of her father and mother. And yet he that
has most money, has best right, and shall have her in the despite of all her
friends and in deffiaunce of Gods ordinances.

Moreover when she is given by the judge unto yt one party, and also married,
even then often times shall the contrary party sue before an hyer judge, or an
other that succedeth the same, and for money deuorce her again. So shamefully
does the covetousness and ambition of our Prelates mock with the laws of God.
I pass over with silence how many years they will prolo^g the sentence with
cauillations and suttletie, if they be well monyed on both parties, Get her
with child say they so shall thy cause be best.
and if a damsel promise ij. how shameful Council they will give the second,
and also how the religious of Satan do separate inseparable matrimony. For
after thou art lawfully married at the commandment of father and mother, and
with the consent of all thy friends: yet if thou will be disgised eke Gods
commandments break they through their own traditions.
unto one of them, and swear obedience unto their traditions, thou may
disobey father and mother, break the oath which thou have sworn to God before
his holy congregation, and withdraw love and charity the highest of Gods
commandments, and that duty and service which thou owe unto thy wife:
whereof Christ can not dispense with thee. For Christ is not against God, but
with God, and came not to break Gods ordinances, but to fulfill them. That
is, he came to overcome thee with kindness, and to make thee to do of very love
the thing which the law co^pelleth thee to do. For love only and to do
service unto thy neighbor is the fulfillyng of the law in yt sight of God. To
be a Monk or a Friar, thou may thus forsake thy wife before thou have line
with her, but not to be a seculare priest. And yet after thou art professed,
the Pope for money will dispense with Money makes marchaundise.
thee, both for thy coat and all thy obedience, and make a seculer Priest of
thee: likewise as it is simonie to sell a benefice (as they call it) but to
resign upon a pension, and the^ to redeine the same, is no simony at all. Oh
crafty iugglers Iugglers.
and mockers with the word of God.

The obedience of wives unto their husbands.
AFter that Eve was deceived of the Serpent, God said unto her Gene. iij. Thy
lust or appetite shall perteyne unto thy husband, and he shall rule thee or
reign over thee. God which created the woman knows what is in that weak
vessel (as Peter calls her) and has therefore put her under the obedience
of her husband, to rule her lusts and wanton appetites. i. Peter. iij.
exhorts wives to be in subjection unto their husbands, after the ensample
of the holy women which in old time trusted in GOD, and as Sara obeyed Abraham
and called him Lord. Which Sara before she was married, was Abraham's sister and
equal with him: but as soon as she was married Marriage alters the degree of
nature.
was in subjection, and became with out comparison inferior. For so is the
nature of wedlock by the ordinance of God. It were much better that our wives
followed the ensample of the holy women of old time in obeyeng their husbands,
then to worship them with a Pater noster, an Aue and a Credo, or to stick up
candles before their images. Paul Ephe. v. says: women submit your selves
unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For the husband is the wives head,
even as Christ is the head of the congregation. Therefore as the congregation is
in subjection to Christ, likewise let wives be in subjection unto their
husbands in all things. Let the woman therefore fear her husband, as Paul
says in the said place. For her husband is unto her in yt stead of God, that
she obey him, and wait on his commandments. And his commandments are
Gods commandments. The husband is (...) the wife in gods stead.
If she therefore grudge against him. or resist him, she grudgeth against God,
and resists God.

The obedience of Servants unto their Masters.
Servants obey your carnal masters with fear and tremblyng, in singleness
of your hearts as unto Christ: not with service in the eye sight as me^
pleaseres: but as the servants of Christ doing the will of God from the heart
with good will, even as though ye served the Lord, and not men. Ephesians. vj. And
i. Pet. ij. servants obey your masters with all fear not only if they be
good and courteous: but also though they be froward. For it comes of grace, if
a man for conscience toward God endure grief suffering wrongfully. In
sufferynge wrongs patie^tly ^e follow the steps of Christ.
For what praise is it if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it
patiently? But and if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong and take it patiently,
the^ is there thank with God. Hereunto verily were ye called. For Christ also
suffered for our sakes, leaving us an example to follow his steps. In what so
ever kind therefore thou art a servant, during the time of thy couenauntes,
thy master is unto thee The master is unto the seruan^t in Gods stead.
in the stead and rowme of God, and God thorough him feeds thee, clotheth
thee, rules thee, and learneth thee. His commandments are Gods
commandments, and thou ought to obey him as God, and in all things to
seek his pleasure and profit. For thou art his good and possession, as his
Ox or his Horse, in so much that who so ever does but desire thee in his heart
from him without his love and license, is condemned of God, which says Exodus
xx. See thou once covet not thy neighbors servants.

Paul the Apostle sent home Onemus Our spirituality retain men's servants
not to honor God, but their. traditions and ceremonies only.
unto his master (as thou read in the epistle of Paul to Philemon). In so
much that though the said Philemon with his servant also was converted by
Paul, and obeyed unto Paul and to the word that Paul preached, not his
servant only, but also himself: yea and though that Paul was in necessity,
and lacked ministers to minister unto him in yt bonds which he suffered for
the Gospels sake: yet would he not retain the servant necessary unto the
furtheraunce of the Gospel, without the consent of the master.

O how sore differs the doctrine Christ's doctrine and the Popes differ.
of Christ and his Apostles, from the doctrine of the Pope, and of his
Apostles. For if any man will obey neither father nor mother, neither Lord nor
master, neither King nor Prince, If thy master please thee not shave thy self
a Monk a Friar or a Priest.
the same needs but only to take the mark of the beast, that is, to shave
himself a Monk, a Friar, or a priest, and is then immediately free and
exempted from all service and obedience due unto man. He that will obey no man
(as they will not) is most acceptable To obey no man is a spiritual thing.
unto them. The more disobedient that thou art unto Gods ordinances, the more
apt and meet art thou for theirs. Neither is the professing, vowing and
swearyng obedience unto their ordinances, any other thing, the^ the defiyng,
denying and forswearyng obedience unto the ordinances of God.

The obedience of Subjects unto kings, Princes, and rulers.
LEt every soul submit himself unto Romans 13.
the authority of the hyer powers. There is no power but of God. The powers
that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God. They that resist, shall receive to themselves
Kings. are chosen to suppress the wicked, and support the good.
damnation. For rulers are not to be feared for good works, but for evil.
Will thou be without fear of the power? Do well then, and so shall thou be
praised of the same. For he is the minister of God, for thy wealth. But and if
thou do evil, then fear. For he bears not a swearde for naught. For he is
the minister of god, to take vengeance on them that do evil. Wherefore ye
must needs obey, not for fear of vengeance only: but also because of
conscience. Even for this cause pay ye tribute. For they are Gods ministers
serving for the same purpose.

Give to every man therefore his duty: Tribute to whom tribute belongs:
Custom to whom custom is due: fear to whom fear belongs: honor to whom
honor pertains. Owe nothing to any man: but to love one an other. For he
that loves an other, fulfilleth the law. For these commandments: Thou
shall not commit adultery: Thou shall not kill: Thou shall not steal: Thou
shall not bear false witness: Thou shall not desire, and so forth: if there be
any other commandment, are all comprehended in this saying: Love thine
neighbor as thy self. Love hurts not his neighbor: therefore is love the
fulfilling of the law.

AS a father over his children is An ^pte similitude.
both Lord and judge, forbidding one brother to avenge himself on an other,
but (if any cause of strife be between them) will have it brought unto himself
or his assigns, to be judged and correct: so God forbids all men to avenge
themselves, and takes the authority and office of auenging unto himself,
saying: Vengeance is mine, and I will reward. Deuteronomy. xxxij. Which text Paul
alleges Romans xij. For it is impossible that a man should be a righteous, an
egall or an indifferent judge in his own cause, lusts and appetites so blind
us. Moreover when thou auengest thy self, thou make not peace, but stirrest
up more debate.

God therefore has given laws unto all nations, and in all lands has put
kings, gouerners, and rulers in his own stead, to rule the world thorough
them. And has commanded all causes to be brought before them, as thou read
Exodus xxij. In all causes (says he) of injury or wrong, whether it be Ox,
Ass, sheep or vesture, or any lost thing which an other chalengeth, let the
cause of both parties be brought unto the Gods, whom the Gods condemn, the
same shall pay double unto his neighbor. Mark, the judges are called Gods in
the Judges are called Gods.
Scriptures, because they are in Gods rowme, and execute the commandments of
God. And in an other place of the said chapter, Moses charge saying: see
that thou rail not on the Gods, neither speak evil of the ruler of thy
people. Who so ever therefore resists them, resists God (for they are in y^
rowne of God) and they that reliste, shall receive the damnation.

Such obedience unto father and mother, master, husband, Emperor, Blessyng.
King, Lords and rulers, requires God of all nations, yea of the very Turks
and Infidels. The blessing and reward of them that keep them, is the life of
this world, as thou read Leuit. xviij. Keep my ordinances and laws:
which if a man keep, he shall live therein. which text Paul rehearses Romans
x. proving thereby that the righteousness of the law is but worldly, and the
reward thereof is the life of this world. And the curse Curse.
of them that breaks them, is the loss of this life: as thou see by y^
punishment appointed for them.

And whoseuer keeps the law (whether it be for fear, for vain glory or
profit) though no man reward him, yet shall God bless him abundantly, God
rewards a^ obedience: though no man else do.
and send him worldly prosperity, as thou read Deuteronomy. xxviij. What good
blessings accompany the keeping of the law, and as we see the Turks far
exceed us Christen men in worldly prosperity for their just keeping of their
temporal laws. God auengeth all disobedience though no man else do.
Likewise though no man punish the breakers of the law, yet shall God send
his curses upon them till they be utterly brought to naught, as thou read
most terribly even in the same place.

Neither may the inferior person avenge himself upon the superior, or
violently resist him for what so ever wrong it be. If he do, he is condemned
in the deed doing: in as much as he takes upon him that which belongs to
God only, which says, Vengeance Vengeance is Gods.
is mine, and I will reward. Deuteronomy. xxxij. And Christ says Mat. 26. All they
that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Take thou a sword to
avenge thy self? so geuest thou not rowme unto God to avenge thee, but robbest
him of his most hye honor, in that thou will not let him be judge over thee.

If any man might have avenged him self upon his superior, that might David
most righteously have done upon David.
king Saul which so wrongfully persecuted David, even for no other cause, the^
that God had anointed him king and promised him the kingdom. Yet when God had
delivered Saul into yt hands of David, that he might have done what he would
with him as thou see in the first book of kings the xxiiij. Chapter, how
Saul came into the cave where David was. And David came to him secretly, and
cut of a peace of his garment. And as soon as he had done it his heart smote
him because he had done so much unto his Lord. And when his me^ couraged him
to slay him, he au^swered, the Lord forbid it me, that I should lay mine hand
on him. Neither suffered he his men to hurt him. When Saul was gone out, David
followed and showed him the piece of his garment and said: why beleuest thou the
words of men that say, David goes about to do thee harm: perceive and see
that there is neither evil nor wickedness in my hand and that I have not
trespassed against thee, and yet thou layest awayte for my life. God destroys
one wicked by an other
God judge between thee and me and avenge me of thee, but mine hand be not upon
thee, as the old proverb says (said David) out of the wicked shall
wickedness proceed (but mine hand be not upon thee, meaning that God ever
punishes one wicked by another) And again (said David) GOD be judge, and
judge between thee and me, and behold and pleate my cause, and give me judgment
or right of thee.

And in the. xxvj. Chapter of the same book, when Saul persecuted David
again. David came to Saul by night, as he slept and all his men, and took
away his spear, and a cup of water from his head. Then said Abisai Dauide
servant, God has delivered thee thine enemy into thine hand this day, let me
now therefore nail him to the ground with my spear, and give him but even one
stripe and no more. David forbad him saying. Kill him not. For who (said he)
shall lay hands on God provides a means to take the evil out of the way when
they have fulfilled their wickedness
the Lords anointed and be not guilty? The Lord lives, or by the Lords life
(said he) he dies not except the Lord smite him or y^ his day be come to dye,
or else go to battle, and there perish.

Why did not David slay Saul, seeing he was so wicked, not in persecutyng David
only, but in disobeying Gods Why David slew not Saul.
commandments, and in that he had slain. lxxxv. of Gods priests wrongfully?
Verily for it was not lawful. For if he had done it, he must have sinned
against God. For God has made the king in every Realm judge over The king
(...) in the ro^^^e of god in this world.
all, and over him is there no judge. He that judges the king judges God, and
he that lays hands on the king, lays hand on God, and he that resists
the king resists God, and damneth Gods law and ordinance. If the subjects
sin they must be brought to yt kings judgment. If the king sin The king
must be reserved unto the vengeance of God.
he must be reserved unto yt judgment, wrath and vengeance of God. And as it
is to resist the king, so is it to resist his officer, which is set or sent
to execute the kings commandment.

And in the first Chapter of the second book of Kings, David commanded the
young man to be slain, which brought unto him the crown and bracelet of Saul,
and said to please David with all, that he him self had slain Saul. And in
the fourth Chapter of the same book, David commanded those two to be slain
which brought unto him the head of Isboseth Saul's son, by whose means yet
the whole kingdom returned unto David, according unto the promise of God.

And Luke xiij. When they showed Christ of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate
mingled with their own sacrifice: he au^swered, suppose ye that these
Galilea^s were sinners above all other Galilea^s, because they suffered such
punishment? I tell you nay: but except ye repent ye shall likewise perish. This
was told Christ, no doubt, of such an intent as they asked him. Math. xxij. It
i^ not lawful for a Christen subject to resist his Prince, though he be an
heathen man.
Whether it were lawful to give tribute unto Caesar? For they thought that it
was no sin to resist an Heathen Prince: as few of us would think (if we were
under the Turk) that it were sin to rise against him, and to ryd our selves
from under his dominion, so sore have our Bishops robbed us of the true
doctrine of Christ. But Christ condemned their deeds, and also the secret
thoughts of all other, that consented thereunto, saying: except ye repent ye
shall likewise perish. As who should say, I know that ye are within in your
hearts, such as they were outward in their deeds, and are under the same
damnation: except therefore ye repent betimes, ye shall break out at the last
into like deeds, and likewise perish, as it came afterward to pass.

Hereby see thou that the king is in this world without law, and may Kings
must make account of their doings only to God.
at his lust do right or wrong, and shall give acomptes, but to God only.

An other conclusion is this, that no person, neither any degree may be exempt
from this ordinance of God. Neither can the profession of Monks and Friars,
or any thing that the Pope or Bishops can lay for themselves, except them from
the sword of the Emperor of kings, if they break the laws. For it is
written, let every soul submit himself unto the authority of the hyer
powers. Here is no man except, but all souls must obey. The hyer powers are
the temporal kings and Princes, unto whom God has given the sword to punish
who soever sins. God has not given them swords to punish one, and The
king has no power but to his damnation to privilege the spirituality to sin
unpunished.
to let an other go free, and sin unpunished. Moreover, with what face durst
y^ spirituality, which ought to be the light, and an example of good living
unto all other, desire to sin unpunished, or to be excepted from tribute,
toll, or custom, that they would not bear pain with their brethren, unto y^
maintenance of kings and officers ordained of God to punish sin? There is
no power but of God (by power understand the authority of kings and
Princes.) The powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists
power, resists god: Yea though he be Pope, Bishop, Monk or Friar. They
that resist shall receive unto themselves damnation. Why? For Gods word is
against them which will have all men under the power of the temporal sword.
For rulers are not to be feared for good works, but for evil. Hereby see
thou that they that resist the powers, or seek to be exempt from their
authority, have evil consciences, and seek liberty to sin unpunished, and
to be free from bearing pain with their brethren. Will thou be without fear
of the power? So do well, and thou shall have laud of the same (that is to say
of the ruler) with good living ought yt spirituality to rid them selves from
fear of the te^porall sword, and not with craft and with blyndyng the kings
and bryngyng the vengeance of God upon them, and in purchasing license to
sin unpunished.

For he is the minister of God for thy wealth: to defend thee from a thousand
inconveniences, from thieves, murderers and them that would defile thy wife,
thy daughter and take from thee all that thou have: yea life and al, if thou
did resist. Furthermore though he be A king is a great benefit though he be
never so evil.
the greatest tyrant in the world, yet is he unto thee a great benefit of God
and a thing wherefore thou ought to thank God hyghly. For it is better to
have somewhat then to be clean stripte out of altogether: it is better to pay
the tenth then to loose all: it is better to suffer one tyrant then many, and
to suffer wrong of one then of every man. Yea and it is better to have a
tyrant unto thy king then a shadow, a passive king that does naught him self,
but suffer other to do with him what they will, and to lead him whether they
list. For a tyrau^t though he do wrong unto thee good, yet he punishes the
evil and makes all me^ obey neither suffers any man to polle but himself
only. A king that is soft as silk and effeminate, that is to say turned unto
the nature of a woman, what with his own lusts, which are as the longyng of
a woman with child, so that he can not resist them, and what with the wyly
tyranny of the^ that ever rule him, shall be much more grievous unto yt realm
then a right tyrant. Read the Cronicles and thou shall find it ever so.

But and if thou do evil, the^ fear. For Princes are ordained to p^uill do^rs.
he bears not a sword for naught. For he is the minister of God, to take
vengeance on them that do evil. If the office of Princes given the^ of God be
to take vengeance of evil doers: then by this text and Gods word, are all
Princes damned, even as many as The damnation of Princes.
give liberty or license unto the spirituality to sin unpunished, and not
only to sin unpunished the^ selves: but also to open sanctuaries, priuileged
places, churchyardes, S. John's hold: Sanctuaries.
yea and if they come to short unto all these, yet to setfoorth a neckeuerse to
save all manner trespassers from the fear Neckeuerse.
of the sword of the vengeance of God put in the hands of Princes to take
vengeance on all such.

GOd requires the law to be kept of all men let them keep it for what soever
purpose they will. Will they not keep the law: so vouchsafes he not that they
enjoy this te^porall life. Now are there three natures of men, one all Three
natures.
together beastly, which in no wise receive the law in their hearts, but rise
against Princes and rulers when soever they are able to make their party good.
These are signified by them that worshypped the golden calfe. For Moses brake
the tables of the law ere he came at them.

The second are not so beastly, but receive the law, and unto them the law
comes: but they look not Moses in the face. For his countenance is to What
it is to look Moses in the face.
bright for them, that is, they understand not that y^ law is spiritual, and
requires the heart. They look on the pleasure, profit and promotio^ that
follows the keeping of the law, and in respect of the reward keep they the law
outwardly with works, but not in the heart. For if they might obtain like
honor, glory, promotion and dignity and also avoid all inconveniences, if
they broke the law, so would they also break the law and follow their lusts.

The third are spiritual and look Moses in the open face, and are (as Paul
says the second to the Romans) a law unto them selves and have the law
written in their hearts by yt spirit of God. These need neither of king nor
officers to drive them, neither that any man profer the^ any reward for to keep
the law. For they do it naturally.

The first work for fear of y^ sword only. The second for reward. The third
work for love freely. They look on the excedyng mercy, love and kinds which
God has showed the^ in Christ, and therefore love again and work freely.
Heaven they take of the free gift of God through Christ's deseruyngs, and hope
without all manner doubtyng Heaven comes by Christ.
that GOD according to his promise, will in this world also defend them and do
all thing for them of his goodness and for Christ's sake, and not for any
goodness that is in them. They consent unto the law that it is holy and just,
and that all men ought to do what soever God commands for no other cause,
but because God commands it. And A Christen man seeks no more but Gods will.
their great sorrow is, because that there is no strength in their members to do
that which their heart lusts to do and is a thyrst to do.

These of the last sort keep the law of their own accord and that in the
heart, and have professed perpetual war against the lusts and appetites of
the flesh, til they be utterly subdued: yet not through their own strength,
but knowing and knowledgyng their weakness cry ever for strength to god which
has promised assistance unto all that call upon him. These follow God and are
led of his spirit. The other ij. are led of lusts and appetites.

Lusts and appetites are diverse and Lusts.
many and that in one man: yea and one lust contrary to an other and the
greatest lust carries a man altogether away with him. We are also changed from
one lust unto an other. Otherwise are we disposed when we are children,
otherwise when we are youngmen, and otherwise when we are old, otherwise over
even, and otherwise in the morning: yea somtymes altered. vj. times in an
hour. How fortuneth all this? Because that the will of man follows Fre^ill.
the wit, and is subject unto the wit and as the wit erreth so does the
will, and as the wit is in captivity, so is the will, neither is it possible
that the will should be free where the wit is in bondage.

That thou may perceive and feel yt thing in thine heart and not be a vain
sophister, disputyng about words without perceauyng, mark this. The root
of all evil, the greatest damnation and most terrible wrath and vengeance of
god that we are in, is natural blindness. We are all out of the right way, every
man his ways: One judges this best, an other that to be best. Now is Worldly
wit.
worldly wit nothing else but craft and sutletie to obtain that which we
judge falsely to be best. As I err in my wit, so err I in my will. When I
judge that The will is bond and ^ed.
to be evil, which in deed is good, then hate I that which is good. And when I
suppose that good which is evil in deed, then love I evil. As if I be
persuaded and borne in hand that my most friend is mine enemy, then hate I my
best friend: and if I be brought in belefe that my most enemy is my friend, The^
love I my most enemy. Now when we say, every man has his free will, to do what
him lusts I say verily that men do what they lust. Notwithstanding, to follow
lusts is not fredome, but captivity and bondage. If God open any man's wits
to make him feel in his heart, that lusts and appetites are damnable, and give
him power to hate and resist them, then is he free even with the fredome
wherewith Fredome.
Christ makes free, and has power to do the will of God.

Thou may hereby perceive that All is sin that springs not of the spirit
of God, and all that is not done in the light of Gods word.
all that is done in the world (before the spirit of God come and gives us
light) is damnable sin, and the more glorious the more damnable: so that,
that which the world counts most glorious is more damnable in the sight of
GOD, then that which the whore, the thief, and the murderer do. With blind
reasons of worldly wisdom may thou change ye minds of youth and make them
give them selves to what thou will either for fear, for praise or for profit,
and yet do but change the^ from one vice to an other. As the persuasions So
do our spirituality in all their works.
of her friends made Lucrece chaste. Lucrece believed if she were a good huswife
and chaste, that she should be most glorious, and that all the world would give
her honor, and praise her. She sought her own glory in her chastity and not
gods. When she had lost her chastity, then counted she her self most
abominable in the sight of all men, and for very pain and thought which she
had, not that she had displeased God, but that she had lost her honor, slew
her self. Look how great her pain and sorrow was for the loss of her
chastity, so great was her glory and rejoicing therein, and so much despised
she them that were otherwise, and pitied them not. Which pride God more
abhors the^ the whoredom of any whore. Of like pride are all ye moral
virtues of Aristotle, Plato and Socrates, and all the doctrine of the
Philosophers the very Gods of our schole men.

In like manner is it for the most part of our most holy Religion. For they of
like imagination do things which they of Bedlem may see, that they are but
madness. They look on the miracles True miracles are wrought to confirm the
preaching, and not the God head of the preacher.
which God did by the Saints to move the unbelieving unto the faith and to
confirm the troth of his promises in Christ, whereby all that believe are made
Saints: as thou see in the last Chapter of Mark. They preached (says he)
every where, the Lord workyng with them and confirmyng their preaching with
miracles that followed. And in the fourth of the Acts) the Disciples prayed
that God would stretch forth his hands to do miracles and wonders in the name
of Jesus. And Paul. i. Corin. xiiij. says, that the miracle of speaking with
diverse tounges, is but a sign for unbelievers, and not for them that believe.
These miracles turn they unto an other purpose saying in their blind Our
hypocrites are blind.
hearts. See what miracles God has showed for this Saint, he must be verily
great with GOD. And at once turn them selves from Gods word, and put their
trust and confidence in the Saint and his merits, and make an Advocate or
rather a GOD of the Saint, and of their blind imagination make a Testament or
bond between the Saint and them, the Testament of Christ's blood clean
forgotten. They look on the Saints garments and The religious look upon the
out side only.
lives or rather lies, which men lie on the Saints: and this wise imagine in
their hearts saying: the Saint for wearyng such a garment and for such deeds is
become so glorious in heaven. If I do likewise, so shall I be also. They see
not the faith and trust, which the Saints had in Christ, neither the the word
of God which the Saints preached, neither the intent of the Saints, how that
the Saints did such things to tame their bodies and to be an ensample to the
world, and to teach that such things are to be despised which the world most
wondreth at and magnifieth. They see not also that some lands are so whote
that a man can neither drink wine nor eat flesh therein: neither consider
they the complexion of the Saints, and a thousand like things see they not.
So when they have killed their bodies and brought them in that case, that
scarce with any restauratiue they can recover their health again, yet had they
lever dye then to eat flesh. Why? for they think, I have now this. xx. xxx.
or xl. years eaten no flesh and have obtained I doubt not by this time as hye
a rowme as the best of them: should I now loose that? nay I had lever dye: and
as Lucretia had lever have been flayne, if he had not been to strong for her,
then to have lost her glory, even so had these. They ascribe heaven unto their
imaginations and mad inventions, and receive it not of the liberality of God,
by the merits and deservings of Christ.

He now that is renewed in Christ, keeps the law without any law written The
sprituall man.
or compulsion of any ruler or officer, save by the ledyng of the spirit
only: but the natural man is entised and moved to keep the law carnally, The
natural man.
with carnal reasons and worldly persuasions, as for glory, honor riches and
dignity. But the last remedy of all when all other fail, is fear. Beat
Feate is the last ^emedy.
one and the rest will abstain for fear: as Moses ever puts in
remembrance saying: kill, stone, burn. So shall thou put evil from thee, and
all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall no more do so. If fear help not,
then will God that they be taken out of this life.

Kings were ordained then, as I Kings defend y^ false authority of the pope,
their office punishing of sin loyd apart.
before said, and the sword put in their hands to take vengeance of evil
doers, that other might fear, and were not ordained to fight one against an
other or to rise against the Emperor to defend the false authority of the
Pope that very Antechrist: Bishops Bishops minister the kings duty, their
own laid apart: yea, they persecute their own office.
they only can minister the temporal sword: their office, the preaching of
Gods word laid a part, which the will neither do nor suffer any man to do, but
slay with the temporal sword (which they have gotten out of the hand of all
Princes) them that would. The preaching of Gods word is hateful and contrary
unto them: Why? For it is impossible to preach Christ except thou preach
against Antichrist, that is to say, them which with their false doctrine and
violence of sword enforce to quench the true doctrine of Christ. And as thou
can heal no disease, except thou begin at the root: even so can thou
preach against no mischief, except thou begin, at the Bishops. Kings they are
but shadows, vain Kings do but wait on y^ Popes pleasure.
names and things idle, having nothing to do in the world, but when our holy
father needs their help.

The Pope contrary unto all conscience The iugling of the Pope.
and against all the doctrine of Christ, which says my kingdom is not of this
world (John. xviij.) has usurped the right of the Emperor. And by policy of
the Bishops of Almany Bishops of Almany.
and with corruptyng the Electours or chosers of the Emperor with money,
brings to pass that such a one is ever chosen Emperor that is not able to
make his party good with the Pope. To stop the Emperor that he come not at
Rome, he brings the French king up to Milane, and Mylane.
on the other side brings he the Venetians. If the Venetia^s come to nigh, the
Bishops of France must bring Bishops of France. A cappe of maintenance. Most
Christen king. Defendre of the Popes Faith. The eldest son of the holy (...)
in the French king. And the Socheners are called and sent for to come and
succor. And for their labor he gives to some a Rose, to an other a cappe of
mayntenaunce. One is called most Christen king: an other defender of the faith:
an other the eldest son of the most holy seat. He blaseth also Bl^^^ng of
arms.
the arms of other and puts in the holy cross, the crown of thorn, or the
nails and so forth. If the French king go to hye, and crepe up other to
Bononie or Naples: then must our English The English Bishops.
Bishops bring in our king. The craft of the Bishops is to entitle one king
with an others Realm. He is called king of Dennemarke, and of The falsehode of
the Bishops.
England: he king of England and of France. Then to blind the Lords and the
commons, the king must challenge his right. Then must the land be taxed and
every man pay, and the treasure borne out of the Realm and the land beggerde.
How many a thousand men's lives has it cost? And how many an hundred thousand
pounds has it carried out of the Realm in our remembrance? Besides how
abominable O a cruel and an abominable example of tyranny: judge them by
their deeds says Christ.
an example of gatheryng was there? such verily as never tyrant sense the
world began did, yea such as was never before heard or thought on, neither
among Jews, Saresens, Turks or Heathen sense God created the Sun to shine:
that a beast should break up into the Temple of God, that is to say, into the
heart and consciences of men, and compel them to swear every man what he was
worth, to lend that should never be paid again. How many thousands forsware
the^ selves? How many thousands set them selves above their ability, partly
for fear lest they should be forsworn and partly to save their credence? When
the pope has his purpose, then is peace made, no man woteth how, and our most
enemy is our most friend.

Now because the Emperor is able to obtain his right: French, English,
Venetians and all must upon him. O great whore of Babylon, how abuses The
whore of Babylon.
she the Princes of the world, how drunk has she made them with her wine? How
shameful licenses does she give them, to use Nichromancy, to hold whores, to
divorce them selves to break the faith and promises that one makes with an
other: that the confessors shall deliver unto the king the confession of whom
he will, and dispe^ceth Confession.
with them even of the very law of God, which Christ him self can not do.

Against the Popes false power.
Matthew. xxvj. Christ says unto Peter, put up thy sword into his sheth. For
all that lay hand upon the sword, shall perish with the sword, that is, who
soever without the commandment of the temporal officer to whom Not Peter
only but Christ also was under the temporal sword.
God has given the sword lays hand on the sword to take vengeance, the same
deserves death in the deed doing. God did not put Peter only under the
te^porall sword, but also Christ him self. As it appears in the fourth
Chapter to the Galathia^s. And Christ says Math. iij. Thus becomes it us to
fulfill all righteousness, that is to say, all ordinances of God. If the head
be then under the te^porall sword, how can the members be excepted? If Peter
sinned in defendyng Christ against the temporal sword (whose authority and
Ministers the Bishops then abused against Christ as ours do now) who can excuse
our Prelates of sin which will obey no man, neither The kings sin in giving
exe^ptions and the Prelates in receauyng them.
King nor Emperor? Yea who can excuse from sin, either the Kings that give,
either the Bishops that receive such exemptions contrary to Gods ordinances,
and Christ's doctrine?

And Math. xvij. both Christ and also Peter pay tribute, where the meaning of
Christ's question unto Peter is: if Princes take tribute of strangers only
and not of their children, then verily ought I to be free which am the son
of God, whose servants and Ministers, they are and of whom they have their
authority. Yet because they neither knew that neither Christ came to use that
authority, but to be our servant and to bear our burden and to obey all
ordinances, both in right and wrong for our sakes and to teach us: therefore
said he to S. Peter. Pay for thee and melest we offend the^. Moreover though
that Christ and Peter (because they were poor) might have escaped, yet would
he not for fear of offendyng other and hurtyng their consciences. For he might
well have given occasion unto the tribute gatherers to have judged amiss both
of him and his doctrine: yea and the Jews might happily have been offended
thereby, and have thought that it had not ben lawful, for them to have paid
tribute unto Heathen Princes and Idolaters, seeing that he so great a Prophet
paid not: Yea and what other thing causes the lay so little to regard their
Princes, as that they see When the spiritualitie pays tribute.
them both despised and disobeyed of the spirituality? But our Prelates which
care for none offendyng of consciences and less for Gods ordinances, will pay
naught: but when Princes must fight in our most holy fathers quarrel and
against Christ. Then are they the first. There also is none so poor that then
has not somewhat to give.

Mark here how past all shame our Shameless iugglers.
schole Doctors are (as Rochester is in his Sermon against Martin Luther)
which of this text of Matthew dispute that Peter because he paid tribute, is
greater then the other Apostles, and has more authority and power then they,
and was head unto the^ all, contrary unto so many clear textes, where Christ
rebukes them saying: that is an Heathenish thing that one should clyme above
an other or desire to be greater. To be great in the kingdom of heaven is to
be a servant, and he that most humbles him self and becomes a servant
unto other (after the ensample of Christ I mean and his Apostles, and not of
the Pope and his Apostles, our Cardinals and Bishops) ye same is greatest in
that kingdom. If Peter in paying tribute became greatest, how comes it, that
they will pay none at all? But to pay tribute is a sign of subjection verily,
and the cause why Christ paid was because he had an household, and for the same
cause paid Peter also. For he had an house, a ship and nets, as thou
read in the Gospel. But let us go to Paul again.

Wherefore ye must needs obey, not for fear of vengeance only: but also
because of conscience. That is though thou be so naughty (as now many years
our Pope and Prelates every where are) that thou nedest not to obey the
temporal sword for fear of They make no conscience at any evil doing.
vengeance: yet must thou obey because of conscience. First because of thine
own conscience. For though thou be able to resist, yet shall thou never have
a good conscience, as long as Gods They care for their neighbors as y^ wolf
does for the sheep.
word, law and ordinance are against thee. Secondarily for thy neighbors
conscience. For though through craft and violence thou might escape and
obtain liberty or privilege to be free The evil ensample of the spirituality
causes the lay to believe that they are not bound to obey.
from all manner duties: yet ought thou neither to sue or to seek for any
such thing, neither yet admit or accept, if it were proffered, lest thy fredome
make thy weak brother to grudge and rebel, in that he sees thee go empty
and he him self more lade^, thy part also laid on his shoulders. See thou
not if a man favor one son more then an other, or one servant more then an
other, how all the rest grudge, and how love, peace and unity is broken? What
Christenly love is in the to thy neighbor ward, when thou can There is no
Christian love in the^.
find in thine heart to go up and down empty by him all day long and see him
over charged, yea to fall under his burden, and yet wilt not once set to thine
hand to help him? What good conscience ca^ there be among our spirituality to
gather so great treasure together, and with hypocrisy of their false learning
to rob almost every man of house and lands, and yet not therewith content,
but with all craft and wilenes to purchase so great liberties and exemptions
from all manner bearyng with their brethren, seeking in Christ nothing but
lucre? I pass over with silence how they teach Princes What purpose? even to
flatter the princes that they may abuse their authority to sle^ who soever
believes (...) Christ and to maintain the Pope.
in every land to lade new exactions and tyranny on their subjects more and
more daily neither for what purpose they do it say I. God I trust shall shortly
disclose their iugglynge and bring their falshode to light, and lay a medecin
to the^, to make their scabbes break out. Nevertheless this I say, that they
have robbed all Realms, not of Gods word only: but also of all wealth and
prosperity, and have driven peace out of all lands and withdrawn them selves
from all obedience to Princes, and have separated them selves from the lay men,
countyng the^ viler the^ dogs, and have set up that great Idol the whore of
Babylon Antichrist of Rome whom they call pope, and have conspired against all
common wealths, and have made them a several kingdom, wherein it is lawful
unpunished to work all abomination. In every Parish have they spies and in
every great man's house, and in every tavern and alchouse. And thorough
Confessi^.
confessions know they all secrets, so that no man may open his mouth to
rebuke what soever they do, but that he shall be shortly made an heretic.
Prelates know all men's secrets(...)man the^.
In all Councils is one of them, yea the most part and chief rulers of the
Councels are of them: But of there Council is no man.

Even for this cause pay ye tribute, that is to wit, for consciences sake, to
thy neighbor, and for the cause that follows. For they are Gods Ministers
seruyng for the same purpose. Because God will so have it, we must obey. We do
not look (if we have Christ's spirit in us) what is good profitable, glorious
and honorable for us, neither on our own will, but on Gods will only. Give to
every man therefore his duty: tribute to whom tribute belongs: custom to
whom custom is due: fear to who^ fear belongs: honor to whom honor
pertains.

That thou might feel the workyng of the spirit of God in thee, and lest
the beauty of the deed should deceive thee, and make thee think that the law
of God which is spiritual were content and fulfilled with the outward and
bodyly deed it follows. Owe nothing to any man: but to love ^oue fulfilleth
the law before God and not the outward deed.
one an other. For he that loves an other fulfilleth the law. For these
commandments: thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou
shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not desire, and
so forth if there be any other commandment are all comprehended or contained
in this saying: love thy neighbor: Against workmen.
therefore is love the fulfillyng of the law. Here have thou sufficient against
all the sophisters workeholy and iustifiers in the world, which so magnify
their deeds. The law is spiritual and requires the heart, and is never
fulfilled with the deed in the sight of god. With ye deed thou fulfillest the
law before The deed fulfilleth the law before the world.
the world and live thereby, that is, y^ enioyest this present life and
auoydest the wrath and vengeance the death and punishment which the law
threatens to them that break it. But before God thou keep the law if thou
love only. Now what shall make us love? Faith makes a man to love.
Verily that shall faith do. If thou behold how much God loves thee in Christ,
and from what vengeance he has delivered thee for his sake, and of what
kingdom he has made thee heir, then shall thou see cause enough to love thy
very enemy without respect of reward, either in this life or in the life to
come, but because that God will so have it, and Christ has deserved it: Yet
thou should feel in thine heart that all thy deeds to come, are abundantly
recompensed all ready in Christ.

Thou will say happily, if love fulfill the law, then it justifies. I say that
that wherewith a man fulfilleth the law declares him justified: but that which
gives him wherewith to fulfill the law, justifies him. By iustifiyng
Iustifiyng.
understand the forgiveness of sins and the favor of God. Now says the
text Roma. x. the end of the law or the cause, wherefore the law was made is
Christ, to justify all that believe. That is, the law is given to utter The
office or duty of the law.
sin, to kill the consciences, to damn our deeds, to bring to repentance
and to drive unto Christ: in who^ God has promised his favor and forgiveness
of sin unto all that repent and consent to the law that it is good. If The
beleuyng of Gods promises justifies.
thou believe the promises then does Gods truth justify thee, that is forgeueth
thee and receaueth thee to favor for Christ's sake. In a surety whereof and to
certify thine heart, he seals thee with the spirit. Ephe. i. and. iiij. And.
ij. Cor. v. says Paul. which gave us his spirit in earnest. How the spirit
is given us through Christ, read the viij. chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans and Gallat. iij. and. ij. Cor. iij. Nevertheless the spirit, and his
fruits The spirit and the inward virtues are known by the outward deed.
wherewith y^ heart is purified, as faith, hope, love, patience, long sufferyng
and obedience, could never be seen without outward experience. For if thou were
not brought sometime into combraunce, whence God only could deliver thee, thou
should never see thy faith, yea except thou foughtest sometime against
desperation, hell, death, sin and powers of this world, for thy faythes
sake, thou should never know true faith from a dream. Except thy brother
now and then offended thee, thou could not know whether thy love were Godly.
For a Turk is not anger, till he be hurt and offended, but it thou love him
that does thee evil, then is thy love of God: likewise if thy rulers were
always kind, thou should not know whether thine obedience were pure or no:
but and if thou can patiently obey evil rulers in all things that is not to
the dishonor of God, and when thou hurtest not thy neighbors, then art thou
sure, that Gods spirit works in thee, and that thy faith is no dream, nor
any false imagination.

Therefore counceleth Paul Romans xij. recompense to no man evil: And on your
part have peace with all men. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves: but give
rowme unto the wrath of God. For it is written vengeance is mine and I will
reward, says the Lord. Therefore if thy enemy hungre, Overcome thine enemy
with well doing.
feed him: If he thurst, give him drink. For in so doing thou shall heap
coals of fire on his heed (that is, thou shall kindle love in him.) Be not
overcome of evil (that is, let not an other man's wickedness make thee wicked
also). But overcome evil with good, that is, with softenes, kindness, and all
patience win him: even as God with kindness wonue thee.

THe law was given in thu^der, lightenyng, fire, smoke and the voice The law.
of a trumpet and terrible sight. Exodus xx. So that the people quaked for fear
and stood a far of saying to Moses. Speak thou to us and we will hear: let
not the Lord speak unto us, left we dye. No ear (if it be awaked and
understands the meaning) is able to abide the voice of the law: except the
promises of mercy be by. That thunder except the rain of mercy be joined with
it, destroys all and builds not. The law is a witness against us and
testifies that God abhors the the sins, that are in us and us for our
sins sake.

In like manner when God gave the The king.
people of Israel a king, it thundered and rained that y^ people feared so sore
that they cried to Samuel for to pray for them, that they should not dye. i.
Reg. xij. As the law is a terrible thing: even so is the king. For he is
ordained to take vengeance and has a sword in his hand and not pecockes
feethers. Fear him therefore and look on him as thou would look on a
sharp sword that hanged over thy head by an hear.

Heads and gouerners are ordained Rulers are Gods gift.
of God, and are even the gift of God, whether they be good or bad. And what
soever is done unto us by them, yt does God, be it good or bad. If they be
evil, why are they evil? verily Why the rulers are evil.
for our wickedness sake are they evil. Because that when they were good we
would not receive that goodness of the hand of God and be thankful:
submitting our selves unto his laws and ordinances, but abused the goodness
of God unto our sensual and beastly lusts. Therefore does God make his scorge
of them, and turn them unto wild beasts, contrary to the nature of their
names and offices, even into Lions, Bears, Foxes, and unclean Swine, to
avenge himself of our unnatural and blind unkindness, and of our rebellious
disobedience.

In the Cvj. Psalm thou read, he destroyed the rivers, and dried up the
springes of water, and turned yt fruitful land into barennesse, for the
wickedness of the inhabiters therein. When the children of Israel had
forgotten God in Egypt, God moved the hearts of the Egiptians to hate them, and
to subdue them with craft and wilynes. Psalm. Ciiij. and Deuteronomiun. iij.
Moses rehearses saying: God was angry with me for your sakes: so that the
wrath of God fell on Moses for the wickedness of the people. And in the
second Chap. of the second book of kings: God was angry with the people and
moved David to number them when Ioab and the other Lords wondered why he would
have them numbered, and because they feared lest some evil should follow,
dissuaded the king: yet it help not. God so hardened his heart in his purpose,
to have an occasion to slay the wicked people.

Evil rulers then are a sign that Evil rulers are a sign that God is angry
with us.
God is angry and wroth with us. Is it not a great wrath and vengeance that
the father and mother should hate their children, even their flesh and their
blood? or that an husband should be unkind unto his wife or a master unto the
servant that wayteth on his profit, or the Lords and Kings should be
tyrauntes unto their subjects and tenauntes which pay them tribute, toll,
custom and rent, laboring and toyling to find them in honor, and to
maintain them in their estate? is not this a fearful judgment of God and a
cruel wrath that the very Prelates and shepheardes of our souls which were
wont to feed Christ's flock with Christ's doctrine, and to walk before them
in living there after, and to give their lives for them, to their ensample and
edifiyng, and to strengthen their weak faythes, are now so sore changed that
if they smell that one of their flock (as they now call them and no longer
Christ's) do but once long or desire for the true knowledge of Christ, they
will slay him, burning him with fire most cruelly? What is the cause of this,
and that Why the Prelates are so wicked.
they also teach false doctrine confirmyng it with lies? verily it is the hand
of God to avenge the wickedness of them that have no love nor lust unto the
truth of God, when it is preached, but rejoice in unrighteousness. As thou may
see in the second Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians: Where he speaks of
the coming of Antichrist. Whose coming shall be (says he) by the workyng of
Satan with all miracles signs and wonders which are but lies, and in all
deceanable unrighteousness among them that perish, because they received not any
love to the The cause of false miracles is: that we have no lust unto the truth.
truth to have been saved. Therefore shall God send them strong delusion, to
believe lies. Mark how God to avenge his truth, sends to the unthankful
false doctrine and false miracles to confirm them, and to harden their hearts
in the false way, that afterward it shall not be possible for them to admit
the truth. As thou see in Exodus vij. and viij. how God suffered false
miracles to be showed in yt sight of Pharao to harden his heart, that he should
not believe the truth, in as much as his sorcerers turned their rods into
Serpe^ts, and turned water into blood, and made frogs by their inchauntment:
so thought he that Moses did all his miracles by the same craft and not by the
power of GOD. And abode therefore in unbelief and perished in resisting God.

Let us receive all things of God The right way to came of bondage.
whether it be good or bad: let us humble our selves under his mighty hand and
submit our selves unto his nurture and chastising, and not withdraw our
selves from his correction. Read Hebr. xij. for thy comfort: and let us not
take the stafe by the end or seek to avenge our selves on his rod, which is
the evil rulers. The child as long as he seeks to avenge him self upon the
rod has an evil heart. For he thinks not that the correction is right or
that he has deserved it, neither repents, but reioyseth in his wickedness.
And so long shall he never be without a rod: yea so long shall the rod be
made sharper and sharper. If he knowledge his fault and take the correction
mekely and eue^ kiss the rod and amend him self with the learning and
nurture of his father and mother, then is the rod taken away and burnt.

So if we resist evil rulers sekyng Evil rulers ought not to be resisted.
to set our selves at liberty, we shall no doubt bring our selves into more
evil bondage and wrappe our selves in much more misery and wretchedness. For
if the heads overcome, then lay they more weight on their backs and make
their yoke sorer and tie them shorter. If they overcome their evil rulers,
then make they way for a more cruel nation, or for some tyrant of their own
nation, which has no right unto the crown. If we submit our selves unto the
chastisyng of God and mekely knowledge our sins for which we are scourged,
and kiss the rod, and amend our living: then will GOD take the rod away,
that is, he will give the rulers a better heart. Or if they continue their
malice and persecute you for well doing, and because ye put your trust in GOD,
then will God deliver you out of their tyranny for his truths sake. It is the
same God is always one, always true, always merciful, and excludes no man
from his promises.
God now that was in the old time and delivered the fathers and the Prophets,
the Apostles and other holy Saints. And what soever he swear to them he has
sworn to us. And as he delivered them out of all temptation combrau^ce and
adversity, because they consented and submitted them selves unto his will and
trusted in his goodness and truth: even so will he do us if we do likewise.

When soever the children of Israel fell from the way which God commanded them
to walk in, he gane them up under one tyrau^t or an other. As soon as they
came to the knowledge of the^ selves and repented crying for mercy and leaning
unto the truth of his promises he sent one to deliver them, as the hystories of
the Bible make mention.

A Christen man in respect of God A Christ^ man does but suffer only.
is but a passive thing, a thing that suffers only and does naught, as the
sick in respect of the Surgion or Physician does but suffer only. The Surgen
launceth and cutteth out the dead flesh, searches the wounds, thrusts in
tents, sereth, burns, sows or sticheth, and leyeth to corsies to draw out
y^ corruption, and last of all leyeth to healyng plasters and makes it whole.
The Phisitio^ likewise gives purgations and drinks to drive out the disease
and then with restauratiues brings health. Now if the sick resist the
raser, the searching iron, and so forth, does he not resist his own health
and is cause of his own death? So likewise Evil rulers are wholesome
medicines.
is it of us, if we resist evil rulers which are the rod and scourge
wherewith God chastises us, the instruments wherewith God searches out
wounds and bitter drinks to drive out the sin and to make it appear, and
corsies to draw out by the rotes the core of the pox of the soul that
freateth inward. A Christen man therefore A Christen man receaueth.
receaueth all thing of the hand of God both good and bad, both sweet and
sour, both wealth and woe. If any person do me good, whether it be father
mother and so forth, that receive I of God and to God give thanks. For he gave
wherewith, and gave a commandment, and moved his heart so to do. Adversity
also receive I of the hand of God as an wholesome medicine, though it be
somewhat bitter. Temptation and adversity do both kill sin, and also utter
it. For though How profitable adversity is.
a Christen man knows every thing how to live: yet is the flesh so weak,
that he ca^ never take up his cross him self to kill and mortify the flesh.
He must have an other to lay it on his back. In many also sin lies hid
within and festereth and rotteth inward and is not seen: so that they think
how they are good and perfect and keep the law. As the young man. Math. xix.
said he had observed all of a child, and yet lied falsely in his heart, as the
text following well declares. When all is at peace and no man troubles us, we
think that we are pacie^t and love our neighbors as our selves: but let our
neighbor hurt us in word or deed, and then find we it otherwise. Then fume
we and rage and set up the bristels and bend our selves to take vengeance. If
we loved with godly love for Christ's kindness sake, we should desire no
vengeance, but pity him and desire God to forgive and amend him knowing well
that no flesh can do otherwise the sin, except that God preserve him. Thou will say what good does such persecution and tyranny unto the righteous? First
it makes them feel the woorkyng of Gods spirit in them, and that their faith
is unfeigned. Secondaryly I say The greatest sinner is righteous in Christ and
the promises. And the perfectest and holiest is a sinner in the law and the
flesh.
that no man is so great a sinner, if he repent and believe, but that he is
righteous in Christ and in the promises: yet if thou look on the flesh and
unto the law there is no man so perfect that is not found a sinner. Nor any
man so pure, that has not somewhat to be yet purged. This shall suffice at
this time as concerning obedience.

BEcause that God excludes no degree from his mercy. But who so ever repents
and believes his promises (of what soever degree he be of) the same shall be
partaker of his grace: therefore as I have described the obedience of them that
are under power and rule, even so will I with Gods help (as my duty is)
declare how the rulers which God shall vouchsafe to call unto the knowledge of
the truth ought to rule.

The office of a Father, and how he should rule.
FAthers move not your children unto wrath: but bring them up in y^ nurtour and
information Rigor in parents toward their chilchildren is to be eschued.
of the Lord. Ephe. vi. and Collos. iij. Fathers rate not your children, least
they be of desperate mind, that is, least you discourage the^. For where y^
fathers and mothers are weywarde hasty and churlishe, ever brauling and
chiding: there are yt children anon discouraged and hartlesse, and apt for
nothing, neither can they The right bringing up of children.
do any thing aright. Bring them up in the nurtoure and information of the
Lord. Teach the^ to know Christ, and set Gods ordinance before them, saying:
son or daughter, God has created thee and made thee, thorough us thy father
and mother, and at his commandment have we so long thus kindly brought thee
up, and kept thee from all perils, he has commanded thee also to obey us,
saying: child obey thy father and mother. If thou meekely obey, so shall thou
grow both in the favor of God and man, and knowledge of our Lord Christ. If
thou will not obey us at his commandment: the^ are we charged to correct
thee, yea, and if thou repent not and amend thy self, God shall sley thee by
his officers, The destruction and marring of children.
or punish thee everlastingly. Nurtoure the^ not worldly, and with worldly
wisdom, saying: thou shall come to honor, dignity, promotion, and riches,
thou shall be better then such and such, thou shall have iij. or iiij.
benefices, and be a great doctoure or a Bishop, and have so many men waiting on
thee, and do nothing but hawk and hunte, and live at pleasure, thou shall not
need to sweat, to labor or to take any pain for thy living and so forth,
filling the^ full of pride, disdain, and ambition, and corrupting their minds
with worldly persuasions. Let the fathers and mothers mark how they themselves
were disposed at all ages, and by experience of their own infirmities, help
their children and keep them from occasions. Let them teach their children to
axe maryages of The marriage of children without con^ of their paren^es is
unlawful.
their fathers and mothers. And let their elders provide marriages for them in
season: teaching them also to know, that she is not his wife which y^ son
takes, nor he her husband which the daughter takes without the consent and
good will of their elders, or them that have authority over the^. If their
friends will not marry the^, then are they not to blame, if they marry
themselves. Let not yt fathers and mothers always take the utmost of their
authority of their children, but at a time suffer with them, and bear their
weaknesses, as Christ does ours. Seek Christ in your children, in your wives,
servants, and subjects. Father, mother, son, daughter, master, servant,
king and subject, be names in the worldly regiment. In Christ we are all one
thing, In Christ we are all servant, and he that has knowledge is bound.
none better then other, all brethren, and must all seek Christ, and our
brothers profit in Christ. And he that has the knowledge whether he be Lord
or king, is bound to submit himself and serve his brethren, and to give him
self for them, to win them to Christ.

The office of an husband and how he ought to rule.
Husbands love your wives, as Christ loved the congregation, and gave himself
for it, to sanctify it, and cleanse it. Men ought to love their wives, as their
own bodies. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall
continue with his wife, and shall be made both one flesh. See that ever one of
you love his wife even as his own body: All this says Paul. Ephe. v. and
Collo. iij. he says husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto the^.
And Peter in the third chapter of his first epistle says: men Me^ ought to
rule their wives by Gods word.
dwell with your wives according to knowledge, (that is, according to the
doctrine of Christ) giving reverence unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel
(that is, help her to bear her infirmities) and as unto them that are heirs
also of ye grace of life, that your prayers be not let. In many things Why the
man is stronger then the woman.
God has made the men stronger then the women, not to rage upon them, and to
be tyrants unto then, but to help the^, but to bear their weakness. Be
courteous thereaefore unto them, and win the^ unto Christ, and overcome them
with kyndnes, that of love they may obey y^ ordinance that God has made
between man and wife.

The office of a master, and how he ought to rule.
Paul Ephe. vi. says: ye masters do even ye same things unto the^ (that is,
be master after ye example and doctrine of Christ, as he before taught y^
servants to obey unto their masters as unto Christ) putting away threanings
(that is, give Teach thy servant to know Christ, and after Christ's doctrine
deal with him.
the^ fair wordse, and exhort the^ kyndely to do their duty: yea nurtour them
as thine own sons with y^ Lords nourtour, that they may see in Christ a cause
why they ought lovingly to obey) and remember (says he) that your master also
is in heaven. Neither is there any respect of persons with him, that is, he is
indifferent and not parciall: as great in his sight is a servant as a master.
And the third chapter to the Col. says he: ye masters, do unto your servant
that which is just and equal, remembering that ye also have a master in heaven.
Give your servant kind words, fode, raiment and learning. Be not bitter
unto them, rail not on them, give the^ no cruel countenance: but according
to the ensample and doctrine of Christ, deal with them. And when they labor
sore, cherishe them Do all thing with Gods word.
again. When ye correct the^, let Gods word be by, and do it with such good
manner that they may see how that ye do it to amend them only, and to bring
them unto the way which God bids us walk in, and not to aue^ge your selves,
or to wreke your malice on them. If at a time thorough hastines ye exceed
measure in punishing, recompense it an other way and pardon them an other time.

The duty of Landlordes.
LEt Christen Landlordes be content with their rent and Landlordes should raise
no rentes, nor bring up new customs.
old customs, not reysing y^ rent or fynes and bringing up new customs to
oppress their tenauntes: neither letting two or three tenauntryes unto one
man. Let them not take in their communes, neither make parkes nor pastures of
whole parishes. For God gave the earth to God gave ^he earth to men.
men to inhabit, and not unto sheep and wild dear. Be as fathers unto your
tenauntes: yea be unto them, as Christ was unto us, and show unto them all
love, and kyndnes. What soever business is among the^, be not parciall,
favoring one more the^ an other. The complayntes, quarrels, and strife that are
among them, count diseases of sick people, and as a merciful physician heal
them with wisdom and good council. Be pitiful and tender hearted unto them,
and let not one of thy tenauntes tear out an others throat, but judge their
causes indifferently and compel them to make their diches, hedges, gates and
ways. For eue^ for such causes were ye made landlordes, and for such causes
paid men rent at the beginning. For if such an order were not, one should sley
an other, and all should go to wast. If thy tenant shall labor and toil all
the year to pay thee thy rent, and when he has bestowed al his labor, his
neighbors cattle shall devour his fruits, how tedyous and bitter should his
life Landlordes should withstand the worng of the Tenauntes.
be? Se therefore that ye do your duties again, and suffer no man to do them
wrong, save the king only. If he do wrong, then must they abide Gods
judgment.

The duty of Kings, and of the Judges and Officers.
LEt Kings (if they had lever be Christen in deed then so to be called) give
themselves all together to the wealth of their Realms after the ensample of
Christ: remembryng that the people are Gods and not theirs: ye are Christ's
inheritance and possession bought with his blood. The most despised There is
no respect of person before God.
person in his Realm is the kings brother, and felowmember with him, and
equal with him in the kingdom of God and of Christ. Let him therefore not
think him self to good to do the^ service, neither seek any other thing in
them, then a father seeks in his children, yea then Christ sought in us.
Though that the king in the temporal regiment be in the rowme of God and
represents God him self, and is with out all comparison better the^ his
subjects: yet let him put of that and become a brother, doing and leaving
undone all things in respect of the common wealth, that all men may see that
he seeks nothing, but the profet of his subjects. When a cause that requires
execution is brought before him, then only let him take ye person of God on
him. Then let him know no creature but hear all indifferently, whether it be a
stranger or one of his own Realm, and the small as well as the great and
judge righteously for the judgment is the Lords. Deuteronomy. i. In time of
judgment he is no minister in the kingdom of Christ: he preaches no Gospel,
but the sharp law of vengeance. Let him take the holy judges of the old
Testament for an example and namely Moses which in executing the Moses.
law was mercylesse, otherwise more then a mother unto them, never auengyng his
own wrongs but suffering all thing, bearing every man's weakness, teaching,
warning, exhorting and ever caryng for them, and so tenderly loved them, that
he desired God either to forgive them, or to damn him with them.

Let the judges also privately when Judges.
they have put of the person of a judge exhort with good counsel and warn the
people and help, that they come not at Gods judgment: but the causes that are
brought unto them, when they sit in Gods stead, let them judge, and condemn ye
trespasser under lawful witnesses and not break up into the consciences O
tyranny to compel a man to accuse himself.
of men, after the example of Antichrists disciples, and compel the^ either
to forswear them selves by the almighty God, and by the holy Gospel of his
merciful promises, or to testify against them selves. Which abhominatio^ Our
Prelates learned of Cayphas.
our Prelates learned of Cayphas Math. xxvj. saying to Christ: I adjure or
charge thee in the name of the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be
Christ the son of God: Secret sins pertayne unto God to punish, and open
sins unto the king.
Let that which is secret to God only, where of no proof ca^ be made nor
lawful witness brought, abide unto the coming of the Lord which shall open
all secrets. If any malice break forth, that let them judge only. For
further authority has God not given them.

Moses Deuteronomy. xvij. warns judges
to keep them upright and to look on no man's person, that is, that they
prefer Parcialitie in Judges is wicked.
not the hye before the low, the great before the small, the rich before poor,
his acquaintance, friend, kinsman, country man or one of his own nation
before a stranger, a friend or an aliant, ye or one of their own faith before
an infidel: but that they look on the cause only to judge indifferently. For
the rowme that they are in, and the law that they execute are Gods, which as he
has made all, and is God of all and all are his sons: even so is he judge
over all, and will have al judged by his law indifferently, and to have the
right of his law, and will avenge the wrong done unto the Turk or Sareson. For
though they be not under the everlasting Testament of God in Christ, as few of
us which are called Christen be, and even no mo the^ to whom God has sent his
promises and poured his spirit into their hearts to believe them, and through
faith graven lust in their hearts, to fulfill the law of love: yet are they
under the Testament of ye law natural, which is the laws of every land made
for the common wealth there, and for peace and unite that one may live by an
other. In which laws the infidels (if they keep them) have promises of
worldly things. Who soever therefore hyndreth Parcialitie, and bribe taking, is
the pestilence of Judges.
a very infidel from the right of that law, sins against God, and of him
will God be aue^ged. Moreover Moses warns them that they receive no gifts,
rewards or bribes. For those two points, favoring of one person more then an
other, and receauyng rewards, peruerte all right and equity and is ye only
pestilence of all judges.

And the kings warns he that
they have not to many wives, lest their hearts turn away: and that they read
always in the law of God, to learn to fear him, lest their hearts be lift up
above their brethren. Which ij. points, women and pride the despising of their
Women, pride and contempt of subjects, are the pestilence of Princes.
subjects, which are in very deed their own brethren, are the common
pestilence of all Princes. Read the stories and see.

The Shyriffes, Bailey arauntes, Constables and such like officers may let no
man that hurts his neighbor escape, but that they bring them before the
judges, except they in the mean time agree with their neighbors and make them
amends.

Let Kings defend their subjects from the wrongs of other nations, but
pick no quarrels for every trifle: no let not our most holy father make them no
more so dronke^ with vain names, Vain names.
with cappes of maintenance, and like bables, as it were popetry for children,
to beggar their Realms and to murder their people, for defendyng of our holy
fathers tyranny. If a lawful peace The holy father lonseth peace and vm^^e
trace tr^uth and a^ honesty.
that stands with Gods word be made between Prince and Prince, and the name
of God taken to record and the body of our Savior broken between them, upon
the bond which they have made, that peace or bond can our holy father not
dispense with, neither lowse it with all the keys he has: no verily Christ
can not break it. For he came not to break the law but to fulfill it. Math. v.

If any man have broken the law or a good ordinance and repent and come to the
rightway again, then has Christ power to forgive him: but license to break
the law ca^ he not give, much more his disciples and vicares (as they call them
selves) can not do it. The keys whereof they so greatly bost What the keys ar^
and why they are so called.
them selves are no carnal things, but spiritual, and nothing else save
knowledge of the law and of the promises or Gospel: if any man for lack of
spiritual feelyng desire authority of men, let him read the old Doctors. If
any man desire authority of Scripture Christ says (Luke. xj.) woe be to you
lawyers for ye have taken away the key of knowledge, ye enter not in your
selves, and them that come in, ye forbid, that is, they had blinded y^
Scripture whose knowledge (as it were a keye) lets into God, with gloses and
traditions. Likewise find thou Math. xxiij. As Peter answered in the name
The keys are promised.
of al: so Christ promised him the keys in the person of all: Math. xvj. And
in the. xx. of John he paid them saying: receive the holy Ghost, who soeuers
The keys are paid.
sins ye remitte they are remitted or forgeuen, and who soeuers sins ye
retain they are retained or holden. With To bind and loose.
preaching the promises loose they as many as repent and believe. And for that
John says receive yt holy ghost. Luke in his last Chapter says: then opened
he their wits, that they might understand the Scriptures and said unto them:
thus it is written. And thus it behooved Christ to suffer and to rise again the
third day. And that repentance Repentance and forgeuenes come by preaching.
and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations. At
preaching of the law repent men, and at the preaching of the promises do they
believe and are saved. Peter in the second of the Acts practiced Peter
practices his keys.
his keys, and by preaching the law brought the people into yt knowledge of
them selves, and bound their consciences, so that they were pricked in their
hearts, and said unto Peter and to the other Apostles, what shall we do? Then
brought they forth the keye of the sweet promises saying: repent and be
Baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost. For the promise was
made unto you, and unto your children, and to all that are a far even as many
as the Lord shall call. Of like examples is the Acts full, and Peter's Epistles,
and Paul's Epistles and all The popes authority: is to preach gods word only.
the Scripture, neither has our holy father any other authority of Christ or
by the reason of his predecessor Peter then to preach Gods word. As Christ
co^pareth the understanding of Scripture unto a keye, so compares he it to a
net, and unto leven and unto many other things for certain properties. I
marvel therefore that they boast not Beware of the net and of the leven and of
the counterfeit keys of our holy father.
them selves of their net and leven, as well as of their keys, for they are
all one thing. But as Christ bids us beware of y^ leue^ of the Phariseis, so
beware of their counterfeted keys and of their false net (which are their
traditions and ceremonies, their hypocrisy and false doctrine, wherewith they
katch, not souls unto Christ, but authority and riches unto them selves.

Let christen kings therefore keep Not with an heretic says the Pope.
their faith and truth, and all lawful promises and bonds, not one with an
other only, but even with the Turk or whatsoever infidel it be. For so it is
right before God, as the scriptures and examples of the Bible testify.
Whosoever Unlawful vows or oaths men are commanded to break.
voweth an unlawful vow, promises an unlawful promise, swears an unlawful
oath, sins against God, and ought therefore to break it. He needs not to sue
to Rome for a license. For he has Gods word, and not a license only: but also
a commandment to break it. They therefore y^ are sworn to be true unto
Cardinals and Bishops, that is to say, false unto God, the king, and the
realm, may break their oaths lawfully without grudge of conscience by the
authority of Gods word. In making them they sinned, but in repe^tyng and
breakyng them they please God hyghly, and receive forgeuenes in Christ.

Let kings take their duty of their subjects, and that is necessary unto yt
defense of the realm. Let them rule their Realms them selves, with the help
of lay men that are sage, wise, learned, and expert. Is it not a shame above
all shames and a monstrous thing, that no man should be found able to govern
a worldly kingdom save bishops Bishops.
and prelates, that have forsaken the world, and are taken out of the world
and appointed to preach the kingdom of God? Christ says, yt his kingdom is
not of this world. John. 18. And Luke 12. unto y^ young man that desired him to
bid his brother to give him part of the inheritance, he answered, who made me
a judge or a deuider Behold the face of the Pope and of the Bishops in this
glass.
among you. No man that lays his hand to the Plowe and looks back is apt
for the kingdom of heaven. Luke. ix. No man can serve two masters but he must
despise the one Math. vj.

To preach Gods word is to much for half a man. And to minister a temporal
kingdom is to much for half a man also. Either other requires an whole man.
One therefore can not well do both. He that auengeth himself on every trifle is
not mete to preach yt patience of Christ, how that a man ought to forgive and
to suffer all things. He that is overwhelmed with all manner riches, and does
but seek more daily, is not meet to preach poverty. He that will obey no
man, is not mete to preach how we ought to obey all men. Peter says Act. vj.
It is not meet that we should leave the word of God and serve at the tables.
Paul says in the ix. chapter of the first Corinthe. Woe is me if I preach not
a terible saying, verily for Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops. If he had said,
woe be unto me, if I fight not and move Princes unto war, or if I increase not
S. Peter's patrimony (as they call it) it had Peter's patrimony.
been a more easy saying for them.

Christ forbids his disciples and The popes authority is improued.
that often (as thou may see Math. xviij. And also xx. Mark. ix. and also x.
Luke ix. and also xxij. Even at his last supper) not only to clime above
Lords. kings, and Emperors in worldly rule, but also to exalt themselves one
above an other in ye kingdom of God. But in vain: for the Pope would not
hear it though he had commanded it ten thousand times. Gods word should
rule only and not Bishops Bishops have captiued Gods word with their own
decrees.
decrees, or the Popes pleasure. That ought they to preach purely and
spiritually, and to fashion their lives after, and with all ensample of godly
living and long suffering, to draw all to Christ: and not to expound the
Scriptures carnally and worldly, saying: God spoke this to Peter and I am his
successor, therefore this authority is mine only: and then bring in the
tyranny of their fleshly wisdom, in praesentia maioris, cessat potestas
minoris, that is, in the presence of the greater, y^ less has no power. There
is no brotherhod where such philosophy is taught.

SVch philosophy, and so to abuse the scriptures, and to mock with Gods word,
is after the manner of the Bishop of Rochesters divinity. For he in his
Rochester.
Sermon of the condemnation of Martin Luther, proves by a shadow of the old
testament, that is, by Moses and Aaron, that Satan and Antichrist our most
holy father the Pope is Christ's vicare and head of Christ's congregation.

Moses (says he) signifies Christ, and Aaron the Pope. And yet the epistle
unto the Hebrews proves that the hye Priest of the old law signifies
Christ, and his offering and his going in once in the year into the inner
temple, signify the offering wherewyth Christ offered himself, and Christ's
going in unto the father to be an everlasting mediator or intercessor for us.
Nevertheless Rochester proves the contrary by a shadow: by a shadow verily.
For in shadows they walk with out all shame, and the light will they They
walk in shadows.
not come at, but enforce to stop and quench it with all craft and falshod,
lest their abominable iugling should be seen. If any man look in the light
of ye new testament, he shall clearly see, that that shadow may not be so
understand.

Understand therefore that one thing in the Scripture represents diverse
things. A Serpent figureth Christ in one place, and the Devil in an other.
And a Lion does likewise. Christ by Leven signifies Gods word in one place,
and in an other signifies thereby the traditions of yt Phareseis which sowred
and altered Gods word for their advantage. Now Moses verily in y^ said place
represents Christ, and Aaron Aaron is every true preacher.
which was not yet hye Priest, represe^ted not Peter only or his successor,
as my Lord of Rochester would have it (for Peter was to little to bear
Christ's message unto all the world) but signifies every disciple of Christ
and every true preacher of Gods word. For Moses put in Aarons mouth, what he
should say, and Aaron was Moses Prophet, and spoke not his own message (as
the Pope and Bishops do) but that which Moses had received of God and
delivered unto him. Exodus 4. and also 7. So ought every preacher to preach Gods
word purely, and neither to add nor minish. A true messenger must do his
message truly, and say neither more nor less then he is commanded. Aaron
when Aaron represents Christ.
he is hye priest, and offers and purges the people of their worldly sin,
which they had fallen in in touching uncleanly things, and in eating meats
forbidden (as we sin in handling the chalice, and the Alter stone, and are
purged with the Bishops blessing) represents Christ, which purges us from
all sin in the sight of God, as the epistle unto the Hebrews makes mention.
When Moses was gone up into the mount and Aaron left behind, and made the
golden Calfe, there Aaron represents all false preachers, and namely, our
most holy father y^ Pope, which in like manner makes us believe in a Bull, as yt
Bishop of Rochester full well alleges the place in his sermon.

If the Pope be signified by Aaron and Christ by Moses, why is not the Pope as
well content with Christ's Aaron adds nothing to Moses law.
law and doctrine, as Aaron was with Moses? What is the cause that our Bishops
preach the pope and not Christ, seeing the Apostles preached not Peter, but
Christ. Paul. ij. Cor. iiij. says of him self and of his felowapostles: The
Apostles preached not Peter: but Christ.
we preach not our selves but Christ Jesus the Lord, and preach our selves
your servants for Jesus sake. And. i. Cor. iij. Let no man rejoice in men.
For all things are yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Peter: whether it
be the world, or life, or death: whether they be present things or things to
come: all are yours and ye are Christ's and Christ is Gods. He leueth out ye
are Peter's, or ye are the popes. And in the Chapter following he says. Let men
thus wise esteem us, eue^ the ministers of Christ. etc. And. ij. Cor. xj. Paul
was gelous over his Corinthians, because they fell from Christ, to whom he had
married the^, and did cleave unto the authority of men (for eue^ then false
Prophets sought authority in the name of the hye Apostles) I am says he
gelouse over you with godly gelousie. For I coupled you to one man, to make you
a chaste virgin to Christ: but I fear lest as the Serpent deceived ^e through
his suttiltie, even so your wits should be corrupt from the singleness that
is in Christ. And it follows: If he that comes to you preached an other
Jesus, or if ye receive an other spirit or another Gospel, then might ye well
have been content, that is, ye might have well suffered him to have authority
above me. But I suppose (says he) that I was not behynd the hye Apostles:
meaning in preaching Jesus and his Gospel, and in ministering the spirit. And
in the said. xj. Chapter, he proves by y^ doctrine of Christ, that he is
greater then the hye Apostles. For Christ says, to be great in the kingdom of
God, is to do service and take pain for other. Paul is greater tha^ hye
Apostles.
Upon which rule Paul disputes saying: if they be the ministers of Christ I am
more. In labors more aboundaunt, in stripes about measure in prison more
plenteously, in death often and so forth. If Paul preached Christ more Paul is
greater the^ Peter.
then Peter and suffered more for his congregation, then is he greater then
Peter by ye testimony of Christ. And in the xij. he says. In nothing was I
inferior unto y^ hye Apostles. Though I Paul proved his Apostleshyp with
preaching and sufferyng: The Bishops prove there Apostleshyp with bulls and
shadows.
be nothing, yet the tokens of an Apostle were wrought among you with all
patience, with signs and wonders and mighty deeds. So proved he his authority
and not with a bulle from Peter sealed with cold lead, either with shadows of
the old Testament falsely expounded.

Moreover the Apostles were sent immediately of Christ and of Christ received
they their authority, as Paul boasts him self every where. Christ The
Apostles were sent of Christ with like authority.
(says he) sent me to preach the Gospel. i. Corint. i. And I received of the
Lord that which I delivered unto you i. Cor. xi. And Gal. i. I certify you
brethren that the Gospel which was preached of me, was not after the manner of
men (that is to wit, carnal or fleshly) neither received I it of man, neither
was it taught me: but I received it by yt revelation of Jesus Christ. And Gal.
ij. He that was mighty in Peter in the Apostleship over the circumcision, was
mighty in me among the Gentiles. And 1. Timoth. 1. Read thou likewise. And
John xx. Christ sent them forth indifferently, and gave them like power. As my
father sent me (says he) so send I you: that is, to preach and to suffer, as I
have done, and not to conquer enemies and kingdoms, and to subdue all
temporal power under you with disguised hypocrisy. He gave the^ the holy
Ghost to bind and loose indifferently, as thou see: And afterward he sent
forth Paul with like authority, as thou see in the Acts. And in the last of
Matthew says he: all power is given me in heaven and in earth, go therefore and
teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the father, and of the son,
and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe whatsoever I commanded you.
The authority that The authority that Christ gave was to preach Christ's
word.
Christ gave the^ was to preach, yet not what they would imagine, but what he
had commanded. Lo says he, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world. He said not I go my way, and lo here is Peter in my stead: But sent
them every man to a sundry country, whether soever the spirit carried them,
and went with the^ him self. And as he wrought with Peter where he went, so
wrought he with the other where they went, as Paul boasts of him self unto
the Galathians. Seeing now that we have Christ's
doctrine and Christ's holy promises, and seeing that Christ is ever present
with us his own self, how comes it that Christ may not reign immediately
over us, as well as the Pope which comes never at us? Seeing also that the
office of an Apostle is to preach only, how can the Pope challenge with right,
any authority where he preaches not? How comes it also that Rochester will
not let us be called one congregation be the reason of one God, one Christ, one
spirit, one Gospel, one faith, one hope, and one Baptism, as well as because
of one Pope?

If any natural beast with his worldly wisdom strive, that one is
greater then an other, because that in congregations one is sent of an other,
as we see in the Acts. I answer that Peter sent no man, but was sent him
self, and John was sent, and Paul, Sylas and Barnabas were sent. Howbeit such
manner sendynges are not worldly, as Princes send Ambassadors, no nor as Friars
send their limiters to gather their brethrenhedes which must obey whether they
will or will not. Here all thing is free and willyngly. And the holy ghost
brings the^ together which makes their wills free, and ready to bestow
them selves upon their neighbors profit. And they that come, offer the^
selves, and all that they have or ca^ do, to serve the Lord and their brethren.
And every man, as he is found apt and meet to serve his neighbor, so is he
sent or put in office. And of the holy Ghost are they sent with the consent of
their brethren and with their own consent also. And Gods word rules in that
congregation, unto which word every man confirms his will. And Christ which
is always present is the head. But as our Bishops hear not Christ's voice, so
see they him not Why Bishops make them a god on earth.
present: and therefore make them a God on the earth, of the kind (I suppose)
of Aarons calfe. For he brings forth Aaron made a calfe. And the Pope makes
Bulls.
no other fruit but Bulls.

For as much also as Christ is as great as Peter, why is not his seat as great
as Peter's? Had the head of the Empire ben at Jerusalem, there had been no
mention made of Peter. It is verily, as Paul says in the xj. Chap. of the ij.
Epistle to the Corinthians. The false Apostles are disceatful workers, and
fashion them selves like unto the Apostles of Christ. That is the The shaue^
nation has put Christ out of his ^owme, and all kings and the Emperor.
shaven nation preached Christ falsely, yea under the name of Christ preached
them selves, and reign in Christ's stead: have also taken away the keye of
knowledge and have wrapped y^ people in ignorance, and have taught the^ to
believe in them selves, in their traditions and false ceremonies: so that Christ
is but a vain name, and after Christ is but a vain name.
they had put Christ out of his rowme, they gate them selves to the Emperor
and kings, and so long ministered their business till they have also put the^ out
of their rowmes, and have got their Proper ministers.
authorities from them and reign also in their stead: so that y^ Emperor and
kings are but vain names and shadows, as Christ is, having nothing to do in
the world. Thus raygne they in the stead of God and man and have all power
under them, and do what they list.

Let us see an other point of our great clarke. A little after the beginning
Rochester is proved both ignorant and malicious.
of his Sermon, entendyng to prove that which is clearer then the son and
serves no more for his purpose then Ite missa est serves to prove that our
Lady was borne without original sin: he alleges a saying that Martin
Luther says, which is this, if we affirm that any one Epistle of Paul or any
one place of his Epistles perteineith not unto the universal Church, that is,
to all the congregation of them that believe in Christ, we take away all S.
Paul's authority. Whereupon says Rochester. If it be thus of the words of S.
Paul, much rather it is true of the Gospels of Christ and of every place of
them. O malicious blyndnes. First note his blindness. He understands by this
word Gospel no more but the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
and thinks not that the Acts of Apostles and the Epistles of Peter, of Paul
and of John The Epistles of Paul are the Gospel.
and of other like, are also the Gospel. Paul calls his preaching the
Gospel. Romans ij. and. i. Cor. iiij. and Gal. i. and. i. Timoth. i. The Gospel
is every where one though it be preached of diverse, and signifies glad
tidings, What Gospel signifies.
that is to wit, an open preaching of Christ and the holy Testament and
gracious promises that God has made in Christ's blood, to all that repent and
believe. Now is there more Gospel in one Epistle of Paul, that is to say,
Christ is more clearly preached, and more promises rehearsed in one Epistle of
Paul, then in the. iij. first Evangelists. Matthew, Mark and Luke.

Consider also his maliciousnes, how wickedly and how craftily he takes away
ye authority of Paul. It is much rather true of the Gospelles, and of every
place in them then of Paul. If One Gospel, one spirit, one truth.
that which ye four Evangelists wrote be truer then that which Paul wrote,
then is it not one Gospel that they preached, neither one spirit that taught
them. If it be one Gospel and one spirit, how is one truer then the other?
Paul proves his authority to ye Galathians The authority of Paul, and of
his Gospel.
and to the Corinthians, because that he received his Gospel by revelation of
Christ and not of man: and because that when he com^^ed with Peter and ye hye
Apostles of his Gospel and preaching, they could improve nothing, neither
teach him any thing: and because also that as many were converted and as great
miracles showed by his preaching, as at the preaching of the hie Apostles, and
therefore will be of no less authority, the^ Peter and other hie Apostles:
Nor have his Gospel of less reputation then theirs.

Finally that thou may know Rochester Rochester plays bo^ pepe.
for ever, and all the remnaunt by him, what they are within ye skin, mark
how he plays bo pepe with ye Scripture. He allegeth the beginning of the
tenth chapter to the Hebrews. Vmbram habens lex futurorum bonorum, the law
has but a shadow of things to come. And immediately expounds the figure
clean contrary unto the chapter following, and to all the whole epistle, making
Aaron a figure of yt Pope, whom the Epistle makes a figure of Christ.

He allegeth half a text of Paul. i. Timoth. iiij. In the latter days some
shall depart from the faith, giving head unto spirits of error and deuilish
doctrine: but it follows in the text, giving attendaunce or head unto the
deuilishe doctrine of them which speak false through hypocrisy, and have their
consciences marked with a hot iron, forbidding to mary, and commau^ding to
abstain from meats which God has created to be received with giving thanks.
Which two things who Never man for bad to marry save the Pope.
ever did save ye Pope Rochesters God, making sin in the creatures which God
has created for ma^s use to be received with thanks? The kingdom of heaven
is not meat and drink says Paul, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost. For whosoever in these things serves Christ, pleases God, and is
allowed of men. Romans xiiij. Had Rochester therefore not a conscience marked with
the hot iron of malice, so that he can not consent unto the will of God and
glory of Christ, he would not have so alleged the text which is contrary to
none save themselves.

He alleges an other text of Paul in the second chapter of his second
epistle to the Thessalonians. Erit dissessi^ primum, that is says Rochester,
before the coming of Antichrist, there shall be a notable departing from the
faith. And Paul says. The Lord comes not except there come a departing
first. Paul's meaning is, that the last day comes not so shortly, but that
Antichrist shall come first and destroy the faith, and sit in the temple of
God, and make all men worship him, and believe in him (as the Pope does) and
then shall Gods word come to light again (as it does at this time) and destroy
him and utter his iuggling, and then comes Christ unto judgment. What say ye
of this crafty co^ueyar? Would he spare, suppose ye to allege and to wrest
other doctors pestilently, which fears not for to iugle with y^ holy
scripture of God, expounding y^ unto Antichrist which Paul speaks of Christ?
No be ye sure. But even after this manner wise pervert they the whole scripture
and all doctors, wresting the^ unto their abominable purpose, clean contrary
to the meaning of the text, and to the circumstaunces that go before and
after. Which deuelishe falshod lest the lay men should perceive, is the very
The cause why they will not have the scripture in English.
cause why y^ they will not suffer the Scripture to be had in the English
tongue, neither any work to be made, that should bring the people to knowledge
of the truth.

He alleges for the Popes authority, Saint Ciprian, Saint Augustine,
Ambrose, Hierome, and Origene: of which never one knew of any authority, that
one Bishop should have above an other. And Saint Gregory alleges he, which
would receive no such authority above his brethren when it was proffered him.
As the manner is to call Tully chief of Orators for his Tully chief of
Orators.
singular cloquence, and Aristotle chief of Philosophers, and Virgill chief
of Poets, for their singular learning, and not for any authority that they had
over other: so was it the manner to call Peter chief of the Apostles for his
singular actiuitie and boldness, and not that he should be Lord over his
brethren, contrary to his own doctrine. Yet compare that chief Apostle unto
Paul, and he is found a great way inferior. This I say not that I would that
any man should make a God of Paul, contrary unto his own learning.
Notwithstanding yet this manner of speaking is left unto us of our elders, that
when we say the Apostle says so, we understand Paul for his excellency above
other Apostles. I would he would tell you how Hieroin, Augustine, Bid, Origene,
and other doctors expound this text upon this rock I will build my
congregation: and how they enterpret the keys also. Thereto, Pasce, pasce,
pasce, which Rochester leaves without any English, signifies not Pol^,
shere, and shave. Upon which text behold the faithful exposition of Bid.

Note also how craftily he would enfeoffe the Apostles of Christ with their
Rochester alleges Paul for his blind ceremonies contrary to Paul's doctrine.
wicked traditions and false Ceremonies, which they themselves have feigned,
alleging Paul. ij. Thessal. ij. I answer that Paul taught by mouth such
things as he wrote in his epistles. And his traditions were the Gospel of
Christ, and honest manners and living, and such a good order as becomes the
doctrine of Christ. As that a woman obey her husband, have her head covered,
keep silence, and go womanly and christenly apparelled: that children and
servants be in subjection: and that the young obey their elders, that no man
eat but he that labors and works, and that men make an earnest thing of
Gods word, and of his holy Sacraments: and to watch, fast, and pray, and such
like, as the Scripture commands. Which things he that would break were no
christen man. But we may well compain and cry to God for help, that It is
not lawful for us to tell what prayer is, what fasting is, or wherefore it
serves.
it is not lawful for the Popes tyranny, to teach y^ people what prayer is,
what fasting is, and wherefore it serves. There were also certain customs
always which were not commanded in pain of hell or everlasting da^natio^, as
to watch all night, and to kiss one an other: which as soon as the people
abused, then they brake the^. For which cause the Bishops might break many
things now in like manner. Paul also in many things which God had made free,
gave pure and faithful counsel without tangling of any man's conscience, and
without all manner commaundyng under pain of cursing, Pain of cursing,
damnation, and so forth.
pain of excommunication, pain of heresy, pain of burning, pain of deadly
sin, pain of hell, and pain of damnation. As thou may see. i. Cor. 7.
Where he counceleth the unmarried, the widows, and virgins that it is good so
to abide, if they have the gift of chastity. Not to win heaven thereby (for
neither Circumcision neither uncircumcision is any thing at all, but the keeping
of the commandments is altogether) But that they might be without trouble,
and might also the better wait on Gods word and s^elyer serve their brethren.
And If Paul had none authority: the^ had Peter none, where had then the Pope
this authority?
says (as a faithful servant) that he had none authority of the Lord to give
them any commandment. But that the Apostles gave us any blind ceremonies
whereof we should not know the reason that I deny and also defy, as a thing
clean contrary unto the learning of Paul every where.

For Paul commands that no Rochester is improued.
man once speak in the Church, that is, in the congregation, but in a tongue
that all men understand, except that there be an interpreter by: he commands
to labor for knowledge, understanding, and feelyng and to beware of
superstition, and persuasions of worldly wisdom, philosophy, and of
hypocrisy and ceremonies, and of all manner disguising, and to walk in y^
plain and open truth. Ye were once darkness (says he) but now are ye light in
the Lord, walk therefore as the children of light. Ephe. v. how does Paul also
wish them increase of grace in every Epistle? How cries he to God to augment
their knowledge, that they should be no more children waueryng with every wind
of doctrine, but would vouchsafe to make them full men in Christ, and in the
understanding of the mysteries or secrets of Christ? so that it should no be
possible for any man to disceaue them with any entisyng reasons of worldly
wisdom, or to beguile them with blind ceremonies, or to lead them out of the
way with superstitiousnes of disguiled hypocrisy: unto which full knowledge
are Wherefore the spiritual officers are ordained.
the spiritual officers ordained to bring them. Ephesians. iiij. So far it is
away that Christ's Apostles should give them traditions of blind ceremonies
without signification, or of which no man should know the reason as Rochester
which loves shadows and darkness lies on them: God stop his blasphemous
mouth.

Consider also how studiously Rochester Rochester alleges heretics for his
purpose for lack of scripture.
alleges Origene, both for his Pope, and also to stablish his blind
ceremonies with all: which Origene of all heretics is condemned to be the
greatest. He is an ancient Doctor says he, yea and to who^ in this point
great faith is to be given: yea verily Robynhode is of authority enough to
prove the Pope withal.
Aristotle and Plato and even very Robynhode is to believed in such a point,
that so greatly mainteineth our holy fathers authority, and all his
disguisinges.

Last of all as once a crafty thief when he was espied and followed, cried
unto the people. Stop the thief, stop the thief. And as many to begin with
all, cast first in an other man's teth that which he fears should be laid to
his own charge: even so Rochester lays to Martin Luthers charge the slaying
and murtheryng of Christen men, because they will not believe in his doctrine,
which thing Rochester and his brethren have not ceased to do now certain
hundred years, with such malice that when they be dead, theyrage burning their
bodies, of which some they them selves of lickelyhode killed before secretly.
And because that all the world knows that Martin Luther slays no man, but
kills only with the spiritual sword, the word of God, such cankred
consciences as Rochester has. Neither persecuteth, but suffers persecution:
yet Rochester with a goodly Argument proves that he would do it if he could.
And mark I pray you what an Orator he is, and how vehemently Rochester is an
Oratoure.
he persuadeth it. Martin Luther has burned the Popes decretals: a manifest
sign, says he, that he would have burnt the Popes holiness also, if he had had
him. A like Argument (which I suppose to be rather true) I make. Rochester and
his holy brethren have burnt Christ's Testament: an evident sign verily that
they would have burnt Christ him self also if they had had him.

I had almost verily left out the Rochester is clean beside himself.
chiefest point of all. Rochester both abominable and shameless, yea and
sterke mad with pure malice, and so adased in the brains with spite, that he
ca^ not overcome the truth that he sees not, or rather cares not what he
says: in the end of his first destruction, I would say instruction as he
calls it, inte^ding to prove that we are justified thorouh holy works,
alleges half a text of Paul of the fifth to the Galathians (as his manner is
to iuggle and co^uey craftily) fides per dilectionem operans. Which If
Rochester be such a iuggler: What suppose ye of the rest? let Rochester be an
example therefore to judge them all.
text he this wise Englisheth: faith which is wrought by love, and makes a
verb passive of a verb deponent. Rochester will have love to go before and
faith to spring out of love. Thus Antichrist turns the rotes of the tree
upward. I must first love a bitter medicine (after Rochesters doctrine) and
then believe that it is wholesome. When by natural reason, I first hate a bitter
medicine, until I be brought in belief of the physician, that it is wholesome,
and that the bitterness shall heal me, and then afterward love it of that
belief. Does the child love the father first, and the^ believe that he is his
son or heir, or rather because he knows that he is his son or heir and
beloved, therefore loves again? John says in the Faith is the root: and love
springs of faith.
third of his first epistle. See what love the father has showed upon us, that
we should be called his sons. Because we are sons therefore love we. Now by
faith are we sons as John says in the first chapter of his Gospel. He gave
them power to be the sons of God, in that they believed on his name. And Paul
says, in the third chapter of his Epistle to the Galathians, we are all the
sons of God by the faith which is in Jesus Christ. And John in the said
chapter of his epistle says. Hereby perceive we love, that he gave his life
for us. We could see no love nor cause to love again, except that we believed
that he dyed for us, and that we were saved thorough his death. And in the
chapter following says John. Herein is love: not that we loved God: but that he
loved us, and sent his son to make agreement for our sins. So God sent not
his son for any love that we had to him: but of the love, that he had to us,
sent he his son, that we might so love and love again. Paul likewise in the
8. chapter to the Romans, after that he has declared the infinite love of
God to us ward, in that he spared not his own son, but gave him for us,
cries out saying: who shall separate us from the love of God? shall
persecution, shall a sword? etc. No, says he, I am sure that no creature
shall separate us from the love of God, that is, in Christ Jesus our Lord: as
who should say, we see so great love in God to us ward in Christ's death, that
though all misfortune should fall on us, we can not but love again. Now how
know we that God loves us? verily by faith. So therefore, though Rochester
Though Rochester have not the spirit to judge spiritual things, yet ought
reason to have kept him from so shameful lying. But God has blinded him to
bring their falshod to light.
be a beast faythlesse, yet ought natural reason to have taught him, that love
springs out of faith and knowledge: and not faith and knowledge out of love.
But let us see the text. Paul says thus. In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision
is any thing worth, nor incircumcision: but faith which works through love, or
which through love is strong or mighty in working, and not which is wrought by
love, as the iuggler says. Faith that loves Gods co^maundeme^ts iustitieth a
man. If thou believe gods promises in christ, and love his commandments, then
art thou safe. If thou love ye commau^deme^t, then art thou sure y^ thy faith
is unfeigned, and that gods spirit is in thee.

How faith justifies before God in the heart, and how love springs of faith,
and compels us to work, and how the works justify before the world, and
testify what we are, and certify us that our faith is unfeigned, and that ye
right spirit of God is in us, see in my book of ye iustifiyng of faith, and
there shall thou see all thing abundantly. Also of the controversy between
Paul and The controversy between James and Paul.
James see there. Never the later, when Rochester says, if faith only
justified, then both the devils and also sinners that lie still in sin should
be saved, his argument is not worth a straw. For neither the devils nor yet
sinners that continue in sin of purpose and delectation, Why devils have none
of Paul's faith, nor sinners that repent not.
have any such faith as Paul speaks of. For Paul's faith is to believe Gods
promises. Faith (says he) Romans x. comes by hearing, and hearing comes by
the word of God. And how shall they hear without a preacher, and how shall
they preach except they be sent? As it is written (says he) how beautiful are
the fecte that bring glade tydinges of peace, and bring tidings of good
things. Now when sent God any messengers unto the devils to preach them peace,
or any good thing: The devil has no promise: he is therefore excluded from
Paul's faith. The devil believes that A man may believe that Christ died and
many other things, (...) not believe in Christ.
Christ dyed, but not that he dyed for his sins. Neither does any that
co^senteth in the heart to continue in sin, believe that Christ dyed for him.
For to believe that Christ dyed for us, is to see our horrible damnation, and
how we What it is to believe in Christ.
were appointed unto eternal pains, and to feel, and to be sure that we are
delivered therefro^ thorough Christ: in that we have power to hate our sins,
and to love Gods commandments. All such repent and have their hearts loosed
out of captivity and bondage of sin, and are therefore justified thorough
faith in Christ. Wicked sinners have no faith, but imaginations and opinions
about Christ, as our schole men have in their principles, about which they
braule so fast one with another. It is an other thing to believe y^ the king is
rich, and that he is rich unto me, and that my part is therein: and that he
will not spare a penny of his riches at my need, when I believe that the king is
rich I am not moved. But when I believe that he is rich for me, and that he will
never fail me at my need, then love I, and of love am ready to work unto the
uttermost of my power: But let us return at the last unto our purpose again.

WHat is the cause that lay men can Why say men can not rule.
not now rule, as well as in times past, and as the Turks yet do? Verily
because that Antichrist with the miste of his iugglyng has beguiled our eyes,
and has cast a superstitious fear upon the world of christen men, and has
taught the^ to dread, not God and his word, but himself and his word: not
Gods law and ordinances, princes and officers which God has set to rule the
world, but his own law and ordinances, traditions and ceremonies, and
disguised disciples, which he has set every where to deceive the world, and to
expel the light of Gods word, that his darcknes may have room. For we see by
daily experience of certain hundred years long, that he which fears neither
God nor his word, neither regards father, mother, master, or Christ
himself, which rebelleth against God ordinances, rises Men fear the Popes
oil more then Gods commandment.
against the kings, and resists his officers, dare not once lay hands on
one of the Popes anointed: no though he sley his father before his face, or do
violence unto his brother, or defile his sister, wife or mother. Like honor
give we unto his traditions and ceremonies. What devotion have we when we are
blessed (as they call it) with the chalice, or when the Bishop lifts up his
holy hand over us? Who dare handle the chalice, touch the Alter stone, or put
his hand in the fount, or his finger into the holy oil? What reverence give we
unto holy water, holy ^yre, holy bread, holy salt, hallowed belles, holy wax,
holy bows, holy candels, and holy ashes? And last of all unto the holy ca^dle
commit we our souls at our last departing. Yea and of the very cloute which
the Bishop or his chapplen that stands by, knitteth about childrens necks at
confirmation, what lay person durst be so bold as to to unloose the knot? Thou will say, do not such things bring the holy Ghost and put away sin and drive
away spirits? I say that a steadfast faith or belefe in Christ and in the
promises that God has sworn to give us for his sake, brings the holy Ghost
as all the Scriptures make mention, and as Paul says (Acts. xix.) have ye
received the holy Ghost through faith or believing? Faith is the rock where on
Christ Faith drives y^ deuil^ away.
builds his congregation, against which ^ayth Christ Math. xvj. hell gates
shall not prevail. As soon as thou beleuest in Christ, the holy Ghost
comes, sin falls away and devils fly: when we cast holy water at the
devil or ryng the belles, he flees, Why do not the Bishops make him flee
from shotyng of gunnes.
as men do from young children, and mocketh with us, to bring us from the true
faith that is in Gods word unto a superstitious, and a false belefe of our own
imagination. If thou had faith and threwest an unhallowed stone at his head,
he would earnestly flee and without mockyng, yea though thou threwest nothing
at all, he would not yet abide.

Though that at the beginning miracles Ceremonies did not the miracle but faith.
were showed through such ceremonies, to move the infidels to believe the word
of God. As thou read how the Apostles anointed the sick with oil and
healed them, and Paul sent his pertelet or Iirkyn to the sick and healed them
also. Yet was it not the ceremony that did the miracle, but faith of the
preacher and the truth of God, which had promised to confirm and stablish his
Gospel with such miracles. Therefore as soon as the gift of miracles ceased,
ought the ceremony to have ceased also: or else if they will needs have a
ceremony to signify some promise or benefit of GOD (which I praise not but
would have Gods word preached every Sunday, for which intent Sondayes and holy
Let them tell what the ceremony means.
days were ordained) then let them tell the people what it means: and not set
up a haulde and a naked ceremony without signification, to make the people
believe therein, and to quench the faith that ought to be given unto the word
of God.

What helps it also that the Priest The priest disguiseth him self with the
passion of Christ.
when he goes to Mass disguifeth him self with a great part of the passion
of Christ, and plays out the rest under silence with signs and profers, with
noddyng, beckyng and mowyng, as it were Jack an apes, when neither he him
self neither any man else woteth what he means? not at all verily, but
hurts and that excedyngly. For as much as it not only destroys the faith
and quenches the love that should Domme ceremonies quench faith and love and
make the infidels to mock us.
be given unto the commandments, and makes the people unthankful, in that
it brings them into such superstition, that they think that they have done
abundantly enough for God, yea and deserved above measure, if they be present
once in a day at such mummyng: But also makes the infidels to mock us and
abhor us, in that they see nothing but such apes play among us, where of no
man can give a reason.

All this comes to pass to fulfill the prophecy which Christ prophesied.
The prophecy of Christ is fulfilled.
Mark. xiij. And Luke. xxj. that there shall come in his name which shall say
that they them selves are Christ. That do verily the Pope and our holy orders
of Religion. For they under the name of Christ preach the^ selves, their own
word, and their own traditions, and teach the people to believe in them. The
Pope gives pardons of his full power, of the treasure of the Church and of the
merits of Saints. The Friars likewise make their benefactours (which only
they call their brethren and sisters) partakers of their masses, fasting,
watchynges, prayings and wolward goynges. Yea and when a nouice of the
obseruauntes is professed The testament of the obseruauntes.
the father asks him, will ye keep the rules of holy S. Fraunces? and he
says yea: will ye so in deed says he? the other answers: yea forsooth
father. Then says the father, and I promise you again everlasting life. O
blasphemy. If eternal life be due unto the pilde traditions of lousy Friars,
where is the Testament become that God made unto us in Christ's blood? Christ
says Math. xxiiij. And Mark. xiij. that there shall come Pseudo-Christs. False
anointed.
Which though I, for a consideration have translated false Christ's, keeping the
Greek word: yet signifies it in the English false anointed and ought so to
be translated. There shall come (says Christ) false anointed and false
Prophets, and shall do miracles and wonders, so greatly that if it were
possible, the very elect or chosen should be brought out of the way. Compare
the Popes doctrine unto the word of GOD, and thou shall find that there has been, and yet is a great going out of the way, and that evil men and deceauers
(as Paul prophesied. ij. Timo. iij.) have prevailed and waxed worse and worse,
beguiling other as they are beguiled them selves. Thou tremblest and quakest
saying: shall God let us go so sore out of the right way? I answer it is
Christ that warns us, Christ's prophesis* be it never so terrible must be yet
fulfilled.
which as he knew all that should follow, so prophesied he before and is a true
Prophet, and his prophecy must needs be fulfilled.

GOd anointed his son Jesus with the holy Ghost, and therefore Christ was
neither shanen nor shorn nor anointed with oil.
called him Christ, which is as much to say as anointed. Outwardly he
disguised him not but made him like other me^ and sent him into the world to
bless us, and to offer him self for us a sacrifice of a sweet savor, to kill
the stench of our sins, that God hence forth should smell them no more, nor
think on them any more: and to make full and sufficient satisfaction or
amends for all them that repent, beleuyng the truth of god, and submitting
them selves unto his ordinances both for their sins that they do, have done
and shall do. For sin we through fragilitie never so often, yet as soon as we
repent and come into the right way again, and unto the Testament which God
has made in Christ's blood, our sins vanish away as smoke in the wind, and
as darkness at the coming of light, or as thou cast a little blood or milk
into yt main see. In so He that does ought to make satisfaction or to get
heaven has lost his part of Christ's blood.
much that who soever goes about to make satisfaction for his sins to God
ward, saying in his heart, this much have I sinned, this much will I do again,
or this wise will I live to make amends with all, or this will I do to get
heaven with all, the same is an infidel, faythlesse and damned in his deed
doing, and has lost his part in Christ's blood: because he is disobedient unto
Gods Testament, and sets up an other of his own imagination, unto which he
will compel God to obey. If we love God we have a commandment to love our
neighbor also, as says John in his Epistle. And if we have offended him to
make him amends, To our neighbor make we amends.
or if we have not wherewith, to ask him forgiveness, and to do and suffer
all things for his sake, to win him to God and to norish peace and unity:
but to Godward Christ is an everlasting satisfaction and ever sufficient.

Christ when he had fulfilled his The Apostles were neither shave nor shoren
nor anointed with oil.
course, anointed his Apostles and disciples with the same sprite, and sent
them forth without all manner disguising, like other men also, to preach the
attoneme^t and peace which Christ had made between God and man. The Apostles
likewise disguised no man, but chose men anointed with the same spirit: one to
preach the word of God, whom we call after the greek tongue Bishop: an
ouersear.
a Bishop or a Priest, that is, in English, an ouersear and an Elder. How he
was anointed, thou read. i. Timothe. iij. A Bishop or an ouersear The
true annoynting old Priest.
must be faultlesse, the husband of one wife. (Many Jews and also Gentiles that
were converted unto the faith, had at that time diverse wines, yet were not
compelled to put any of the^ away, which Paul because of ensample would not
have preachers for as much as in Christ we return again unto y^ first
ordinance of God, that one man and one woman should go together) he must be
sober, of honest behavior, honestly apparelled, harbarous (that is, ready to
lodge strangers, apt to This oil is not among our Bishops.
teach, no dronckard, no fighter, not given to filthy lucre: but gentle,
abhorring fyghting, abhorring covetousness, and one that rules his own
householde honestly, having children under obedience with all honesty. For if
a man can can not rule his own house, how can he care for the congregation of
God? he may not be young in the faith, or as a man would say a Nouice, least
he swell and fall into yt judgment of yt evil speaker, that is, he may not be
unlearned in the secrets of the faith. For such are attonce stubburne, and
headstrong, and set not a little by themselves. But alas, we have above twenty
thousand that know no more scripture then is written in their portoues, and
among them is he exceeding well learned that can turn to his service. He must
be well reported of the^ yt are without: least he fall into rebuke, and into the
snare of the evil speaker, that is, least the infidels which yet believe not,
should be hurt by him, and driven from the faith, if a man that were defamed
were made head or ouerseer of the congregation.

He must have a wife for two causes, Priests ought to to have wives and why.
one, that it may thereby be known who is mete for the rowme. He is unapt for
so chargeable an office, which had never household to rule. An other cause is,
that chastity is an exceeding seldom gift, and unchastity exceeding perilous
for that degree. In as much as y^ people look as well unto the living as unto
the preaching, and are hurt at once if the living disagree, and fall from the
faith, and believe not the word.

This ouerseer, because he was taken What the Priests duty is to do: and what
to have.
from his own business and labor, to preach Gods word unto the parish, has
right by the authority of his office, to challenge an honest living of yt
parish, as thou may see in y^ Enangelistes, and also in paul. For who will
have a servant and will not give him meat, drink, and raiment, and all
things necessary? How they would Men are not bound to pay the Priest in tithes,
by Gods law.
pay him, whether in money, or assign him so much rent, or in tithes, as the
guise is now in many countreies, was at their liberty.

Likewise in every congregation Deacon what it signifies and what is his
office.
chose they an other after the same ensample, and even so anointed, as it is
to see in the said chapter of Paul, and Act. vj. Whom after the Greek word we
call Deacon, that is to say in English, a servant or a minister, whose office
was to help and assiste ye Priest, and to gather up his duty, and to gather
for the poor of the parish, which were destitute of friends and could not No
beggars.
work, common beggars to run from door to door, were not the^ suffered. On
yt Saints days, namely, such as had How holy days and offerynges came up.
suffered death for the word sake, came men together into the church, and the
Priest preached unto them, and exhorted them to cleave fast unto the word, and
to be strong in the faith, and to fight against the powers of the world, with
suffering for their faythes sake, Saints were not yet Gods.
after the ensample of the Saints. And taught the^ not to believe in the
saints and to trust in their merits, and to make Gods of them: but took the
saints for an example only, and prayed God to give them like faith and trust
in his word, and like strength and power to suffer therefore, and to give them
so sure hope of the life to come, as thou may see in the collectes of Saint
Laurence and of Saint Stephen in our Lady matens. And in such days, as we now
offer, so gave they every man his portion according to his ability, and as God
put in his heart, to the maintenance of the priest, Deaco^, and other common
ministers, and of the poor, and to find learned men to teach, and so forth.
And all was put in the hands of the Deacon, as thou may see in ye life of
Saint Laurence, and in the histories. And for such purposes Why lands were
given unto the spiritual officers before we fell from the faith.
gave men lands afterward to ease the parishes, and made hospitals, and also
places to teach their children, and to bring them up, and to nourtour them in
Gods word, which lands our Monks now devour.

Antichrist.
ANtichrist of an other manner has sent forth his disciples, those false
anointed of which Christ warns us False anointed.
before, that they should come and show miracles and wonders, even to bring
the very elect out of the way, if it were possible. He annointeth them after
the Shauyng is borrowed of the heathen, and oylyng of y^ Jews.
manner of y^ Jews, and shaueth them and shoreth them after the manner of the
Heathen Priests, which serve the Idols. Hesendeth them forth not with false
oil only, but with false names False names.
also. For compare their names unto their deeds, and thou shall find them
false. He sends them forth as Paul prophesied of them. ij. These. ij. with
lying signs and wonders. What sign Lying signs.
is the anointing? that they be full of the holy ghost. Compare them to the
signs of the holy ghost which Paul reckons, and thou shall find it a false
sign. A Bishop must be faultles, the husband of one wife. Nay says yt No wife
but ^n whore.
Pope, the husband of no wife, but the holder of as many whores as he lists.
God commands all degrees, if they burn, and can not live chaste, to marry.
The Pope says, if thou burn take a dispensation for a Concubine, Take a
dispensation.
and put her away when thou art old, or else as our Lawyers say, si non cast
tamen caute, that is, if ye live not chaste, Knaueate.
see ye carry clean, and play the knave secretly. Harbarous, yea to whores and
baudes, for a poor man shall as soon break his neck as his fast with them,
but of the scraps and with the dogs, when dinner is done. Apt to teach, and
as Peter says. j. Pet. ij. ready always to give an answer to every man that
axeth you a reason of the hope that ye have, and that with meekenes. Which
thing is signified by the boots which doctors of divinity Boots.
are created in, because they should be ready always to go thorough thick
and thin, to preach Gods word, and by the Bishops two horned miter, Miters.
which betokens the absolute and perfect knowledge that they ought to have in
the new Testament and the old. Be not these false signs? For they beat only
and teach not. Yea says yt Pope Cite them.
if they will not be ruled, cite them to Pose the^.
appear, and pose them sharply, what they hold of the Popes power, of his
Pardons, of his Bulls, of Purgatory, of ceremonies, of confession and such
like creatures of our most holy fathers. If they miss in any point, make
heretics of them and burn them. If they be of mine anointed and bear Make
the^ heretics.
my mark, disgresse them, I would say disgraduate them and (after the example
Burn the^
of noble Antiochus. ij. Match. vij.) pare the crowns and the fingers of them,
and torment them craftly, and for very pain make them deny the truth. But now
say our Bishops, because the truth is come to far abroad, and yt lay people
begin to smell our wiles, it is best to oppress them with craft secretly, and
to tame them in prison. Yea let us find the means to have them in the kings
prison, and to make treason of such doctrine: Yea we must stir up some war
one where or an other, to bring the people into an other imagination. If they
be Gentlemen abjure them secretly.

Curse them iiij. times in the year. Curse the^.
Make them afraid of every thing and namely to touch mine anointed, Fear
the^.
and make them to fear the sentence of the Church, suspentio^s,
exco^munications and curses. Be the right or wrong, bear them in hand that
they are to be feared yet. Preach me and mine authority, and how terrible a
thing my curse is, and how black it makes their souls. On the holidays
which were ordained to preach Gods word, set up long ceremonies, long Matines,
long Masses, and long Euensonges, and all in Latin that they understand not:
and All in Latin.
roll them in darkness, that ye may lead them whether ye will. And lest Roll
the^.
such things should be to tedious, sing Sing.
some, say some, pype some, ryng the Ryng.
belles and lulle them and rock them a sleep. And yet Paul ij. Cor. xiiij.
forbids Lulle the^.
to speak in the church or congregation Rock the^ a sleep.
save in the tongue that all understand. For the lay man thereby is not edified
or taught. How shall the lay man say Amen (says Paul) to thy blessing or
thanks geuyng, when he woteth not what thou say? He wotted not whether thou
bless or curse. What then says the Pope, what care Pray in Latin.
I for Paul. I command by the virtue of obedience to read the Gospel in
Latin. Let them not pray but in Latin, Say them a Gospel.
no not there Pater noster. If any be sick, go also and say them a Gospel and
all in Latin: yea to the very corn and fruits of the field in the procession
week, preach the Gospel in Latin. Make the people believe, that it shall grow
the better. It is verily as good to preach it to swyne as to men, if thou
preach it in a tongue they understand not. How shall I prepare my self to Gods
commandments? How shall I be thankful to Christ for his kindness? How shall
I believe the truth and promises which GOD has sworn, while thou tellest them
unto me in a tongue which I understand not?

What then says me Lord of Caunterbury to a Priest that would have What quod
my Lord of Canterbury.
had the new Testament gone forth in English: What (says he) would thou
that the lay people should wete what we do?

No fighter, which I suppose is signified by the cross that is borne before
Cross.
the hye Prelates and borne before the^ in procession: Is that also not a false
sign? What Realm can be in peace for such turmoylers? What so little a
Turmoylers.
Parish is it, but they will pick one quarrel or an other with them, either
for some syrplis, cresome or mortuary, either for one trifle or other, and cite
them to the arches? Traitors they are to all creatures and have a secret
conspiration between them selves. One The craft of the Prelates.
craft they have, to make many kingdoms and small, and to norish old titles
or quarrels, that they may ever move them to war at their pleasure. And if
much lands by any chance, fall to one man, ever to cast a bone in the way,
that he shall never be able to obtain it, as we now see in ye Empeperour. Why?
For as long as the kings be small, if God would open the eyes of any to set a
reformation in his Realm, then should the Pope interdict Interdict
his land, and send in other Princes to conquer it.

Not given to filthy lucre, but abhorryng covetousness. And as Peter says. i.
Pet. v. Taking the oversight of them, not as though ye were compelled
thereunto: but willingly.: Not for desire of filthy lucre, but of a good
mind: not as though ye were Lords over the Parishes (over the Parishes quoth
he) O Peter Peter thou wast to Peter (...) never to schole at the arches.
long a fisher, thou wast never brought up at the arches, neither wast master
of the Rolls, nor yet Chaunceler of England. They are not content to reign
over king and Emperor and the whole earth: but challenge authority also in
heaven and in hell. It is not enough for them to reign over all that are
quick, but have created them a Purgatory, to reign also over the dead, and to
have one kingdom more The Pope has one kingdom more then God himself.
then God him self has. But that ye be an ensample to the flock (says
Peter.) And when the chief shepherd shall appear ye shall receive an
incorruptible crown of glory. This abhorring of coueteousnes is signified as I
suppose by shauyng and sheryng of the Shering what it signifies.
of the hear, that they have no superfluity. But is not this also a false
sign? yea verily it is to them a remembrance to shere and shave, to heap
benefice upon benefice, promotion upon promotion, dignity upon dignity,
Byshopricke upon Bishopric, with pluralities, unions and Tot quots. Tot quot.


First by the authority of the Gospel they that preach the word of God in
every Parish and other necessary ministreys, have right to challenge an honest
living like unto one of the brethren, and therewith ought to be content.
Bishops and priests that preach Bishops that preach not.
not, or that preach, ought save Gods word, are none of Christ's, nor of his
annoyntyng: but servants of the beast whose mark they bear, whose word
they preach, whose law they maintain clean against Gods law, and with their
false sophistry give him greater power then God ever gave to his son Christ.

BUt they as insatiable beasts not unmindful why they were shaven and shoren,
because they will stand at no man's grace, or be in any man's danger, have
gotten into their own hands, first the tyth or tenth of all the Tithes.
realm. Then I suppose with in a little or all together the third foot of all
the temporal lands.

Mark well how many personages Temporal lands.
or vicarages are there in the Realm, which at the least have a plow land a
piece. Then note the lands of Bishops, Abbotes, Pryors, Nuns, knights of
Saint John's, Cathedral Churches, Colleges, Chauntryes and Frechapels. For
though the house fall Frechappell.
in decay, and the ordinance of the fou^der be lost, yet will not they loose
the lands. What comes once in, may never more out. They make a Frechapell of
it, so that he which enjoys it shall do naught therefore. Besides all this,
how many chaplaynes do Gentlemen find at their own cost in their houses. How
many sing for souls by testamentes. Then the proving of Testamentes,
Testamentes.
the prising of goods, the Bishop of Caunterburies prerogative. Is that not
much thorough the Realm in a year? Four offering Offering days. Privy
tithes.
days and privy tithes. There is no servant, but that he shall pay somewhat
of his wages. None shall receive the body of Christ at Easter, be he never so
poor a beggar, or never so young a lad or maid, but they must pay somewhat
for it. Then mortuaryes Mortuaries.
for forgotten tithes (as they say) And yet what Parson or Vicar is there that
will forget to have a Pygin house to pecke up somewhat both at sowing time, and
at harvest when corn is ripe. They will forget nothing. No man shall die in
their debt, or if any man do, he shall pay it when he is dead. They will loose
no thing. Why? It is Gods, it is not theirs. It is Saint Cudberts rentes, Saint
Albans lands, Saint Edmondes right, Saint Peter's patrimony say they, and none
of ours. Item if a man die in an other man's parish, If he die from home.
besides that he must pay at home a mortuary for forgotten tithes, he must
there pay also y^ best that he there Thou must pay ere thou pass.
has. Whether it be an horse of twenty pound, or how good so ever he be:
either a chain of gold of an hundredth mark, or five hundredth pound, if it
so chance. It is much verily for so little pain taking in confession and in
ministering the Sacraments. Then beadrolles. Item chrysome, Churchinges, banes,
weddinges, offering at weddinges, offering at buriynges, offering to Images,
offering of wax and lights, which come to their vauntage, Pety pillage.
besides the superstitious wast of wax in torches and tapers thoroughout the
land. Then brotherhoodes and pardoners. What get they also by confessions? Yea,
and many enjoin penance Confession.
to give a certain for to have so many Masses said, and desire to provide a
chappellayne themselves. Soul masses, diriges, monethmyndes, year minds,
Alsoulday and trentals. The mother Church and the hie altar must have some what
in every Testament. First Mass. Professinges. Conturations.
Offeringes at Priests first Masses. Ite^ no man is professed, of what soever
religion it be, but he must bring somewhat. The halowing or rather coniuring of
Churches, chapels, altars, superaltares, chalice, vestime^ts and belles. Then
book, bell, ca^dlesticke, organes, chalice, vestimentes, copes, altere
clothes, syrpleses: towels, basens, ewars, sheep, senser and all manner
ornaments must be found them freely, they will not give a myte thereunto. Last
of all what swarms of beggyng Friars are there. The Parson shereth, the Vicare
Parson. Vicare. Parish priest. Friars.
shaueth, the Parish Priest polleth, the Friar scrapeth, and the Pardoner
pareth, we lack but a butcher to pulle of the skin.

What get they in their spiritual Spiritual law.
law (as they call it) in a year, at the arches and in every dioces? what get
the Co^missaries, and Officials with their somners and apparitars by bawdery in
a year? Shall ye not find Curates A proper commodity of confession.
enough which to flatter the Commissaries and Officials with all that they may
go quite them selves, shall open unto them the confessio^s of the richest of
their Parishes. Whom they cite privily, and lay to their charges secretly. If
they desire to know their accusers, nay say they, the matter is known well
enough, and to more then ye are ware of. Come lay your hand on the Lay your
hand on the book.
book, if ye forswere your self, we shall bring proves, we will handle you, we
will make an example of you. Oh how terrible are they? Come and swear (say
they) that ye will be obedient unto our injunctions. And by that craft wring they
their purses and make them drop as long as there is a penny in them. In three or
four years shall they in those offices get enough to pay for a Bishops bulle.
What other thing are these in a Realm save horsleches and even very maggotes,
cankres, and caterpillars, which devour no more but all that is grene, and
those wolves which Paul prophesied should come and should not spare the flock.
Acts. xx. Chapter. And which Christ said should come in lambs skynnes, and
bad us beware of them and judge them by their works.

THough as I before have sufficiently No man may aue^ge save the king* and he
is bound by his office.
proved, a Christen man must suffer all thing, be it never so great unright, as
long as it is not against Gods commandment, neither is it lawful for him to
cast any burden of his back by his own authority, till God pull it of which
laid it on for our deseruinges, yet ought the kings every where to defend
their realms from such oppression, if they were Christen, which is seldom
seen: and is an hard thing verily, though not impossible. For alas they be
captives or ever they Kings are in captivity.
be kings, yea almost er they be borne. No man may be suffered about him but
flatterers, and such as are first sworn true unto our most holy fathers the
Bishops, that is to say, false to God and man.

If any of the nobles of the realm be true to the king, and so bold that he
dare council him that which should be to his honor, and for the wealth of the
realm. They will wait a season for him (as men say) They will provide a
ghostly father for him. God bring their wickedness to light. There is no
mischief whereof they are not the root, nor bloudshedde, but thorough their
cause, either by their counsel, or in that they preach not true obedience, and
teach not the people to fear God. If any faithful servant be in all the
court, he shall have twenty spies waiting upon him, he shall be cast out of the
court, or (as the saying is) conuayed to Callice, and made a captain, or an
Ambassadoure, he shall be kept far enough from the kings presence.

The kings ought I say to remember The duty of kings.
that they are in Gods steed, and ordained of God, not for themselves, but for
the wealth of their subjects. Let them remember that their subjects are their
brethren, their flesh and blood, members of their own body, and eue^ their
own selves in Christ. Therefore ought they to pity them, and to rid them from
such wylye tyranny which increases more and more daily. And though that the
kings by the falshod of the Bishops and Abbottes, be sworn to defend such
liberties: yet ought they Unlawful oaths ought to be broken, and may without
dispensation.
not to keep their oaths, but to break them. For as much as they are unright
and clean against Gods ordinance, and even but cruel oppression, contrary
unto brotherly love and charity. Moreover the spiritual officer ought to
punish no sin, but and if any sin The king only ought to punish sin: I
mean that is broken forth, the heart must remain to God.
break out the king is ordained to punish it, and they not: but to preach and
exhort the^ to fear God, and that they sin not.

And let the kings put down some of their tyranny, and turn some unto a
common wealth. If the tenth part of such tyranny were given the king yearly,
and laid up in the shyre towns against the realm had need, what would it
grow to in certain years? Moreover one king, one law, is Gods ordinance in
every realm. Therefore ought not the king to suffer them to have a several
law by themselves, and to draw his subjects thither. It is not mete will they
say, that a spiritual man should be judged of a worldly or a temporal man. O
abomination: The sprite pertains unto the shaven only.
see how they divide and separate themselves? If the lay man be of the world,
so is he not of God. If he believe in Christ, then is he a member of Christ,
Christ's brother, Christ's flesh, Christ's blood, Christ's spouse, coheyre
with Christ, and has his spirit in earnest, and is also spiritual. If they
would rob us of the spirit of God, why should they fear to rob us of
worldly goods? Because thou art put in office to preach Gods word, art thou
therefore no more one of the brethren? is the Mayor of London no more one of
the City, because he is the chief officer? Is the king no more of the realm
because he is head thereof? The king is in the room of God, and The kings law
is Gods law.
his law is Gods law, and nothing but the law of nature and natural
equity, which God graued in the hearts of men. Yet Antichrist is to good to be
judged by the law of God, he must have a new of his own making. It were mete
verily that they went to no law at all. No more needed they, if they would
study to preach Gods word truly, and be contented with sufficient, and to be
like one of their brethren.

If any question arose about y^ faith, How men ought to judge, questions of the
scripture.
or of the scripture, that let them judge by the manifest and open scriptures,
not excluding the lay men. For there are many found among the lay men, which
are as wise as the officers. Or else when the officer dies, how could we put
an other in his room? Wyl^ thou so teach xx. xxx. xl. or fifty years, that no
man shall have knowledge or judgment in Gods word save thou only? Is it not
a shame that we We come often to schole. But are never caught.
Christian come so often to Church in vain, when he of four score year old
knows no more then he that was borne yesterday.

Moreover when the spiritual officers have excommunicate any man, or have
condemned any opinion for heresy: Let not the king nor temporal officers
punish and sley by and by at their Kings ought to see what they do and not to
believe the Bishops, namely, seeing their living is so sore suspects,
commandment. But let them look on Gods word, and compare their judgment
unto the scripture, and see whether it be right or no, and not believe them at
the first choppe, whatsoever they say, namely in things that pertayne unto
their own authorities and power. For no man is a right judge in his own
cause. Why does Christ co^ma^de the Scripture to be preached unto all
creatures, but that it pertains It pertains unto all men to know the
scriptures.
unto all me^ to know them? Christ refers him self unto the scriptures
John. v. And in the. xj. Chapter of Matthew, unto the question of John Baptistes
Disciples he answered. The blind see, the lepers are cleansed, the dead arise
again etc. meaning that if I do the works which are prophesied that Christ
should do when he comes, why doubt ye whether I be he or no, as who should
say, ask y^ scripture whether I be Christ or no, and not my self. How
happens it then that our Prelates will not come to the light also that we may
see whether their works be wrought in GOD or no? Why fear they to let the ^ay
men see what they do? Why make they all their examinations in darkness? Why
examine
they not their causes of heresy openly, as the lay men do their fellous and
murderers? Wherefore did Christ and his Apostles also warn us so diligently
of Antichrist, and of false Prophets that should come? Because that we should
slomber or sleep careless, or rather that we should look in the light of the
Scripture with all diligence to spy them when they came, and not to suffer our
selves to be disceaued and led out of y^ way? John bids judge the spirits.
Whereby shall we judge them but by the Scripture? How shall thou know, whether
the Prophet be true or false, or whether he speak Gods word of his own head,
if thou will not see the Scriptures? Why said David in the second Psalm be
learned Be learned ye that judge the earth.
ye that judge the earth, lest the Lord be angry with you, and ye perish from
the right way?

A terrible warnyng verily: yea and look on the stories well, and thou shall
find very few kings sense the beginning of the world that have not perished
from the right way, and that because they would not be learned.

The Emperor and Kings are The kings are become Antichrists hangmen.
nothing now a days but even hangmen unto the Pope and Bishops, to kill
whosoever they condemn, without any more a do, as Pylate was unto the Scribes
and Phariseis and the hye Bishops, to hang Christ. For as those Prelates
answered Pylate (when he asked what he had done) if he were not an evil doer,
we would not have brought him unto thee. As who should say, we are to holy to
do any thing amiss, you may believe us well enough: yea and his blood on our
heads, said they, kill him hardly, we will bear the charge, our souls for
thine: we have also a law by which he ought to dye, for he calls him self
Gods son. Even so say our Prelates, he ought to dye by our laws, he speaks
against the Church. And your grace is sworn to defend the liberties and
ordinances of the Church, and to maynteine our most holy fathers authority:
our souls for yours, ye shall do a meritorious deed therein. Nevertheless as
Pylate escaped not the judgment of God, even so is it to be feared lest our
temporal powers shall not. Wherefore be learned ye that judge the Be learned ye
that judge the earth.
earth lest the Lord be angry with you and ye perish from the right way.

Who slew the Prophets? Who slew Who slew the prophets.
Christ? Who slew his Apostles? Who the martirs and all the righteous that ever
were slain? The kings and the temporal sword at the request of the false
Prophets. They deserved such murder to do, and to have their part with ye
hypocrites, because they would not be learned, and see the truth them selves.
Wherefore suffered y^ Prophets? Why were the prophets slain?
because they rebuked the hypocrites which beguiled the world, and namely
Princes and rulers and taught them to put their trust in things of vanity and
not in Gods word. And taught What deeds of mercy teach the hipocrited?
them to do such deeds of mercy as were profitable unto no man but unto the
false Prophets them selves only, making marchau^dise of Gods word. wherefore
slew they Christ? even for rebuking Why flew they christ?
the hipocrites: because he said, woe be to you Scribes and Phariseis
hypocrites, for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven before men Math. xxiij. that
is, as it is written. Luke. xj. ye have taken away the keye of knowledge. The
keys.
The law of God which is the keye wherewith men bind, and the promises which
are the keys wherewith men loose, have our hypocrites also taken away. They
will suffer no man to know Gods word, but burn it and make heresy of it: yea
and because the people begin to smell their falsehode they make it treason to
the king and Christ is a traitor and a breaker of the kings peace.
breakyng of the kings peace to have so much as their Pater noster in English.
And instead of Gods law, they bind with their own law. And instead of Gods
promises they lose and iustifye How the hypocrites bind and lose.
with pardons and ceremonies, which they them selves have imagined for their
own profit. They preach it were better for thee to eat flesh on good Friday
then to hate thy neighbor: but let any man eat flesh but on a Saturday or
break any other tradition of theirs, and he shall be bound and not losed, till
he have paid the utter most farthing, either with shame most vile, or death
most cruel, but hate thy neighbor as much as thou will and thou shall have no
rebuke of them, yea rob him, murder him, and the^ come to them and welcome.
They have a sa^ctuary for thee, to save thee, yea and a neckuerse, if thou
can but read a little Latinly, though it be never so soryly, so that y^ be
ready to receive y^ beasts mark. They care for no understanding: it is
enough, if thou can roll up a pair of Mattens or an Euensong and mumble a
few ceremonies. And because they be rebuked, this they rage. Be learned
therefore ye that Be learned ye that judge the earth.
judge y^ world lest God be angry with you, and ye perish from the right way.

Woe be to you scribes, and phariseis ypocrites, says Christ, Math. xriij. for
^or rebukyng this (...). And for the same cause are we persecutes.
ye deudure widows houses under a coulor of long prayer. Our hypocrites rob
not the widows only: but Knight, Squyre, Lord, Duke, King, and Emperor, and
even the whole world under the same couloure: teaching the people to trust in
their prayers, and not in Christ, for whose sake God has forgeuen all the
sin of the whole world, unto as many as repent and believe. They fear the^
with purgatory, and promise to pray perpetually, They be(...)Purgatory that
make perpetu^.
least the lands should ever return home again unto the right heirs. What
have thou bought with robbyng thy heirs, or with giving the hypocrites that
which thou robbest of other men? Perpetual prayer? Yea perpetual pain. For
they appoint thee no time of deliverance, their prayers are so mighty. The
Pope for money can Why it is (...) Pur gatory.
empty purgatory when he will. It is verily purgatory. For it purges and
makes clean riddaunce: yea it is hell. For it deuoureth all things. His
fatherhode sends them to heaven with scala coeli: that is, with a ladder to
scale Scala C^.
the walls. For by the door Christ, will they not let them come in. That door
The door is stopped vys ye must clyme and scale the walls.
have they stopped up, and that because ye should buy ladders of them. For
some they pray daily which gave the^ perpetuities, and yet make Saints of
them, receiving offeringes in their Some are prayed for and prayed to also.
names, and teaching other to pray to them. None of them also which takes upon
them to save other with their prayers, trusts to be saved thereby The craft
that helps other helps not his own master.
themselves, but hyre other to pray for them.

Moses takes record of God that he took not of any of the people so much as
an Ass, neither vexed any of Prayer was not sold in the old tyms.
them. Numeri. xvj. Samuel in yt first book of kings the xij. chapter, asked
all Israel whether he had taken any man's Ox, or Ass, or had vexed any man,
or had taken any gift or reward of any man. And all the people testified nay,
yet these two both taught the people, and also prayed for them as much as our
prelates do. Peter. j. Peter. v. exhorts the elders to take the oversight of
Christ's flock, not for filthy lucre: but of a good will even for love. Paul.
Act. xx. takes the Priests or elders to record, that he had taught
repentance and faith, and all y^ council of God. And yet had desired no man's
gold, silver, or vesture: but fed himself with the labor of his hands.
And yet these two taught and prayed for the people as much as our Prelates do,
with whom it goes after the common saying, no penny, no Pater noster. Which
Prelates yet as they teach not, but beat only, so wot they not what prayer
means.

Moreover the law of love which Christ left among us, is to give and not to
receive. What prayer is it then that thus robs all the world contrary Their
prayer breaks the great commandment of God. It is time that they were tied
by therefore.
to that great commandment which is the end of all commandments, and in
which all other are contained. If men should continue to buie prayer four or
five hundred years more, as they have done, there would not be a foot of
ground in Christendom, neither any worldly thing, which they y^ will be
called spiritual only should not possess. And thus all should be called
spiritual.

Woe be to you Lawyers, for ye lade men with burde^s, which they are not able to
bear, and ye yours selves touch not the packes with one of your fingers says
Christ Luke. xj. Our Lawyers verily have laden us a thousand The burdens of our
spiritual lawyers.
times more. What spiritual kynred have they made in baptime, to let
matrimony, besides that they have added certain degrees unto the law natural
for the same purpose. What an vnbearable burden of chastity do they violently
thrust on other men's backs, and how easily bear they it themselves? How sore
a burden? How cruel a ha^gman? How grievous a torment? yea and Confession
tormenteth the conscience: robs the purse of money, and the soul of faith.
how paynefull an hell is this ear confession unto men's consciences. For the
people are brought in belief, that with out that they can not be saved. In so
much that some fast certain days in the year, and pray certain
superstitious prayers all their lives long, that they may not die without
confession. In peril of death, if the Priest be not by, the shippemen shriue
themselves unto the Mast. If any be present, they run then every man into his
ear, but to gods promises fly they not: for they know them not. If any man
have a deaths wound, he cries immediately for a Priest. If a man die without
shrift many take it for a sign of damnation. Many by reason of that false
belief die in desperation. Many for shame keep back of their confession xx.
xxx. years, and think all the while that they be damned. I knew a poor woman
with child which longed, and being ouercomen of her passion, eat flesh on a
Friday, which thing she durst not confess in the space of xviij. years, and
thought all that while that she had been damned, and yet sinned she not at all.
Is not this a sore burden that so weyeth down the soul unto the bottom of
hell? What should I say? A great book were not sufficient to rehearse y^
snares which they have laid to rob men both of their goods, and also of the
trust which they should have in Gods word.

The Scribes and Phariseis do all their works to be seen of men. They set
abroad their Philacteries, and make long borders on their garments, and love
to sit uppermost at feasts, and to have the chief seats in the synagoges,
that, is in the congregations or councels, and to be called Rabby, that is to
say masters says Christ. Math. xxiij. Behold the deeds of our
spirituality, and how many thousand fashions are among them to be known by?
Which as none is like an other, so loves none Bags or bables to be known by.
an other. For every one of them supposes that all other polle to fast and
make to many captives: yet to resist Christ, are they all agreed least they
should be all compeld to deliver up their prisoners to him. Behold the
monsters how they are disguised, with miters, croses, and hatt^s, with crosses,
pillars, and pollaxes, and with three crowns. What names have they? my Lord
Prior, my Lord Abbot, my Glorious names.
Lord Bishop, my Lord Archbishop, Cardinal and Legate: if it please your
fatherhod, if it please your Lordship, if it please your grace, if it please
your holiness, and innumerable such like. Behold how they are esteemed, and How
are they esteemed?
how hie they be crept up above all, not into worldly seats only: but into
the seat of God, the hearts of men, where they sit above God himself. For
both they and whatsoever they make of their own heads is more feared and
dread then God and his commandments. In them and their deseruinges put we
more trust, then in Christ and his merits. To their promises give we more
faith, then to the promises which God has sworn in Christ's blood.

The hypocrites say unto the kings and Lords, these heretics would have us
down first, and then you, to make of all common. Nay ye hypocrites Kings are
down: they can not go lower.
and right heretics approved by open Scripture, the kings and Lords are
down already, and that so low that they can not go lower. Ye tread them under
your feet, and lead the^ captive and have made them your bond servant to
wait on your filthy lusts, and to avenge your malice on every man, contrary
unto the right of Gods word. Ye have not only robbed them of their la^d,
authority honor and due obedience, which ye owe unto them, but also of their
wits, so that they are not without understanding in Gods word only: but eue^
in worldly matters that pertain unto their offices, they are more then
children. Ye bear them in hand what ye will, and have brought them eue^ in
case like unto them which when they dance naked in nets, believe they are
invisible. We would have them up again, and restored unto the rowme and
authority which GOD has given them, and whereof ye have robbed them. And your
inward falsehode we do but utter only with the light of Gods word, that your
hypocrisy might be seen. Be learned therefore ye that judge the world, lest God
be angry with you, and ye perish from the right way.

Woe be to you Scribes and Phariseis, hypocrites. For ye make clean yt
vtterside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of brybry
and excess, says Christ. Mat. xxiij. Is that Our hypocrites live by theft.
which our hypocrites eat and drink and all their riotous excess any other
thing save robbery, and that which they have falsely gotten with their lying
doctrine? Be learned therefore ye that judge the world, and compel them to
make restitution again.

Ye blind guides says Christ, ye strain out a gnat and swalow a camel.
Math. xxiij. do not our blind guides also stomble at a straw, and lepe over a
block, making narow consciences at Consciences that are so narrow about
traditions, have wide mouths about gods commandments.
trifles, and at matters of weight none at all? If any of them happen to swalow
his spitle or any of the water wherewith he washes his mouth, ere he go to
Mass: or touch the Sacrament with his nose, or if the Ass forget to breath on
him, or happen to handle it with any of his fingers which are not anointed,
or say Alleluia instead of Laus tibi Domine, or Ite Missa est instead of
Benedicamus Domino, or pour to much wine in the chalice, or read the Gospel
without light, or make not his crosses a right, how trembles he? how fears
he? what an horrible sin is committed? I cry God mercy, says he, and you my
Ghostly father. But to hold an whore or an other man's wife, to bye a benefice,
to set one Realm at variaunce with an other, and to cause xx. thousand me^ to
dye on a day is but a trifle and a pastime with them.

The Jews boasts them selves of As the Jews are the children of Abraham: so
are the Bishops the successors of the Apostles.
Abraham. And Christ said unto them. John. viij. If ye were Abraham's children,
ye would do the deeds of Abraham. Our hypocrites boast them selves of the
authority of Peter, and of Paul and the other Apostles, clean contrary unto
the deeds and doctrine of Peter, Paul and of all the other Apostles. Which
both obeyed all worldly authority and power, vsurpyng none to them selves, and
taught all other to fear the kings and rulers, and to obey them in all things
not contrary to the commandment of God, and not to resist them, though they
took away life and goods wrongfully, but patiently to abide Gods vengeance.
This did our spirituality never yet, The spiritualty have taught to fear their
traditions.
nor taught it. They taught not to fear God in his commandments, but to
fear them in their traditions. In so much that the evil people which fear
not to resist a good king and to rise against him, dare not lay hands on one
of them, neither for defilyng of wife daughter or very mother. When all They
win somewhat always.
men lose life and lands, they remain always sure and in safety, and ever
win somewhat. For who soever co^quereth other men's lands unrightfully, ever
gives the^ part with them. To them is all thing lawful. In all Councels and
Parlamentes are they the chief. Without them may no king
be crowned, neither until he be sworn to their liberties. All secrets know
they, even the very thoughts of men's hearts. By them all things are
ministered. No king nor Realm may thorough their falsehode live in peace. To
believe they teach not in Christ, but in them and their disguised hypocrisy.
And of them compel they all men to buy redemption and forgeuenes of sins.
The peoples sin they eat and thereof wax fat. The more wicked the people
are, the more prosperous is their common wealth. If kings and great men do
amiss, they must build Abbayes and Colleges, mean men build chauntreis,
poor find tre^tals and brotherhodes and beggyng Friars. Their own heirs do
men disherite to endote them. All kings are compelled to submit them selves
to them. Read the story of king John, and of other kings. They will have their
causes avenged, though whole Realms should therefore perish. Take from them
their desguising, so are they not spiritual. Compare that they have taught us
unto the Scripture, so are we without faith.

Christ says John. v. Chapter: how They that seek honor have no faith, neither
can they do Gods message.
can ye believe which receive glory one of an other. If they that seek to be
glorious, can have no faith, then are our Prelates faythlesse verily. And John.
vij. he says: he that speaks of him self, seeks his own glory. If to
seek glory and honor be a sure token, that a man speaks of his own self,
and does his own message and not his masters: then is the doctrine of our
Prelates of them selves, and not of God. Be learned therefore ye that judge the
earth, lest God be angry with you and ye perish from the right way.

Be learned lest the hypocrites bring Be learned.
the wrath of God upon your heads and compel you to shed innocent blould: as
they have compelled your predecessors to slay the Prophets, to kill Christ
and his Apostles and all the righteous y^ sense were slain. Gods word Gods
wordought all men to know.
pertains unto all men: as it pertains unto all servant to know their
masters will and pleasure: and to all subjects to know the laws of their
Prince. Let not the hypocrites do all thing secretly. What reason is it that
They do all secretly.
mine enemy should put me in prison at his pleasure and their diet me, and
handle me, as he lusts, and judge me him self and that secretly, and
condemn me by a law of his own making, and then deliver me to Pylate to
murder me? Let Gods word try every Gods wordought so judge.
man's doctrine, and whom so ever Gods word proves unclean let him be taken
for a leper. One Scripture ^he right way to understand the scripture.
will help to declare an other. And the circumstau^ces, that is to say, the
places that go before and after, will give light unto the middle text. And the
open and manifest Scriptures will ever improve the false and wrong exposition
of the darker sentences. Let the temporal power to who^ God has given the
sword to take vengeance, look or ever that they leap, and see what they do.
Let the causes be disputed before them, and let him that is accused have rowme
to answer for him self. The The kings have a judge before whom my soul for
yours helps not.
powers to whom God has committed the sword shall give acountes for every
drop of blood that is shed on the earth. Then shall their ignorance not
excuse them, nor the saying of the hypocrites help them, my soul for yours,
your grace shall do a meritorious deed, your grace ought not to hear them, it
is an old heresy condemned by the Church. The king ought to look in the
Scripture, and see whether it were truly condemned or no, if he will punish it.
If the king or his officer for him, will slay me, so ought the king or his
officer to judge me. The king can not, but unto his damnation, lend his sword
to kill whom he judges not by his own laws. Let him that is accused stand on
the one side and the accuser on the other side, and let the kings judge sit
and judge the cause, if the king will kill and not be a murderer before God.

Hereof may ye see, not only that Preach what thou will but rebuke nor
hypocrisy.
our persecution is for the same cause that Christ's was, and that we say
nothing that Christ said not: but also that all persecution is only for
rebuking of hypocrisy, that is to say, of ma^s righteousness, and of holy deeds
which man has imagined to please God, and to be saved by, without Gods word,
and beside the testament that God has made in Christ. If Christ had not
rebuked yt Phareseis because they taught the people to believe in their
traditions and holiness, and in offeringes that came to their auantage, and that
they taught the widows and the^ that had their friends dead, to believe in
their prayers, and that through their prayers the dead should be saved, and
thorough that means robbed them both of their goods, and also of the
testament and promises that God had made, to all that repented, in Christ to
come, he might have been vncrucified unto this day.

If Saint Paul also had not preached against circumcision, that it justified
not: and that vows, offeringes, and ceremonies justified not: and that
righteousness and forgeuenes of sins came not by any deserving of our deeds,
but by faith or believing ye promises of God, and by the deserving and merits
of Christ only, he might have lived unto this hour. Likewise if we preached
not against pride, covetousness, lechery, extorcion, usury, symony, and against
the evil living both of the spirituality as well of the temporalitie, and
against inclosings of parkes, reising of rent and fines, and of the carrying out
of wolle out of the realm, we might endure long enough. But toutch the scabbe
of hypocrisy or popeholynes, and go about to utter their false doctrine
wherewith they reign as Gods in the heart and consciences of men, and rob
them not of lands, goods, and authority only, but also of the testament of
God, and salvation that is in Christ: then helps thee neither Gods word, nor
yet if thou diddist miracles, but that thou art not an heretic only, and have
the devil within thee, but also a breaker of the kings peace, and a traitor.
But let us return unto our lying signs again.

WHat signifies that the Prelates The Prelates are clothed in red.
are so bloody, and clothed in red? that they be ready every hour to suffer
martyrdom for the testimony of Gods word. Is that also not a false sign?
When no man dare for them once open his mouth to ask a question of Gods word,
because they are ready to burn him.

What signifies the pollaxes that Pollaxe^.
are borne before hye Legates A Latere: What so ever false sign they make of
them, I care not: but of this I am sure, that as the old hypocrites when they
had slain Christ, set pollaxes to keep him in his s^pulcre that he should not
rise again: eue^ so have our hypocrites buried the testament that God made
unto us in Christ's blood, and to keep it down, that it rise not again, is
all their study: whereof these pollaxes are the very sign.

Is not that shepardes hoke the Bishopes crose a false sign? Is not that white
rochette that the Bishops and Chanons wear so like a Nun, and so
effeminatly, a false sign? What other things are their sandals, gloves,
myters, and all the whole pomp of their disguising, then false signs in which
Paul prophesied that they should come? And as Christ warned us to beware of
wolves in lambs skins, and bad us look rather unto their fruits Judge the
free by his fruit, and not by his leanes.
and deeds, then to wonder at their disguisinges. Run throughout all our
holy religious, and thou shall find them likewise all clothed in falshod.

Of the sacraments.
FOrasmuch as we be come to signs, we will speak a word or two of the signs
which God has ordained, that is to say, of the sacraments which Christ left
amongst us for our comfort, that we may walk in light and in truth, and in
feling of the power of God. For he that walks in y^ day, stumbleth not, when
contrariwise he that walks in the night stumbleth. Ioh. xi. And they that
walk in darkness wot not whether they go. Ioh. xij.

This word sacrament is as much to say as an holy sign, and represents
always some promise of God. As Sacraments are signs of Gods promises.
in the old Testament God ordained that the raynebowe should represent and
signify unto all men an oath that God swear to Noe, and to all men after him,
that he would no more drown the world thorough water.

The sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.
SO the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, has a promise annexed,
which the Priest should declare in the English tongue. This is my body that is
broken for you. This is my blood that is shed for many unto the forgiveness of
sins. This do in remembrance of me says Christ. Luke 22. And 1. Cor. 11. If
when thou see the Sacrament, or eatest his body, or drinckest The promise
which the Sacrament preaches, justifies only.
his blood, thou have this promise fast in thine heart (that his body was
slain, and his blood shed for thy sins) and beleuest it, so art thou saved and
justified thereby. If not, so helps it thee not, though thou hear a
thousand masses in a day, or though thou do nothing else all thy life long
then eat his body or drink his blood: no more the^ it should help thee in a
dead thyrst, to behold a bushe at a tavern door, if thou knew not thereby
that there were wine within to be sold^.

Baptime.
BAptime has also his word and promise, which the Priest ought to to teach
the people, and Christen them in the English tongue, and not to play y^
popengay with Credo say ye, ^olo say ye, and Baptismum say ye, for there ought
to be no mumming in such a matter. The Priest before he baptiseth, asks
saying: beleuest thou in God the father almighty, and in his son Jesus
Christ, and in the holy ghost, and that the congregation of Christ is holy? And
they say, yea. Then the Priest upon this faith baptiseth the child in y^ name
of the father, and of yt son, and of the holy ghost, for the forgeuenes of
sins, as Peter says. Act. ij.

The washing without the word helps not: but through the word it purifieth
and cleanses us. As thou read Ephe. v. How Christ cleanses the congregation
in the fountain of water through the word. The word is the promise that God
has made. Now as a preacher, in preaching the How the sacraments justify.
word of God saves the hearers that believe, so does the washing, in that it
preaches and represents unto us the promise that God has made unto us in
Christ. The washing preaches unto us, that we are cle^sed with Christ's
bloudshedding, which was an offering and a satisfaction for the sin of all
that repent and believe, consenting and submitting themselves unto the will of
God. The plunging into the water signifies that we die, and are buried with
Christ, as concerning the old life of sin which is Adam. And the pulling out
again, signifies that we rise again with Christ in a new life full of the
holy ghost, which shall teach us and guide us, and work the will of God in us,
as thou see. Romans vj.

Of wedlock.
MAtrimony or wedlock is a state or a degree ordained of God, and an office
wherein the husband serves the wife, and the wife the husband. It was ordained
for a remedy and to increase the world, and for the man to help the woman,
and the woman the man with all love and kyndnes, and not to signify any
promise that ever I heard or read of in y^ scripture. Therefore Matrimony was
not ordained to signify any promise.
ought it not to be called a Sacrament. It has a promise that we sin not in
that state, if a man receive his wise as a gift given to him of God, and the
wife her husband likewise: as all manner meats and drinks have a promise that
we sin not, if we use them measurably with thanks giving. If they call
matrimony a Sacrament because the scripture uses the similitude of matrimony,
to express the marriage or wedlock that is between us and Christ. (For as a
woman though she be never so poor, yet when she is married, is as rich as her
husband: even so we when we repent and believe the promises of God in Christ,
though we be never so poor sinners, yet are as rich as Christ, all his merits
are ours with all that he has). If for that cause they call it a sacrament: so
will I musterde seed, leven, a net, keys, bread, water, and a thousand other
things which Christ and the Prophets, and all the scripture use, to express
the kingdom of heaven and Gods word wythall. They praise wedlock with their
If wedlock be holy, why had they lever have whores the^ wines?
mouth, and say it is an holy thing, as it is verily: but had lever be
sanctified with an whore, then to come within the sanctuary.

Of Order.
SUbdeacon, Deaco^, Priest, Bishop, Cardinal, Patriarch and Pope, be names of
offices and service, or should be, and not Sacraments. There is no promise
coupled therewith. If they minister their offices truly, it is a sign that
Christ's spirit is in them, if not, that the devil is in them. Are these all
Sacraments, or which one of them? Or what thing in them is that holy sign or
Sacrament? The shauyng or the annoynting? What also is the promise that is
signified thereby? But what word printeth in them that charact: that spiritual
seal? O dreamers and natural beasts without the seal Character.
of the spirit of God: but sealed with the mark of the beast and with cankred
consciences.

There is a word called in Latin Sacerdos Sacerdos.
in Greek Hiercus, in Hebrew Cohan, that is, a Minister an officer, a
sacrificer or a Priest, as Aaron was a Priest and sacrificed for the people and
was a mediator between God and them. And in the English should it have had some
other name then Priest? But Antichrist has deceived us with unknown and
strange terms, to bring us into confusion and superstitious blyndnes. Of that
manner is Christ a Priest for ever, and all we Priests thorough him and need no
more of any such Priest on earth to be a mean for us unto god. For Christ has
brought us all into the inner temple within the veil or forehanging, and unto
the mercy stool of God. And has coupled us unto God, where we offer every man
for himself ye desires and petitions of his heart, and sacrifice and kill the
lusts and appetits of his flesh with prayer, fasting, and all manner godly
living.

An other word is there in Greek called Presbiter, in latin, Senior, in
english an elder, and is nothing but an Presbiter.
officer to teach, and not to be a mediator between God and us. This needs no
anointing of man. They o^ yt old testament were anointed with oil, Priests
now ought not to be anointed with oil.
to signify the anointing of Christ and of us thorough Christ with the holy
ghost. This wise is no man Priest but he that is chosen, save as in time of
necessity every parson Christeneth, so may every man teach his wife and
household, and the wife her children. So in time of need if I see my brother
sin, I may between him and me rebuke him, and damn his deed by the law of
God. And may also comfort them that are in despair with the promises of God,
and save them if they believe.

By a Priest then in the new testament The office of a Priest.
understand nothing but an elder to teach the younger, and to bring the^ unto
the full knowledge and understanding of Christ and to minister the Sacraments
which Christ ordained, which is also nothing but to preach Christ's promises.
And by them that give all their study to quench the light of truth, and to
hold the people in darcknes, understand the disciples of Satan and messengers
of Antichrist, what soever names they have, or what soever they call
themselves. And as concerning that our spirituality (as they will be called)
make themselves holyer then the lay people, and take so They will be holier,
but their deeds be not holy at all.
great lands and goods to pray for them, and promise them pardons and
forgeuenes of sins, or absolution, without preaching of Christ's promises, is
falsehode and the woorkyng of Antichrist: and (as I have said) the rauenyng of
those wolves which Paul (Act. xx.) prophesied, should come after his departing
not sparyng the flock. Their doctrine is that marchaundise whereof Peter
speaks saying: through coueteousnes shall they with feigned words make
marchaundise of you. ij. Pet. ij. And their reasons wherewith they prove their
doctrine are (as says Paul. i. Timo. vj.) superfluous disputynges, arguynges
or braulyngs of me^ with corrupt minds and destitute of truth, which think
Compare their deeds to the doctrine end deeds of Christ. and of his Apostles,
and judge their fruits.
that lucre is godlynes. But Christ says. Math. vij. by their fruits shall
thou know them, that is by their filthy covetousness and shameless ambition and
dronken desire of honor, contrary unto the example and doctrine of Christ and
of his Apostles. Christ said to Peter, the last Chapter of John. Feed my
sheep, and not shere thy flock. And Pet. says. i. Pet. v. Not being Lords
over the Parishes: but these shere, and are become Lords. Paul says. ij. Cor.
ij. Not that we be Lords over your faith: but these will be Lords and compel
us to believe what soever they lust, without any witness of Scripture, yea clean
contrary to the Scripture, when the open text rebukes it. Paul says, it is
better to give, the^ to receive. Act. xx. But these do nothing in the world but
lay snares to katch and receive what so ever comes, as it were the gapyng
mouth of hell. And. ij. Cor. xij. I seek not yours but you: but these seek
not you to Christ, but yours to the^ selves, and therefore lest their deeds
should be rebuked will not come at the light.

Nevertheless the truth is, that we are all equally beloved in Christ, and God
has sworn to all indifferently. According therefore as every man believes Gods
promises, longs for the^, and is diligent to pray unto GOD to fulfill them,
so is his prayer heard, and as good is the prayer of a cobbler, as of a
Cardinal: and of a bocher, as of a Bishop: and the blessing of a baker that
knows the truth, is as good as the blessyng of our most holy father the Pope.
And by blessing understand not What blessing means.
the wagging of the popes or Bishops hand over thine head, but prayer, as when
we say, God make thee a good man, Christ put his spirit in thee, or give thee
grace and power to walk in the truth, and to follow his commandments etc. As
Rebeccas friends blessed her when she departed, Gene. xxiiij. saying. Thou art
our sister: grow unto thousand thousands, and thy seed possess the gates of
their enemies. And as Isaac blessed Jacob Gene. xxvij. saying. God give thee of
the dew of heaven, and of the fatnes of the earth, abundance of corn, wine
and oil etc. And Gene. xxviij. Almighty God bless thee and make thee grow,
and multiply thee, that thou may be a great multitude of people, and give to
thee and to thy seed after thee the blessings of Abraham, that thou may
possess the land wherein thou art a stranger which he promised to thy
graundfather and such like.

Last of all one singular doubt they have: what makes the Priest, the
annoynting or puttyng on of the hands or what other ceremony or what words.
About which they braule and scolde one ready to tear out an others throat. One
says this, and an other that, but they ca^ not agree. Neither ca^ any of them
make so strong a reason which an other can not improve. For they are all out of
the way, and without the spirit of God to judge spiritual things. Howbeit to
this I answer, that when Christ called. xij. up into the mountain and chose
them, then immediately without any anointing or ceremony were they his
Apostles, that is to wit, ministers chosen to be sent to preach his
Testament, unto all the whole world. And after the resurrection when he had
opened their wits, and given them knowledge to understand the secrets of his
Testament, and how to bind and loose, and what he would have the^ to do in all
things, then he sent them forth with a commandment to preach and bind the
unbelieving that continue in sin, and to loose the beleuyng that repent. And
that commandment The commandment makes Priests.
or charge made the^ Bishops, priests, Popes and all thing. If they say that
Christ made the^ priests at his Maundey or last Supper when he said, do this
in the remembrance of me. I answer, though the Apostles wist not then what
he meant, yet I will not strive nor say that against. Never the latter the
commandment and the charge which he gave them made the^ Priests.

And Acts the first, when Mathias was chose^ by lotte, it is not to be douted
but that the Apostles, after their common manner, prayed for him that God would
give him grace to minister his office truly, and put their hands on him, and
exhorted him and gave him charge to be diligent and faithful, and then was he
as great as the best. And Acts. vj. When the Disciples that believed had
chosen. vj. Deacons to minister to the widows, the Apostles prayed and put
their hands on them, and admitted them without more add. Their putting on of
hands Putting on of hands.
was not after the manner of the dome blessing of our holy bishops with two
fingers: but they spoke unto them, and told them their duty and gave them a
charge and warned them to be faithful in the Lords business: as we choose
temporal officers and read their duty to them, and they promise to be
faithful ministers, and then are admitted. Neither is there any other manner or
ceremony at all required in making of our spiritual officers, then to choose
an able person, and the^ to rehearse him his duty and give him his charge and
so to put him in his rowme. And as for that other solemn doubt, as they call
it whether Judas was a Priest or What Judas is now.
no, I care not what he then was: but of this I am sure, that he is now not
only Priest, but also Bishop, Cardinal and Pope.

Of Penance.
Penance is a word of their own forgyng to disceaue us with all, as many
other are. In the Scripture we find panitentia repentance. Agite
poenitentiam, do repent: Poeniteat vos, let it repent you. Metanoyte in Greek,
forthinke yo, or let it forthinke you. Of repentance A point of practice.
they have made penance, to blind the people and to make them think that
they must take pain and do some holy deeds to make satisfaction for their
sins, namely such as they enioyue them. As thou may see
in the Cronicles, when great kings and tyrauntes (which with violence of
sword conquered other kings lands and slew all that came to hand) came to
them selves, and had conscience of their wicked deeds, then the Bishops coupled
them, not to Christ: but unto the Pope, and preached the Pope unto them, and
made them to submit them selves and also their realms unto the holy father the
Pope, and to take penance, as they call it, that is to say, such injunctions
as the Pope and Bishops would command them to do, to build Abbays, to endote
them with liuelode, to be prayed for for ever: and to give them exemptions and
privilege and license to do what the lust unpunished.

Repentance goes before faith and Repentance.
prepares the way to Christ, and to the promises. For Christ, comes not, but
unto them that see their sins in the law and repent. Repentance that is to
say, this morning and sorrow of the heart lasts all our lives long. For we
find our selves all our lives long to weak for Gods law, and therefore sorrow
and morn longyng for strength. Repentance is no Sacrament: as faith, hope,
love, and knowledge of a man's sins are not to be called Sacraments. For they
are spiritual and invisible. Now must a Sacrament be an outward sign that may
be seen to signify, to represent, and to put a man in remembrance of some
spiritual promise which can not be seen but by faith only. Repentance and
all the good deeds which accompany repentance to slay the lusts of the
flesh are signified by Baptism. For Paul says Repentance is signified by
Baptime.
Roma. vj. (as it is above rehearsed.) Remember ye not (says he) that all we
which are baptized in the name of Christ Jesus, are baptized to dye with him?
we are buried with him in Baptism for to dye, that is, to kill the lusts and
the rebellion which remains in the flesh. And after that he says, ye are
dead as concerning sin but live unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. If
thou look on the profession
of our hearts, and on the spirit and forgeuenes which we have received thorough
Christ's merits, we are full dead: but if thou look on the rebellion of the
flesh we do but begin to dye and to be baptized, that is, to drown and quench
the lusts, and are full baptized at the last minute of death. And as
concerning the workyng of the spirit we begin to live, and grow every day more
and more both in knowledge and also in Godly living, according as the lusts
abate. As a child receaueth ye ^ull soul at the first day, yet grows daily
in the operations and works thereof.

Of Confession.
COnfession is diverse? One follows true faith insparably. And is the
confessing and knowledging with the One confession is to knowledge wherein thou
put thy trust.
mouth, wherein we put our trust and confidence. As when we say our Credo:
confessing that we trust in God the father almighty, and in his truth and
promises: and in his son Jesus our Lord, and in his merits and deseruinges:
and in the holy Ghost, and in his power, assistance and guiding. This
confession is necessary unto all men that will be saved. For Christ says
Matthew. x. he that denies me before men, him will I deny before my father that
is in heaven. And of this confession says the holy Apostle Paul in the x.
chapter. The belief of the heart justifies: and to knowledge with the mouth
makes a man safe. This is a wonderful text for our Philosophers or rather
sophisters, our worldly wise enemies to the wisdom of God, our deep and
profounde wells without water, our clouds without moisture of rain, that is
to say, natural souls without the sprite of God, and feeling of godly
things. To justify and to make safe are both one thing. And to confess with
the mouth is a good work, and the fruit of a true faith, as all other works
are.

If thou repent and believe the promises, then Gods truth justifies thee, that
is, forgeueth thee thy sins, and seals thee with his holy spirit, and
makes thee heir of everlasting life through Christ's deseruinges. Now if thou
have true faith, so see thou the exceeding and infinite love and mercy which
God has showed thee freely in Christ: then must thou needs love again: and
love can not but compel If when tyrauntes oppose thee thou have power to
confess then art thou sure that thou and art sat.
thee to work, and boldly to confess and knowledge thy Lord Christ, and the
trust which thou have in his word. And this knowledge makes thee safe, that is
declares that thou art safe already, certifieth thine heart, and makes thee
feel that thy faith is right, and that Gods spirit is in thee, as all other
good works do. For if when it comes unto the point, thou have no lust to
work, nor power to confess, how could thou presume to think that Gods
sprite were in thee?

An other confession is there which An other confession is to knowledge thy
sins in (...) unto God.
goes before says, and accompanies repentance. For who so ever repents
does knowledge his sins in his heart. And who soever does knowledge his
sins, receaueth forgenenes (as ^ayth John in the first of his first Epistle.)
If we knowledge our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us out sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, that is, because he has promised, he
must for his truths sake do it. This confession is necessary all our lives
long, as is repentance. And as thou understand of repentance, so
understand of this confession, for it is likewise included in the sacrament of
Baptime. For we always repent and always knowledge or confess our sins
unto God, and yet despair not: but remember that we are washed in in Christ's
blood, which thing our baptime does represe^t, and signify unto us.

Shrift in the ear is verily a work of Satan, and that the ^alsest that ever
Shrift.
was wrought, and that most has devoured the faith. It began among the
Greeks, and was not as it is now, to recke^ all a ma^s sins in the priests
ear: but to ask counsel of such doubts as men had, as thou may see in S.
Hierome, and in other authors. Neither went they to Priests only which were
very few at that time, no more then preached the word of God, for this so
great vantage in so many masses saying, was not yet found: but went
indifferently, where they saw a good and a learned man. And for because Shrift
was put down for knavery among the Greeks: But is stablished the^ by among us.
of a little knavery which a Deaco^ at Constantinople plaide thorough confession
with one of the chief wives of the city, it was laid down again. But we
Antichrists possession, the more knavery we see grow thereby daily, the more
we stablishe it. A christen man is a spiritual thing, and has Gods word in
his heart, and gods spirit to certify him of all thing. He is not bound to
come to any ear. And as for the reasons which they make are but persuasions of
man's wisdom. First as perteining unto the keys and manner of bynding and
loosing is eough above rehearsed, and in other places. Thou may also see how
the Apostles used them in the Acts, and in Paul's Epistles, how at the
preaching of faith the spirit came, and certified their hearts that they were
justified thorough believing the promises.

When a man feels that his heart How a man shall know that (...) sins are
forgeuen.
consents unto the law of God, and feels himself meek, pacient, courteous
and merciful to his neighbor, altered and fashioned like unto Christ, why
should he doubt but that God has forgeuen him and chosen him and put his
spirit in him, though he never cromme his sin into the priests ear?

One blind reason have they saying. Blind reason to their guide and not Gods
spirit.
How shall the Priest unbind, loose and forgive the sin which he knows
not? How did the Apostles? The Scripture forsake they and run unto their
blind reasons, and draw the Scripture unto a carnal purpose. When I have
told thee in thine ear all that I have done my life long, in order and with
all circumstances after the shamefullest manner, what can thou do more then
preach me the promises, saying: if thou repent and believe, Gods truth shall
save thee for Christ's sake? Thou see not mine heart, thou know not whether
I repent or no, neither whether I consent to the law, that it is holy,
righteous, and good. Moreover whether I believe the promises or no, is also
unknown to thee. If thou preach the law and the promises, (as the Apostles
did) so should they that God has chosen repent and believe and be saved: even
now as well as then. How be it Antichrist must know all secrets to stablish
his kingdom, and to work his mysteries withal.

They bring also for them the story of the x. lepers, which is written Learn
to know them for they are verily lepers in their hearts.
in the. xvij. Chapter of Luke. Here mark their falsehoode, and learn to
know them for ever. The fourtene Sunday after the feast of the Trinity, the
beginning of the vij. le^n is the said Gospel and the viij. and the ix.
lessons with the rest of the seventh is the exposition of Bid upon the said
Gospel. Where, says Bid, of all that Christ healed, of what so ever disease
it were, he sent none unto the Priests, but the lepers. And by the lepers
enterpreteth the folowers of false doctrine only, which the spiritual
officers, and the learned men of the congregation ought to examine, and rebuke
their learning with Gods word, and to warn the congregation to beware of them.
Which, if they were afterward healed by the grace of Christ, ought to come
before the congregation, and there openly confess their true faith.

But all other vices (says he) does God heal within in the conscience.

Though they this wise read at mattens, yet at hie mass, if they have any
sermon at all, they lie clean contrary unto this open truth. Neither are they
ashamed at all. For why they walk altogether in darcknes.

Of Contrition.
COntrition and repentance are both one and nothing else but a sorrowful and a
mournyng heart. And because that God has promised mercy unto a contrite heart,
that is, to a sorrowful and repentyng heart, they to beguile Gods word and to
stablish their wicked tradition, have feigned that new word attrition saying:
thou can not know whether thy sorrow or repentance be contrition or
attrition, except thou Attritio^ is of the leaves of the phariseis.
be shreuen. When thou art shreuen, the^ it is true contritio^. Oh foxy
Pharisay, that is thy leven, of which Christ so diligently bad us beware. Math.
vj. And the very prophecy of Peter thorough covetousness with feigned words
shall they make marchau^dise of you. ij. Pet. ij. with such gloses corrupt they
Gods word, to sit in the consciences of y^ people, to lead them captive, and to
make a pray of the^: byeng and sellyng their sins, to satisfy their
insatiable covetousness. Nevertheless the truth is, when any man has
trespassed against God. If he repent and knowledge his trespass, God promises
him forgiveness without ear shrift.

If he that has offended his neighbor repent and knowledge his fault askyng
forgeuenes, if his neighbor forgive him, God forgeueth him also, by his holy
promise. Mat. xviij. Likewise if he that sins openly, when he is openly
rebuked, repent and turn, then if the congregation forgive him God forgeueth
him. And so forth who soever repents and when he is rebuked knowledgeth his
fault is forgiven.

He also that doubts or has his consciences tangled, ought to open his mind
unto some faithful brother that is learned, and he shall give him faithful
council to help him withal.

To whom a man trespasseth, unto him he ought to confess. But to confess Whom
a man offends (...) must he confess.
my self unto thee O Antichrist, whom I have not offended, am I not bound.

They of the old law had no confession in the ear. Neither the Apostles nor
they that followed many hundred years after knew of any such whisperyng. Whereby
then was their attritio^ turned unto contrition? yea why are we which Christ
came to loose, more bound the^ the Jews. Yea and why are we more bound
without Scripture? For Christ came not to make us more bound, but to loose us
and to make a thousand things no sin which before were sin, and are now
become sin again. He left none other law with us, but the law of love. He
loosed us not from Moses to bind us unto Antichrists ear. God had not tied
Christ unto Antichrists ear, neither has poured all his mercy in thither,
for it has no record in the old Testament, that Antichrists ear should be
Propiciatorium, that is to wit, Gods It has no record in (...) y^ Scripture
that God should crepe in, and hyde him (...) in Antichrists ear.
mercy stole, and that God should crepe into so narow a hole, so that he could
no where else be found. Neither did God write his laws neither yet his holy
promises in Antichrists ear: but has graued them with his holy spirit in
the hearts of them that believe, that they might have them always ready at hand
to be saved thereby.

Satisfaction.
AS pertainyng unto satisfaction, this wise understand, that he that loves God
has a commandment (as S. John says in the fourth Chap. of his first
Epistle) to love his neighbor also: whom if thou have offended thou must make
him amends or satisfaction, or at the lest way if thou be not able, ask him
forgeuenes, and if he will have mercy of God, he is bound to forgive thee. If
he will not: yet God forgeueth thee, if thou thus submit thy self. But unto
Godward Christ is a perpetual Christ is (...) everlasting satisfaction.
and an everlasting satisfaction for evermore.

As often as thou fallest through frailty, repent and come again and thou art
safe and welcome, as you may see by ye similitude of the riotous son, Luke.
xv. If thou be lopen out of sanctuary come in again. If thou be fallen from
the way of truth come thereto again and thou art safe, if thou be gone astray
come to ye fold again and the shepherd Christ shall save thee, yea and the
angels of heaven shall rejoice at thy coming, so far it is of that any man
shall beat thee or chide thee. If any Pharisey envy thee, grudge at thee, or
rail upon thee, thy father shall make answer for thee, as thou seist in the
fore rehearsed likeness or parable. Who soever therefore is gone out of the way
by whatsoever chance it be, let him come to his Baptism again and unto the
profession thereof and he shall be safe.

For though that the washyng of Baptism be past, yet the power thereof,
Baptism ^steth ever.
that is to say, yt word of God which Baptism preaches lasts ever and
saves for ever. As Paul is past and gone, nevertheless ye word that Paul
preached lasts ever and saves ever as many as come thereto with a repentyng
heart and a steadfast faith.

Hereby see thou that when they make penance of repentance and call it a
Sacrament and divide it into contrition, confession and satisfaction they
speak of their own heads and lie falsely.

Absolution.
THeir absolution also justifies no man from sin. For with the heart do men
believe to be justified with all says Paul. Roma. 10. that is, through faith
and beleuyng the promises, are we justified, as I have sufficiently proved in
other places with y^ Scripture. Faith (says Paul in the same place) comes by
hearing, that is to say, by hearing the preacher that is sent from God and
preaches Gods promises. Now when thou absoluest in Latin, the unlearned
hears not. For how, says Paul. i. Cor. xiiij. when thou blessest in an
unknown tongue, shall the unlearned say Amen unto thy thanks giving? for he
wotteth not you say. So likewise the lay wotteth not whether thou loose or
bind, or whether thou bless or curse. In like manner is it if the lay
understand Latin or though the Priest absolve in English. For in his
absolution he rehearses no promise of God: but speaks his own words
saying: I by the authority of Peter and Paul absolve or loose thee from all
thy sins. Thou say so, which art but a lying man and never more then now
verily.

Thou say I forgive thee thy sins, and the Scripture (John the first) that
Christ only forgeueth and takes away ye sins of the world. And Paul and
Peter and all the Apostles preach that all is forgeuen in Christ and for
Christ's sake. Gods word only loses and thou in preaching that might loose
also and else not.

Who soever has ears let him hear and let him that has eyes, see. If any
man love to be blind, his blindness on his own head and not on mine. Of
byndyng and loosing and of the Popes authority or power.


THey allege for the^ selves the saying of Christ to Peter Math. xvj.
Whatsoever thou byndest on earth, it shall be bound, and what soever thou
loses, and so forth. Lo say they, what soever we bind and what soever we
loose here is nothing excepted. And an other text lay they of Christ in ye last
of Matthew. All power is given to me says Christ, in heaven and in earth: go
therefore and preach etc. Preaching leaves The Pope chalengeth power not over
man only but over God also.
the Pope out, and says lo all power is given me in heaven and in earth. And
thereupon takes upon him temporal power above king and Emperor, and makes
laws and byndeth them. And like power takes he over gods laws and dispenses
with them at his lust, making no sin of that which God makes sin, and
makes sin where God makes none: yea and wypeth out Gods laws clean and
makes at his pleasure, and with him is lawful what he lusts. He binds
where God loses and loses where God binds. He blesses where GOD curses
and curses where God blesses. He takes authority also to bind and loose in
Purgatory. Purgatory is the Popes creature: he may therefore be bold there.
That permit I unto him: for it is a creature of his own making. He also
byndeth the angels. For we read of Popes that have commanded the angels to
fet diverse out of Purgatory. The Pope binds the angels.
Howbeit I am not yet certified whether they obeyed or no.

Understand therrfore that to bind and to loose, is to preach the law of The
true byndyng and loosing.
God and the Gospel or promises, as thou may see in the third chapter of the
second epistle to the Corinthians: Where Paul calls the preaching of the law
the ministration of death, and damnation, and the preaching of the promises
then ministering of the spirit and of righteousness. For when the law is
preached, all men are found sinners, and therefore damned: and when the Gospel
and glad tydinges are preached, then are all that repent and believe, found
righteous in Christ. And so expound it all the old doctors. S. Hierome
against Bishops and Priests.
Saint Hierome says upon this text, whatsoever thou bindest, the Bishops and
Priests says he, for lack of understanding, take a little presumption of the
Phareseis upon the^. And think that they have authority to bind innocents,
and to loose the wicked, which thing our Pope and Bishops do. For they say the
curse is to be feared, The curse is to be feared.
be it right or wrong. Though thou have not deserved, yet if ye Pope curse
thee, thou art in peril of thy soul as they lie: yea and though he be never
fo wrongfully cursed, he must be feign to The right manner of loosing.
buy absolution. But Saint Hierome says as ye Priest of the old law made the
lepers clean or unclean, so byndeth and unbinds the Priest of the new law.


The Priest there made no man a leper, neither cleansed any man, but God: and
the Priest judged only by Moses law, who was clean, and who was unclean,
when they were brought unto him.

So here we have the law of God to judge what is sin, and what is not, and
who is bound, and who is not. Moreover if any man have sinned, yet if he
repent and believe the promise, we are sure by Gods word that he is loosed and
forgeuen in Christ. Other authority then this wise to preach, have the Priests
not. Christ's Apostles had no other the^ selves, as it appears thoroughout
all the new testament. Therefore it is manifest that they have not.

Saint Paul says i. Corinth. xv. Christ understood this text all power is
given me in heaven and in earth: and also used it far other wise then the
Pope.
When we say all things are under Christ, he is to be excepted that put all
under him. God the father is not under Christ, but above Christ, and Christ's
head. i. Corinth. vi.

Christ says John. xij. I have not spoken of mine own head, but my father
which sent me, gave a commandment what I should say, and what I should
speak. What soever I speak
therefore, even as my father bad me so I speak. If Christ had a law what he
should do, how happens it, that the Pope so runs at large lawless?
Though that all power were given unto Christ in heaven and in earth: Yet had he
no power over his father, nor yet to reign temporally over temporal Princes:
but a commandment to obey them. How has the Pope the^ such temporal
authority over king and Emperor? How has he authority above Gods laws, and
to command the Angels, the saints, and God himself?

Christ's authority which he gave to What authority Christ gave his Apostles.
his Disciples, was to preach the law and to bring sinners to repentance, and
then to preach unto them the promises which the father had made unto all men
for his sake. And the same to preach only sent he his Apostles. As The right
byndyng and loosyng.
a king sends forth his Judges, and gives them his authority, saying: What
ye do, that do I. I give you my full power. Yet means he not by that full
power, that they should destroy any town or City, or oppress any man or do
what they list, or should reign over the Lords and Dukes of his Realm and
over his own self. But gives them a law with them and authority to bind
and loose, as farforth as the law stretches and makes mention: that is, to
punish the evil, that do wrong, and to avenge ye poor that suffer wrong.
And so far as the law stretches, will the king defend his Judge against all
men. And as the te^porall judges bind and loose temporally, so do the pristes
spiritually, and no other ways. How be it by falshod How the Pope reigns
under Christ.
and subtlety the Pope reigns under Christ, as Cardinals and Bishops do
under kings lawless.

THe Pope (say they) absolueth or loses a poena et culpa, that is from A
poena et a culia is a proper brea^.
the fault or trespass, and from the pain due unto the trespass. God if a
man repent forgeueth the offense only, and not the pain also, say they, save
turns the everlasting pain unto a temporal pain. And appoints seven
years in purgatory for every deadly sin. But the Pope for money forgeueth
The Pope is more mighty and more merciful for money, the^ God is for the
death of his only son.
both, and has more power the^ God, and is more merciful the^ God. This do I
says the Pope of my full power and of ye treasure of the Church, of
deseruinges of martyrs, co^fessours, and me^rites of Christ.

First the merits of the Saints did not save themselves, but were saved by
Christ's merits only. The merits of saints.


Secondarily God has promised Christ's merits unto all that repent: so that
whosoever repents is immediately The merits of Christ.
heir of all Christ's merits and beloved of God as Christ is. How the^ came
this foul monster to be Lord over The Pope sells that which God gives freely.
Christ's merits, so that he has power to sell that which God gives freely.
O dreamers, yea O devils and O venomous scorpians, what poison have ye in your
tails? O pestilent leaven, that so turns the sweet bread of Christ's
doctrine into the bitterness of gall.

The Friars run in the same spirit Friars.
and teach, saying: do good deeds and redeem the pains y^ abide you in
purgatory, yea give us somewhat to do good works for you. And thus Sin is
y^ best marchaundise that is.
is sin become the profitablest marchaundise in the world. O the cruel
wrath of God upon us because we love not the truth.

For this is the damnation and judgment of God, to send a false Prophet unto
him that will not hear the truth. I know you says Christ, John. v. that ye
have not the love of God in you. I am come in my fathers name and ye receive me
not, if an other shall come Christ prophesied of Antichrist and told why he
should come.
in his own name, him shall ye receive. This does God avenge him self on the
malicious hearts which have no love to his truth.

All the promises of God have they either wypte clean out, or thus leauened
The promises are either put out or leauened, and why.
them with open lies to stablishe their confession with all. And to keep us
from knowledge of the truth, they do all thing in Latin.

They pray in Latin, they Christen in Latin, they bless in Latin, they All
is in Latin.
give absolution in Latin, only curse they in the English tongue. Wherein they
take upon them greater authority then ever God gave them. For in their curses
as they call them, with book bell and candle, they commau^de God and Christ
and the angels and The Pope commands God to curse.
all Saints to curse them: curie them God (say they) father, son and holy
ghost, curse them virgin Mary. etc. O ye abommable, Who gave you authority to
commau^de God to curse? God commands you to bless, and ye command him to
curse. Bless them that persecute you: bless but curse not, says S. Paul
Roma. xij. What tyranny will these not use over men, which presume and take upon
them to be Lords over God and to command him? If God shall curse any man,
who shall bless and make him better? No man can amend him self, except God
pour his spirit unto him. Have we not a commandment to love our neighbor
as our selves? How can I love him and curse him also? James says, it is not
possible that blessing and cursing should come both out of one mouth. Christ
commands. Math. v. saying: love your enemies. Bless them that curse you. Do
good to them that hate you. Pray for them that do you wrong and persecute you,
that ye may be the children of your heavenly father.

In the marches of Wales it is the manner if any man have an Ox or a A custom
that is used in the marches of ways.
Cow stolle^, he comes to the Curate and desires him to curse the stealer.
And he commands the Parish to give him every man Gods curse and his. Gods
curse and mine have he, says every man in the Parish. O merciful God what is
blasphemy, if this be not blasphemy and shamyng of the doctrine of Christ?

Understand therefore, the power of excommunication is this. If any man sin
openly and amendeth not when he is warned? then ought he to be rebuked openly
before all the Parish. And the Priest ought to prove by the Scripture, that all
such have no part with Christ. For Christ serves not but for them that love
the law of God, and consent that it is good holy and righteous. And repent
sorrowing and mournyng for power and strength to fulfill it. And all the parish
ought to be warned, to avoid the company of all such, and to take them as
heathen people. This is not done that he should perish, but to save him, to
make him ashamed and to kill the lusts of the flesh, that the spirit might
come unto the knowledge of truth. And we ought to pity him, and to have
compassion on him, and with all diligence to pray unto God for him, to give him
grace to repent and to come to the right way again, and not to use such
tyranny over God and man, commau^dyng God to curse. And if he repent we ought
with all mercy to receive him in again. This may thou see Mat. xviij. and. i.
Cor. v. and ij. Cor. ij.

Confirmation.
IF confirmation have a promise, then it justifies, as far as the promise
extends. If it have no promise, then is it not of GOD as the Bishops be not.
The Apostles and Ministers of Gods sacraments preach Gods promises.
God preach Gods word: and Gods signs or Sacraments signify Gods word also,
and put us in remembrance of the promises which God has made unto us in
Christ. Contrariwise Antichrists The popes sacraments are dumme.
Bishops preach not and their Sacraments speak not, but as the disguised
Bishops mum, so are their superstitious Sacraments domme. After that the
Bishops had left preaching, then feigned they this domme ceremony of
confirmation to have somewhat at the lest way, whereby they might reign over
their Dioceses. They reserved unto them selves, also the Christenyng of Belles
and coniuring Christening of belles.
or hallowyng of Churches and Churchyardes, and of Altares and superaltares,
and holowyng of Chalices and so forth, what soever is of honor or profit.
Which confirmation and the other coniurations, also they have now committed to
their Suffragans: because Why Suffraga^s are ordained.
they them selves have no leisure to minister such things, for their lusts and
pleasures and abundance of all things, and for the combraunce that they have
in the kings matters and business of the Realm. One keeps The Bishops
divide all among the^.
the priuey seal, an other y^ great seal, the third is confessor, that is to
say, a priuey traitor and a secreat Judas, he is President of the Princes
Counsel, he is an Ambassador, an other sort of the Kings secret Counsel.
Woe is unto the Realms where they are of yt counsel. As profitable are they
verily unto the Realms with their Counsel, as the Wolves unto the Sheep, or
the Foxes unto the Geese.

They will say that the holy Ghost Ceremonies bring not the holy Ghost.
is given thorough such ceremonies. If God had so promised, so should it be,
but Paul says Galat. iij. that the spirit is received thorough preaching of
the faith. And Acts tenth, while Peter preached the faith, the holy Ghost fell
on Cornelius and on his household. How shall we say then to that which they will
lay against us, in the eight chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Where Peter
and John put Putting on of hands.
their hands on the Samaritans, and the holy Ghost came? I say that by putting
or with putting, or as they put their hands on them, the holy Ghost came.
Nevertheless the putting on of the hands did neither help nor hinder. For the
text says they prayed for them that they might receive the holy ghost.

God had made the Apostles a promise, that he would with such miracles
confirm their preaching, and mou^ other to the faith. Mar. the last. The
Apostles therefore believed and prayed God to fulfill his promise, and God for
his truths sake even so did. So was it the prayer of faith that brought Prayer
of faith does the miracles.
the holy Ghost, as thou may see also in the last of James. If any man be
sick says James, call the elders of the congregation, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil, in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith
shall heal the sick. Where a promise is, there is faith bold to pray, and
God true to give her her petition. Putting on of the hands is an indifferent
thing. For the holy Ghost came by preaching of the faith, and miracles were
done at the prayer of faith as The ^ting on o^ hands does neither help nor
hinder.
well without putting on of the hands, as with, as thou see in many places.
Putting on of the hands was the manner of that nation, as it was to rent their
clothes, and to put on sackecloth, and to sprinkle themselves with ashes and
earth, when they heard of or saw any sorrowful thing, as it was Paul's manner to
stretch out his hand, when he preached. And as it is our manner to hold up our
hands, when we pray, and as some kiss their thome nail, and put it to their
eyes, and as we put our hands on childrens heads, when we bless the^,
saying: Christ bless thee my son, and God make thee a good man: which
gestures neither help nor hinder. This may thou well see by the xiij. of the
Acts, where the holy Ghost commanded to separate Paul and Barnabas, to go and
preach. The^ the other fasted and prayed, and put their hands on their heads,
and sent them forth. They received not the holy Ghost the^, by putting on of
hands, but the other as they put their hands on their heads prayed for them,
that God would go with them and strength them, and coraged them also, bidding
them to be strong in God, and warned them to be faithful and diligent in the
work of God, and so forth.

Anoyling.
LAst of all comes the anoyling without promise, and therefore without the
spirit and without profet, but altogether unfruitful and superstitious. The
sacraments which they have imagined are all without promise, and therefore
help not. For What soever is not of faith, is sin.
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans xiiij. Now without a promise can
there be no faith. The sacraments which Christ himself ordained, which have
also promises, and would save us The latin tongue destroys the says.
if we knew them and believed them, them minister they in the latin tou^g. So
are they also become as unfruitful as the other. Yea they make us believe That
the work without y^ promise saves, is unproued.
that the work it self without the promise saves us, which doctrine they
learned of Aristotle. And thus are we become an hundred times worse then the
wicked Jews which believed that the very work of their sacrifice justified
them. Against which Paul fights in every epistle, proving that nothing
helps save the promises which God has sworn in Christ. Ask the people what
they understand by their Baptime or washing. And thou shall see The prople
believe in y^ work without y^ pr^e.
that they believe, how that the very plunging into the water saves them: of
the promises they know not, nor what is signified thereby. Baptime is called
volowing in many places of Volow^g.
England, because the priest says, ^olo say ye. The child was well volowed
(say they) yea and our Vicare is as fair a volower as ever a priest within
this twenty miles.

Behold how narowly the people look on the ceremony. If ought be left out, or
if the child be not altogether dipped in the water, or if, because y^ child is
sick, yt priest dare not plunge him into the water, but pour water on his
head, how tremble they? how quake they? how say ye sir John say they, is this
child christened enough? has it his full christendom? They believe verily
that the child is not christened: yea I have known Priests
that have gone unto the orders again supposing that they were not priests,
because that the Bishop left one of his ceremonies undone. That they call
confirmation, the people call Byshoping. They think that if the Bishop butter
the child in ye forehead, that it is safe. The work saves not, but the
word, that is to say, (...) promise.
They think that the work makes safe, and likewise suppose they of anoyling.
Now is this false doctrine verily. For James says in y^ first chapter of his
Epistle. Of his good will begat he us with y^ word of life, that is, with the
word of promise. In which we are made Gods sons and heirs of the goodness of
god before any good works. For we can not work Gods will till we be his
sons and know his will and have his spirit to teach us. And Saint Paul
says in yt fyft chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians. Christ cleansed the
congregation in the fountain of water thorough the word. And Peter says in
the first of his first epistle. Ye are borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of
immortal seed, by the word of God which lives and lasts ever. Paul in
every Epistle warns us that we put no trust in works, and to beware of
persuasions or arguments of man's wisdom, of superstitiousnes, of ceremonies,
of Pope holiness, and of all manner disguising. And exhorts us to cleave fast
unto the the naked and pure
word of God. The promise of God is the Anchor that saves us in all
temptations. If all y^ world be against, us, Gods word is stronger then ye
world. If the world kill us, that shall make us alive again. If it be possible
for the world to cast us into hell, from thence yet shall Gods word bring us
again. Herby see thou that it is not Works, be they never so glorious
justify not.
the work, but the promise that justifies us thorough faith. Now where no
promise is, there can no faith be, and therefore no iustifiyng though there be
never so glorious works. The Sacrament of Christ's body after this wise preach
they. Thou must In all thing they leave ou^ the promises.
believe that it is no more bread, but the very body of Christ, flesh, blood,
and bone, even as he went here on earth, save his coat. For that is here yet,
I wot not in how many places. I pray thee what helps all this? Here is no
promise. The devils know that Christ dyed on a Friday, and the Jews also. What
are they help thereby? We have a promise that Christ and his body and his
blood, and all that he did and suffered, is a sacrifice, a ransom, and a full
satisfaction for our sins: that God for his sake will think no more on them,
if they have power to repent and believe.

Holy work men think that God rejoices in the deed self, without any
further respect. They think also that God as a cruel tyrant, rejoices and
has delectation in our pain taking without any further respect. And therefore
many of them martyr themselves without cause, after the ensample of Baals
Priests which (iij. Reg. xviij. cut themselves to please their God with all,
and as the old heathen pagans sacrificed their children in the fire unto their
Gods. The Monks of the Charterhouse think that y^ very eating of fish in it
self pleases God, and refer not the eating unto the chastening of the body.
For when they have slain their bodies with cold fleme of fisheating: yet then
will they eat no flesh, and sley themselves before their days. We also when
we offer our sons or daughters, and compel or persuade them to vow and
profess chastity, think that y^ very pain and that rage and burning which
they suffer in absteining from a make, pleases God, and so refer not our
chastity unto our neighbors profet. For when we see thousands fall to
innumerable diseases thereby, and to die before their days: yea though we see
the^ break the commandments of God daily, and also of very impatiency work
abominations against nature, to shameful to be spoken of: yet will we not let
them marry, but compel them to continue still with violence. And thus teach
our deuines as it appears by their arguments. He that takes most pain, say
they, is greatest and so forth.

The people are thoroughly brought in belief that the deed in it self without
any further respect saves them, if they be so long at Church, or say so many
Pater nosters, and read so much in a tongue whtch they understand not, or go
so much a pilgrimage, and take so much pain, or fast such a superstitious
fast, or observe such a superstitious obseruau^ce, neither profitable to
himself nor to his neighbor: but done of a good intent only say they, to
please God withal, ye to kiss the paxe they think it a meritorious deed,
when to love their neighbor, and to forgive him, which thing is signified
thereby, they study not to do, nor have power to do, nor think that they
are bound to do it, if they be offended by him. So fore have our false
prophets brought y^ people out of their wits, and have wrapped the^ in
darcknes, and have rocked them a sleep in blyndnes and ignorauncy. Now is all
such doctrine false doctrine, and all such faith false faith. For the deed
pleases How far forth the deed is acceptable to God.
not, but as far forth as it is applied unto our neighbors profet, or the
taming of our bodies to keep the commandment.

Now must the body be tame only, and that with the remedies that God has
ordained, and not killed. Thou must not forswere the natural remedy which God
has ordained, and bring thy self into such case that thou should either
break Gods commandment or kill thy self, or burn night and day without
rest, so that thou can not once think a godly thought: neither is it lawful
to forsake thy neighbor, and to withdraw thy self from serving him, and to
get thee into a den, and live idly profitable to no man, but robbing all men,
first of faith, and then of goods and land, and of all he has, with making
him believe in the hypocrisy of thy superstitious prayers and Popeholy deeds.
The prayer of faith, and ye deeds thereof that spring of love are accepted
before God. The prayer is good according to the proportion Our prayers
acceptable according to our faith, ou^ deeds according to the measure of love.
of faith, and the deed according to the measure of love. Now he that bideth
in the world, as Monks call it, has more faith then the cloysterer. For he
hangs on God in all things. He must trust God to send him good speed, good
luck, favor, help, a good master, a good neighbor, a good servant, a good
wife, a good chapman merchant, to send his marchaundice safe to land, and a
thousand like. He loves also more, which appears in that he does service
always unto his neighbor. To pray one for an other are we equally bound, and
to pray is a thing that we may always do, what so ever we have in hand, and
that to do may no man hyre an other: Christ's blood has hired us all ready.
Thus in the deed deliteth God as farforth as we do it either to to serve our
neighbor with all, as I have said: or to tame the flesh, that we may fulfill
the commandment from the bottom of the heart.

And as for our pain taking God reioyseth not therein as a tyrant: but pitieth
us and as it were morneth with us, and is always ready and at hand to help us,
if we call, as a merciful father and a kind mother. Never the later he
suffers us to fall into many temptations and much adversity: yea him self
lays the cross of tribulation on our backs, not that he reioyseth in our
sorrow, but to drive sin out of y^ flesh, which can none otherwise be cured:
as the Physician and Surgion do many things which are paynefull to the sick,
not that they rejoice in the pains of the poor wretches: but to persecute and
to drive out the diseases which can no otherwise be healed.

When the people believe therefore if they do so much work or suffer so much
pain, or go so much a pilgrimage, that they are safe, is a false faith. For a
Christen man is not saved by works, but by faith in the promises before all
good works, though that the works (when we work Gods commandment with a
good will, and not works of our own imagination) declare that we are safe and
that the spirit of him that has made us safe is in us: yea and as God through
preaching of faith does purge and justify the heart, even so thorough workyng
of deeds, does he purge and justify the members, making us perfect both in
body and soul after the likeness of Christ.

Neither needs a Christen man to A Christian man needs not to go a pilgrimage
to be saved thereby.
run hither or thither, to Rome, to Jerusalem, or S. James: or any other
pilgrimage far or nere, to be saved thereby, or to purchase forgeuenes of his
sins. For a Christen ma^s health and salvation is with in him: even in
Salvation is with in us.
his mouth. Roma. x. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thine heart
that is the word of faith which we preach says Paul. If we believe the promises
with our hearts and confess them with our mouths, we are safe. This is our
health with in us. But how shall they believe that, they hear not? And how shall
they hear without a preacher says Paul Roma. x. For look on the promises of
God, and so are all our preachers domme. Or if they preach them they so sause
the^ and leven the^, that no stomach can brook them nor find any savor in
them. For they paynte us such an ear confession Confession.
as is impossible to be kept, and more impossible that it should stand with the
promises and Testament of God. And they join them penance, as they call it,
to fast, to go pilgrimages, and give so much to make satisfaction with all.
They preach their Masses, their merits, their pardons, their ceremonies, and
put the promise clean out of possession. The word of health and salvation is
nigh thee, in thy mouth and thine heart says Paul. Nay say they, thy salvation
is in our faithful ear. This is their hold, thereby know they all secrets,
thereby mock they all men and all men's wives, and beguile Knight, and Squier,
Lord, and King, and betray all Realms. The Bishops with Bishops work there
treason thorough confession.
the Pope have a certain conspiration and secret treason against the whole
world. And by confession know they what Kings and Emperors think. If ought be
against them, do they never so evil, then move they their captives to war
and to fight, and give them pardons to slay whom they will have taken out of
the way. They have with falsehode taken from all Kings and Emperors their
right and duties, which now they call their freedoms, liberties, and
privileges and have perverted the ordinances that God left in the world, and
have made every King swear to defend their falsehode Kings be sworn to the
bishops and not the Bishops unto the kings.
against their own selves. So that now if any man preach Gods word truly and
show the fredome and liberty of the soul which we have in Christ, or entende
to restore the Kings again unto their duties and right, and to the rowme and
authority which they have of God, and of shadows to make the^ Kings in
deed, and to put the world in his order again: then the Kings deliver their
swords and authority unto the hypocrites to ^lay him. So dronken are they
with the wine of the whore.

The text that follows in Paul will they happily lay to my charge and others.
How shall they preach except How shall they preach except they be sent is
expounded.
they be sent, says Paul in the said. x. to the Romans. We will they say, the
Pope, Cardinals and Bishops: all authority is ours. The Scripture pertains
unto us and is our possession. And we have a law, that who soever presume to
preach without the authority of the Bishops is excommunicate in the deed
doing. Whence therefore have thou thine authority will they say. The old
Phariseis had the Scripture in captivity likewise, and asked Christ by what
authority do thou these things? as who should say: We are phariseis and
thou art none of our order, nor have authority of us. Christ asked them an
other question, and so will I do our hypocrites. Who sent you? God? How to
know who is sent of God and who is not.
Nay he that is sent of God, speaks Gods word John. iij. Now speak ye not
Gods word, nor any thing save your own laws made clean contrary unto Gods
word. Christ's Apostles preached Christ, and not them selves. He that is of
the truth, preaches the truth. Now ye preach nothing but lies, and therefore
are of the devil the father of all lies, and of him are ye sent. And as for
mine authority or who sent me: I report me unto my works as Christ John. v.
and. x. If Gods word bear record that I say truth, why should any man doubt,
but that God the father of truth and of light has sent me as the father of
lies and of darkness has sent you, and that the spirit of truth, and of light
is with me, as the spirit of lies and of darkness is with you? By this means
thou will that every man be a preacher will they say. Nay verily. For GOD will
No man may preach but he that is called and sent of god.
that not, and therefore will I it not, no more then I would that every man of
London were Mayre of London, or every man of the Realm King thereof. God is not
the author of dissension and strife, but of unity and peace and of good order.
I will therefore that where a congregation is gathered together in Christ one
be chosen after the rule of Paul, and that he only preach, and else no man
openly: but that every man teach his household after the same doctrine. But if
the preacher preach false: then whosoeuers heart God moves, to the same it
shall be law full to rebuke and improve the false teacher, with the clear and
manifest Scripture, and that same is no doubt a true Prophet sent of GOD. For
the Scripture is gods, and theirs that believe and not the false Prophet.

SAcrament is then as much to say as an holy sign. And the Sacraments which
Christ ordained preach Gods word unto us, and therefore justify and minister
the spirit to them that believe, as Paul thorough preaching the Gospel was a
minister of righteousness, and of the spirit, unto all that believed his
preaching. Domme ceremonies are no Sacraments, but superstitiousnes. Christ's
Sacraments preach the faith of Christ as his Apostles did and thereby justify.
Antichrists domme ceremonies preach not y^ faith that is in Christ, as his
Apostles our Bishops and Cardinals do not. But as Antichrists Bishops are
ordained to kill who soever preach the true faith of Christ: so are his
ceremonies ordained to quench the faith which Christ's Sacraments preach. And
hereby may thou know the difference between The difference between true
Sacraments and false.
Christ's signs or Sacraments, and Antichrists signs or ceremonies, that
Christ's signs speak, and Antichrists be domme.

Hereby see thou what is to be thought of all other ceremonies, as hallowed
water, bread, salt, bows, belles, wax, ashes, and so forth, and all other
disguisinges and Apesplay, and of all manner coniurations, as the coniuring of
church and churchyardes and of alter stones and such like. Where no promise of
God is, there can be no faith nor iustifiyng, nor forgeuenes of sins. For it
is more then madness to look for any thing of god, save that he has promised.
How far he has promised, so far is he bodu^ to them that believe, and
further not. To have a A says without Gods promise is idolatry.
faith therefore or a trust in any thing, where god has not promised is plain
idolatry, and a worshipping of thine own imagination instead of God. Let us
see the pith of a ceremony, or two, to judge the rest by. In coniuring of holy
water they pray, that whosoever be sprinkled therewith may receive health as
well of body as of soul, and likewise in making holy bread and so forth in the
coniurations of other ceremonies. Now we see by daily experience that half
their prayer is unheard. For no man receaueth health of body thereby. No more
of likelihode do they of soul. Yea we see also by experience that no man
receaueth health of soul thereby. For no man by sprinckling himself with holy
water, and with eating holy bread, is more merciful then before, or forgeueth
wrong, or becomes at one with his enemy, or is more patient and less
covetous, and so forth. Which are the sure tokens of the soul health.

They preach also that the wagging of the Bishops hand over us blesses us, The
Bishops blessing.
and puts away our sins. Are these works not against Christ? How can they
do more shame unto Christ's blood? For if the wagging of the Bishops hand over
me be so precious a thing in the sight of God that I am thereby blessed, how
then am I full blessed with all spiritual blessinge in Christ as Paul says
Ephe. j? Or if my sins be full done away in Christ, how remains there any
to be done away by such fantasies? The Apostles knew no ways to put away sin,
or to bless us but by preaching Christ. Paul says Gal. ij. How the Apostles
blessed us.
If righteousness come by the law, then Christ dyed in vain. So dispute I here.
If blessing come by the wagging of the Bishops hand, then dyed Christ in vain,
and his death blesses us not. And a little before, says Paul, if while we
seek to be justified by Christ, we be yet found sinners (so that we must be
justified by the law or ceremonies) is not Christ then a minister of sin? So
dispute I here. If while we seek to be blessed in Christ we are yet unblessed,
and must be blessed by the wagging of the Bishops hand, what have we then of
Christ but curse? Thou will say: When we come first to the faith, then Christ
forgeueth us and blesses us. But the sins which we afterward commit are
forgeuen us through such things. I answer: Repentance and sure faith in in
Christ purges our sins.
If any man repent truly and come to the faith and put his trust in Christ,
the^ as often as he sins of frayltie, at the sygh of the heart is his sin put
away in Christ's blood. For Christ's blood purges ever and blesses ever. For
John says in the second of his first epistle. This I write unto you that ye
sin not. And though any man sin (meaning of frailty and so repent) yet
have we an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ which is righteous, and he it
is that obteineth grace for our sins, and Heb. vij. it is written. But this
man (meaning Christ) because he lasts or abides ever, has an everlasting
priesthod. Therefore is he able also ever to save the^ that come to God through
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us. The Bishops therefore
ought to bless us in preaching Christ, and not to deceive us and to bring the
curse of God upon us, with wagging their hands over us. To preach is their
duty only, and not to offer their feet to be kissed, or testicles or stones
to be groped. We feel also by experience that after the Popes, Bishops or
Cardinals blessing we are no otherwise disposed in our souls then before.

Let this be sufficient as concerning the sacraments and ceremonies, with The
protestation of the author.
this protestation, that if any ca^ say better or improve this with Gods word,
no man shall be better content therewith then I. For I seek nothing but the
truth and to walk in the light. I submit therefore this work and all other
that I have made or shall make (if God will that I shall more make) unto the
judgments, not of them that furiously burn all truth, but of them which are
ready with Gods word to correct, if any thing be said amiss, and to further
Gods word.

I will talk a word or two after Confession robs the Sacraments and makes
the^ frutelesse.
the worldly wisdom with them, and make an end of this matter. If the
sacraments justify, as they say, I understand by iustifiyng forgeuenes of
sins. Then do they wrong unto the sacraments, in as much as they rob the
most part of them through confession of their effect, and of the cause wherefore
they were ordained. For no man may receive the body of Christ, no man may
marry, no man may be oyled or aneiled as they call it, no man may receive
orders, except he be first shriuen. Now when the sins be forgeuen by shrift
before hand, there is naught left for the sacraments to do. They will
answer, that at the least way they increase grace, and not the sacraments
only, but also hearing of mass, matens and euensong, and receiving of holy
water, holy bread, and of the Bishops blessing, and so forth by all ceremonies.
By grace I understand the favor of God, and also the gifts and What grace is.
working of his spirit in us, as love, kyndnes, patience, obedience,
mercifulnes, despising of worldly things, How to know what justifies: and
what not: or what brings grace and what not.
peace, concord, and such like. If after thou have heard so many masses,
matens and euensonges, and after thou have received holy bread, holy water, and
the Bishops blessing, or a Cardinals or the Popes, if thou will, be more kind
to thy neighbor, and love him better then before, if thou be more obedient
unto thy superiors, more merciful, more ready to forgive wrong done unto thee,
more despisest the world, and more a thyrst after spiritual things, if after
that a Priest has taken orders he be less covetous then before: if a wife
after so many and often pilgrimages be more chaste, more obedient unto her
husband, more kind to her maids and other servants: if Gentlemen, knights,
Lords, and kings, and Emperors, after they have said so often daily service
with their Chappellaynes, know more of With their Chaplayns quoth he: God give
grace their Chaplayns at the last make them not so mad to say service alone
while they.
Christ then before, and can better skill to rule their tenauntes, subjects,
and realms christenly then before, and be content with their duties, then do
such things increase grace: if not, it is a lie. Whether it be so or no, I
report me to experience. If they have any other enterpretations of iustifiyng
or grace, I pray them to teach it me. For I would gladly learn it. Now let us
go to our purpose again.

Of miracles and worshipping of Saints.
ANtichrist shall not only come with lying signs, and disguised with falshod,
but also with lying miracles and True miracles draw to Christ.
wonders, says Paul in the said place ij. These. ij. All the true miracles
which are of God, are showed (as I above rehearsed) to move us to hear Gods
word, and to stablishe our faith therein: and to confirm the truth of Gods
promises, that we might without all doubting believe the^. For Gods word
thorough faith brings the spirit into our hearts, and also life, as Christ
says John. vi. The words which I speak are spirit and life. The word also
purges us and cleanses us, as Christ says John. xv. ye are clean by the
means of the word. Paul says. i. Timo. ij. One God, one Mediator (that is to
say, advocate, intercessor, or an atonemaker) between God and man: the man
Christ Jesus which gave him self a raunson for all men Peter says of Christ
Acts. iiij. Neither is their health in any other: neither yet also any other
name given unto men wherein we must be saved. So now Christ is our peace, our
redemption or raunsom for our sins, our righteousness, satisfaction and all
the promises of God are yea and Amen in him. ij. Cor. i. And we for yt great
and infinite love which God has to us in Christ, love him again, love also
his laws, and love one an other. And the deeds which we The effect and force
of our good deeds.
hence forth do, do we not to make satisfaction or to obtain heaven: but to
succor our neighbor to tame yt flesh that we may wax perfect and strong men
in Christ, and to be thankful to God again for his mercy, and to glorify
his name.

Contrariwise the miracles of Antichrist False miracles drive from Christ.
are done to pull thee from the word of God, and from beleuyng his promises
and from Christ, and to put thy trust in a man, or a ceremony wherein Gods word
is not. As soon as Gods word is believed, the faith spread abroad, then sease
the miracles of god. But the miracles of Antichrist, because they are wrought
by the devil, to quench the faith, grow daily more and more: neither shall
cease until the worlds end among them that beloue not Gods word and
promises. See thou not how God loosed and sent forth all the devils in the
old world among the Heathen or Gentiles? And how the devils wrought miracles,
and spoke to them in every image? Even so shall the devil work falshode by
one craft or an other, until the worlds end among them that believe not Gods
word. For the judgment and damnation of him that has no lust to hear the
truth, is to hear lies, and to be stablished and grounded therein through
false miracles, and he that will not see, is worthy to be blind, and he that
bids the spirit of God go from him, is worthy to be without him.

Paul, Peter, and all true Apostles preached Christ only. And the miracles did
but confirm and stablish their preaching, and those everlasting promises and
eternal Testament that God had made between man and him in Christ's blood, and
the miracles did testify also that they were true servants of Christ. Paul
preached not him self, he taught not any man to trust in him or his holiness,
or in Peter or in any ceremony, but in the promises which God has sworn
only, yea he mightyly resists all such false doctrine both to the
Corinthians, Galathians, Ephesia^s and every where. If He that teaches to
trust in a saint is a false Prophet.
this be true (as it is true and nothing more truer) that if Paul had preached
him self, or taught any man to believe in his holiness or prayer or in any thing,
save in the promises that GOD has made and sworn to give us for Christ's
sake, he had been a false Prophet: why am not I also a false Prophet, if I
teach thee to trust in Paul or in his holiness or prayer, or in any thing save
in Gods word as Paul did.

If Paul were here and loved me What he should pray that prays for his
neighbor.
(as he loved them of his time of who^ he was sent and to who^ he was a
servant to preach Christ, what good could he do for me or wish me, but
preach Christ and pray to God for me, to open mine heart, to give me his
spirit, and to bring me unto the full knowledge of Christ? unto which port or
haven, when I am once come, I am as safe as Paul, fellow with Paul, ioyntheyre
with Paul of all the promises of God, and gods truth hears my prayer as well
as Paul's, I also now could not but love Paul and wish him good, and pray for
him, that God would strength him in all his temptations and give him victory,
as he would do for me. Nevertheless there are many The (...) be (...) and not
deceived.
weak, and young consciences always in the congregation which they that have
the office to preach ought to teach, and not to disceaue them.

What prayers pray our Clergy for us which stop us and exclude us from The
spirit pray not that we might come to y^ knowledge of Christ.
Christ and seek all the means possible to keep us from knowledge of Christ?
They compel us to hyre Friars, Monks, Nuns, Chanons, and Priests, and to
buy their abominable merits, and to hyre the Saints that are dead to pray
for us, for the very Saints have they made hyrelynges also: because that their
offeryngs come to their profit. What pray all those: that we might come to the
knowledge of Christ, as the Apostles did? Nay verily. For it is a plain case,
that all they which enforce to keep us from Christ, pray not that we might come
to the knowledge of Christ. And as for the Saints (whose prayer was when they
were a line that we might be grounded, stablished and stre^gthed in Christ
only) if it were of God that we should this wise worship them contrary unto
their own doctrine, I dare be bold to affirm that by the means of their
prayers, we should have been brought long a go unto the knowledge of God and
Christ again, though that these beasts had done their worste to set it. Let
us therefore set our hearts at rest in Christ and in Gods promises, for so I
think it best, and let us take the The (...) are but an en^ (...).
Saints soran example only, and let us do as they both taught and did.

Let us set Gods promises before our eyes, and desire him for his mercy and for
Christ's sake to fulfill them. And he is as true as ever he was, and will do
it, as well as ever he did, for to us are the promises made as well as to them.

Moreover the end of Gods miracles is good, the end to these miracles are
evil. For the offerynges which are Offerings cause of the miracles.
the cause of the miracles do but minister and maynteine vice, sin and all
abomination, and are given to them that have to much, so that for very
abundance, they ^ome out their own shame, and corrupt the whole world with
the styuch of their filthiness.

Thereto what soever is not of faith is sin, Roma. xiiij, Faith comes by
hearing Gods word Roma. x. when now thou fastest or do any thing in the
worship of any Saint beleuyng to come to the favor of God or to be saved
thereby if thou have Gods word, then is it true faith and shall save thee. If
thou have not Gods word, then is it a false faith superstitiousnes and
Idolatry, and damnable sin.

Also in the Collects of the Saints with which we pray God to save us through
the merits or deservings of the Saints (which Saints yet were not saved by
their own deservings them selves) we say Per Christ (...) Dominu^ nostrum,
that is for Christ our Lords sake. We say save us good Lord thorough the
saints merits for Christ's sake. How can he save us through the Saints
merits for Christ's sake and for his deseruyng merits and love? Take an
example. A Gentleman says unto me I will do the vttemost of my power for thee,
for the love which I owe unto thy father. Though thou have never done me
pleasure, yet I love thy father well, thy father is my friend and has deserved
that I do all that I can for thee etc. Here is a Testament and a promise made
unto me in the love of my father only. If I come to the said Gentleman in the
name of one of his servants which I never saw, never spoke with, neither
have any acquaintance at all with and say: Sir I pray you be good master unto
me in such a cause. I have not deserved that he should so do. Nevertheless I
pray you do it for such a servants sake: yea I pray you for the love that
you owe to my father do that for me for such a servants sake. If I this wise
made my petition, would not me^ think that I come late out of S. Patrikes God
y^ father fulfilleth his promises to us for Christ's sake, and not for the
merits of saints as y^ Papists taught.
Purgatory, and had left my wits behind me. This do we. For the Testament
and promises are all made unto us in Christ. And we desire God to fulfill his
promises for the Saints sake: yea that he will for Christ's sake do it for the
Saints sake.

They have also martyrs which never preached Gods word, neither dyed
therefore: but for privileges and liberties All such Martyrs are the popes
martyrs and not Gods. For martyr signifies a witness bearer: now is he not Gods
witness that testifies not his word.
which they falsely purchased contrary unto Gods ordinances. Yea and such
Saints though they be dead, yet rob now as fast as ever they did, neither
are less covetous now then when they were alive. I doubt not but that they
will make a Saint of my Lord Cardinal, after the death of us that be alive,
and know his iuggling and crafty conueiaunce, and will shrine him gloriously,
for his mightily defending of the right of holy Church, except we be diligent
to leave a commemoration of that Nimroth behind us.

The reasons wherewith they prove their doctrine are but fleshly: and as The
reasons which they make for y^ worshipping of Saints are solued.
Paul calls them, entising words of man's wisdom, that is to wit,
sophistry and brauling arguments of men with corrupt minds and destitute of
the truth, whose God is their bellye, unto which idol whosoever offers not,
the same is an heretic, and worthy to be brunt.

The Saint was great with God when he was alive, as it appears by the
miracles which God showed for him, he must therefore be great now say they. This
rea^o^ appears wisdom, but it is very folishnes with God. For the miracle
was not showed that thou should put thy trust in the Saint, but in the word
which the saint preached, which word if thou beleuest, would save thee, as God
has promised and sworn, and would make thee also great with God, as it did ye
Saint.

If a man have a matter with a great man, or a king, he must go first unto one
of his mean servants, and the^ hyer and hyer till he come at the king. This
entising argument is but a blind reason of man's wit. It is not like in the
kingdom of the world, and in the It is not like with kings and God.
kingdom of God and Christ.

With kings for the most part we have none acquaintance, neither promise.
They be also most commonly merciless. Moreover if they promise, they are yet
me^ as unconstant as are other people, and as untrue. But with God, if we have
belief, we are accounted, and have an open way in unto him by the door Christ,
which is never shut, but through unbelief, neither is there any porter to
keep any man out. By him says Paul Ephe. ij. that is to say, by Christ we
have an open way in unto the father. So are ye now no more strangers and
forreiners (says he) but citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God. God has also made us promises and has sworn: yea has made a testament
or a covenant, and has bound himself, and has sealed his obligation with
Christ's blood, and confirmed it with miracles. He is also merciful and kind,
and co^playneth that we will not come unto him. He is mighty and able to
perform that he promises. He is true and can not be but true, as he can not
be but God. Therefore is it not like with the king and God.

We be sinners say they, God will not hear us. Behold how they flee from God
as from a tyrant merciless. Whom a man counts most merciful unto him, he
sonest flies. But these teachers dare not come at God. Why? For they are ye
children of Caine. If the Saints love whom God hates, then God and his
Saints are divided. When thou prayest to ye saints, how do they know, except
that God whom thou countest merciless, tell them? If God be so cruel and so
hates thee, it is not likely that he will tell the Saints that thou prayest
unto them.

When they say we be sinners: I answer, that Christ is no sinner, save a
Christ is no sinner.
satisfaction, and an offering for sin. Take Christ from the saints and what
are they? What is Paul without Christ? is he any thing save a blasphemer, a
persecuter, a murderer, and a shedder of Christen blood? But as soon as he
came to Christ he was no more a sinner, but a minister of righteousness, he went
not to Rome to take penance upon him, but went and preached unto his brethren
the same mercy which he had received free, without doing penance or hiering of
Saints or of Monks or Friars. Moreover if it be Gods word that thou should
put thy trust in the saints merits or prayers, then be bold. For Gods word
shall defend thee and save thee. If it be but thine own reason, then fear.
For God commands by Moses Deuteronomy. xij. saying: what I command you, that
observe and do, and put nothing to, nor take ought therefro: yea and Moses
warns straightly Nothing brings a man sooner to confusion then the Idolatry
of his own imagination
in an hundred places, that we do that only which God commands, and which
seems good and righteous in his sight, and not in our own sight. For nothing
brings the wrath of god so sone and so sore on a man, as the idolatry of his
own imagination.

Last of all these arguments are contrary to the arguments of Christ and of
his Apostles. Christ disputes, Luke 11. saying: If the son ask the father
bread, will he give him a stone? or if he ask him fish, will he give him a
serpent? and so forth. If ye then (says he) which are evil can give good
gifts to your children, how much rather shall your heavenly father give a good
spirit unto them that ask him? And a little before in the same chapter he
says: If a man came never so out of season to his neighbor to borow bread:
even when he is in his chamber, and the door shut, and all his servants with
him: nevertheless yet if he continue knocking and praying, he will rise and
give him as much as he needs, though not for love, yet to be rid of him, that
he may have rest: As who should say: what will God do if a man pray him, seeing
that prayer overcomes an evil man? Ask therefore (says he) and it shall be
given you, seek, and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. And
Luke 18. he puts forth the parable or similitude of the wicked Judge which
was overcome with the importunate prayer of ye widow. And concludes, saying:
Hear what the wicked Judge did. And shall not God aduenge his elect which cry
unto him night and day? Whether therefore we complain of the intolerable
oppression and persecution that we suffer, or of the flesh that combreth and
resists the spirit, God is merciful to hear ^s, and to help us. See
thou not also how Christ cures many, and casts out deuyls out of many
unspoken too, how shall he not help, if he be desired and spoken to?

When the old pharisees (whose nature is to drive sinners from Christ) asked
Christ why he did eat with publicanes and sinners. Christ answered that the
whole neded not the physician but the sick. that is, he came to have
conversation with sinners to heal the^. christ is a (...) give to ^rs.
He was a gift given unto sinners, and a treasure to pay their debtes. And
Christ sent the complaining and disdayning pharisees to the Prophet Oseas God
loves mercy.
saying, Go and learn what this means, I desire or require mercy, and not
sacrifice. As who should say, Hypocrites love o^^e^ynges.
Ye pharisees love sacrifice and offering, for to feed that God your bellies
withal, but God commands to be merciful. Sinners are ever captives and a
pray unto the Pharisees and hypocrites, for to offer unto their bellies, and to
buy merits, pardons, and forgeuenes of sins of them. And therefore fear
they them away from Christ, with arguments of their belly wisdom. For he
that receaueth forgeuenes free of Christ, will buy no forgeuenes of them. I came
(says Christ) to call, not the righteous, but the sinners unto repentance.
The pharisees are righteous, and therefore have no part with Christ, neithe^
need they: for they are Gods themselves and saviors. But sinners that repent
partaine to Christ. If we repent, Christ has made satisfaction for us already.

God so loved the world, that he gave his only son, that noue that believe on
him should perish, but should have everlasting life. For God sent not his son
into the world, to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved. He that believes on him shall not be damned, but he that beeleeueth not
is damned already. John. iij.

Paul Romans 5. says: Because we are justified through faith, we are at peace
with God through our lord Jesus Christ, that is, because that God, which can
not lie, has promised and sworn to be merciful unto us, and to forgive us
for Christ's sake, we We are at peace in our consciences when we believe
constantly ou^ sins are remitted through Jesus Christ.
believe and are at peace in our consciences, we run not hither and thither for
pardon, we trust not in this friar, nor that monk, neither in any thing, save
in the word of God only. As a child when his father threateneth him for his
fa^t, has never rest til he hear the word of mercy and forgeuenes of his
fathers mouth again, but as soon as he hears his father say, Go thy ways,
do me no more so, I forgive thee this fault: then is his heart at rest, then is
he at peace, then runs he to no man to make intercession for him. Neither
though there come any false merchant saying, what will thou give me, and I will
obtain pardon of thy father for thee. Will he suffer him self to be beguiled?
No, he will not buy of a wily fox, that which his father has given him freely.

It follows: God sets out his love that he has to us. that is, he makes
it appear, that men may perceive love, if they be not more then stock blind.
In as much (says Paul) as while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Much
more now (says he) seeing we are justified by his blood, shall we be preserved
from wrath thorough him: for if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God,
by the death of his son, much more seeing we are reconciled we shall be
preserved by his life. As who should say, If God loved us when we knew him not,
much more loves he us now we know him. If he were merciful to us while we
hated his Law, how much more merciful will he be now seeing we love it, and
desire strength to fulfill it. And in the viij. he argues: If God spared not
his own son, but gave him for us all, how shall he not with him give us all
things also?

Christ prayed, John xvij. not for the Apostles only, but also for as many as
should believe through their preaching and was heard, whatsoever we ask in his
name the Father gives us John. xvi. Christ is also as merciful Why we come
not to Christ.
as the saints. Why go we not straight way unto him? Verily because we feale
not the mercy of God neither believe his truth. God will at the least way (say
they) hear us the sooner for the saints sake. Then loves he the saints
better then Christ and his own truth. Hears he us for the saints sake? so
hears he us not for his mercy: For merits and mercy can not stand together.

Finally if thou put any trust in thine own deeds, or in the deeds of any
other man, of any saint, then minishest thou the truth, mercy, and goodness of
God. For if God look unto thy works, or unto the works of any other man, or
goodness of the saint, then does he not all things of pure mercy, and of his
goodness, and for the truths sake which he has sworn in Christ. Now says
Paul Tit. 3. Not of the righteous deeds which we did, but of his mercy saved
he us.

Our blind disputers will say: If our good deeds justify us not, if God look
not on our good deeds, neither regard them nor love us the better for them,
what need we to do good deeds? I answer, God looks on our good deeds, and
loves them, yet loves us not for their sakes. God loves us first God looks
on our good deeds
in Christ of his goodness and mercy, and pours his spirit into us, and gives
us power to do good deeds. And because he loves us, he loves our good deeds:
yea because he loves us he forgeueth us our evil deeds, which we do of
frailty and not of purpose or for the nonce. Our good deeds do but testify
only that we are justified and beloved. For except we were beloved, and had
Gods spirit, we could neither do, nor yet consent unto any good deed.
Antichrist turns the roots of Intichrist turns the roots of the trees
vnword.
the trees upward. He makes the goodness of God the branches, and our goodness
the roots. We must be first good after Antichrists doctrine, and move God,
and compel him to be good again for our goodnesses sake: so must Gods
goodness spring out of our goodness. Nay verily Gods goodness is the root of
al goodness and our goodness, if we have any, springs out of his goodness.

Prayer.
OF Prayer and good deeds, and of the order of love or charity I have
abundantly written in my book of the justifying of faith. Never the later
that thou may see, what the prayers and good works of our monks and friars
and of other ghostly people are worth, I will speak a word or two, and make
an end. Paul says Gal. 3. All ye are the sons of God through faith in Jesus
Christ: for all ye that are In Christ^ we are one as good as an other equally
beloved and indifferently heard.
baptized have put Christ on you. that is, ye are become Christ himself. There
is no Jew (says he) neither Greek, neither bond nor free, neither man nor
woman, but ye are all one thing in Christ Jesus. In Christ there is neither
french nor english, but the frenchman is the englishmans own self, and the
english the frenchmans own self. In Christ there is neither father nor son
neither master nor servant, neither husband nor wife, neither king nor
subject: but the father is the sons self, and the son the fathers own
self: and the king is the subjects own self, and the subject is the kings
own self, and so fourth. I am thou ^hy self, and thou art I my self, and can
be no nearer of kyn. We are all the sons of God, all Christ's servants
bought with his blood, and every man to other Christ his own self. And Col.
3, Ye have put on the new man which is tenned in the knowledge of God after the
image of him that made him (that is to say, Christ) where is (says he) neither
Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarous or Scithian. bond or
free: but Christ is all in all things. I love thee not now because Christ is
all to a Christen man.
thou art my father, and have done so much for me, or my mother, and have borne
me, and given me suck of thy breasts (for so do Jews and saracens) but
because of the great love that Christ has showed me. I serve thee not because
thou art my master, or my king, for hope of reward, or fear of pain, but
for the love of Christ: for the children of faith are under no law (as thou
see in the Epistles to the Romans, The children of faith work of love and
need no law to co^p^ll them.
to the Galathians, in the first to Timothe) but are free. The spirit of Christ
has written the lively law of love in their hearts, which drives the^ to
work of their own accord freely and willingly, for the great loves sake only
which they see in Christ, and therefore need they no law to compel them.
Christ is all in all things to them that We are all Christ's servants and
serve Christ.
believe, and the cause of all love. Paul says Ephesians. 6. Servants obey unto
your carnal or fleshly masters with fear and trembling, in singlenes of your
hearts as unto Christ: not with eye service as menpleasers, but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, even as though ye
served the Lord and not men. And remember that whatsoever good thing any man
does, that shall he receive again of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
Christ thus is all in all things and cause of all to a christen man. And
Christ says Math. 25. In as much as ye have done it to any of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it to me. And in as much as ye have not The
contempt or love, we show one to another, the same show we to Christ.
done it unto one of the least of these, ye have not done it to me. Here see
thou that we are Christ's brethren, and cue^ Christ him self, and what so ever
we do one to another that do we to Christ If we be in Christ we work for no
worldly purpose, but of love. As Paul says 2. Cor. 5. The love of Christ
compelled us (as who should say) we work not of a fleshly purpose: For
(says he) we know henceforth no man fleshly: no though we once knew Christ
fleshly we do so now no more. We are otherwise minded, then when Peter drew
his swoorde to fight for Christ. We are now ready to suffer with Christ, and to
lose life and all for our very enemies to bring them unto Christ. If we be in
Christ, we are minded like unto Christ, which knew nothing Christ knows
nothing worldly (...) not his ^ry mother.
fleshly, or after the will of the flesh, as thou see Math. 12. when one said
to him: Lo, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with
thee. He answered, who is my mother, and who are my brethren? And stretched
his hand over his Disciples saying: see my mother and my brethren: for
whosoever does the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my
brother, my sister, and my mother. He knew not his mother in that she bare him,
but in that she did the will of his Father in heaven. So now as God the Fathers
will and commandment is all to Christ, even so Christ is all to a Christen
man.

Christ is the cause why I love thee, why I am ready to do the uttermost of my
power for thee, and why I pray for thee. And as long as the cause abides, so
long lasts the effect: even as As long as Christ abides so long a Christen
man loves.
it is always day, so long as the Sun shines. Do therefore the worst thou
caust unto me, take away my goods, take away my good name: yet as long as
Christ remains in my heart, so long I love thee not a whit the less, and so
long art thou as dear unto me as mine own soul, and so long am I ready to
do thee good for thine evil, and so long I pray for thee with all my heart: for
Christ desires it of me, and has deserved it of me. Thine unkindness compared
unto his kindness is no thing at all, yea it is swallowed up as a little smoke
of a mighty wind, and is no more scene or thought upon. Moreover that evil
which thou did to me, I receive not of thy hand, but of the hand of God,
and as Gods scourge to teach me patience and to norture me. And therefore have
no cause to be angry with thee, more the^ the child has to be angry with his
fathers rod. or a sick man with a sour or bitter medecin that heals him,
or a prisoner with his fetters, or he that is punished lawfully with the
officer that punishes him. Thus is Christ all and the whole cause why I love
thee. And Money byndeth not Christ^ people to pray.
to all can naught be added. Therefore cannot a little money make me love thee
better, or more bound to pray for thee, nor make Gods commandment greater.
Last of all, if I be in Christ, then the love of Christ compels me. And
therefore I am ready to give thee mine and not to take thine from thee. If I be
able I will do thee service freely: if not, then if thou minister to me again,
that receive I of the hand of God, which ministers it to me by thee: For God
God cares for his.
cares for his and ministers all things unto them, and moves Turks and
Saracenes, and all manner infidels to do them good as thou see in Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, and how God went with Joseph into Egypt, and gat him favor in
the prison, and in every place, which favor Joseph received of the hand of
God, and to God gave the thanks. This is God and Christ all in all, good and
bad receive I of God. Them that are good I love because they are in Christ, and
the evil to bring them to Christ. When any man does well I rejoice, that God
is honored, and when any man does evil I sorrow because that God is
dishonored. Finally in as much as God has created all, and Christ bought all
with his blood, therefore ought all to seek God and Christ in all, and else
nothing.

But contrariwise unto monks, The belly to a God and cause of all unto our
spiritualty.
friars, and to y^ other of our holy spirituality the belly is all in all, and
cause of all love. Offer thereto, so art thou father, mother, sister, and
brother unto them. Offerest thou not, so know they thee not, thou art nether
father mother sister brother, nor any kynne at all to them. She is a sister of
ours, he is a brother of ours say they, he is verily a good man, for he does
much for our religion. She is a mother to our covent: we be greatly bound to
pray for them. And as for such and such (say they) we know not whether they be
good or bad, or whether they be fish or flesh, for they do naught for us: we be
more bound to pray for our benefactours (say they) and for them that give us,
the^ for them that give us not. For them that give little are they little
bound, and them they love little: and for them that give much they are much
bound, and them they love much. And for them that give naught are they naught
bound, and them they love not at al. And as they love thee when thou geuest: so
hate they thee when thou take away from them, and run all under a stool, and
curse thee as black as pitch. So is cloister love belly love, ^^ll is of the
belly and nothing of Christ.
cloister prayer belly prayer, and cloister brotherhode belly brotherhode.
Morouer love that springs of Christ seeks not her own self (1. Cor. 13.)
but forgets her self, and bestows her upon her neighbors profit, as
Christ's love forget teth her self: but Monks love thinks on the belly.
Christ sought our profit and not his own. He sought not the favor of god
for himself, but for us, yea he took the wrath and vengeance of God from us
unto himself, and bare it on his own back to bring us unto favor. Likewise
does a Christen man give to his brethren, and robs them not as friars and
monks do: but as Paul commands Ephesians. 4. labors with his hands some
good work to have wherewith to help the needy. They give not but receive
only. They labor not, but live idely of the sweat of the poor. There is none
so poor a widow, though she have not to find her self and her children, nor
any money to give: yet shall the friar snatch a chese or somewhat. They preach,
say thou, and labor in the word. First I say, Friars and Monks ought not
to preach.
they are not called and therefore ought not: for it is the Curates office. The
Curate can not (say thou.) What does the thief there then? Secondarily a
true preacher preaches Christ's testament only and makes Christ the cause and
reward of all our deeds, and teaches every man to bear his cross willingly
for Christ's sake. But these are enemies unto the cross of Christ, and preach
their belly which is their God: Ephesians. 3. and they think that lucre is the
serving of God. 1. Tim. 6. that is, they think them christen only which offer
unto their belies, which when thou have filled, then spue they out prayers for
thee, to be thy reward, and yet w^t not what prayer means. Prayer is the
longing for Gods promises, which promises as they preach them not, so long they
not for them, nor wish them unto any man. Their longing is to fill their paunch
whom they serve, and not Christ: and through sweet preaching and flattring
words deceive the hearts of the simple and unlearned. Romans 16.

Finally as Christ is the whole cause Christ is the whole cause why God loves
us.
why we do all thing for our neighbor, even so is he the cause why God does all
thing for us, why he receaueth us into his holy Testament, and makes us heirs
of al his promises, and pours his spirit into us, and makes us his sons,
and fashioneth us like unto Christ, and makes us such as he would have us to
be. The assurance How to know that we are Gods sons.
that we are the sons, beloved, and heirs with Christ, and have Gods spirit
in us, is the consent of our hearts, unto the law of God. Which law is all The
law is y^ mark: yea and the touch stone where with we ought to try our selves
and see how far ^orth we are purged.
perfection, and the mark whereat all we ought to shoot. And he that hitteth
that mark, so that he fulfilleth the law with all his heart, soul, and might,
and with full love and lust, without all let or resistance is pure gold and
needs not to be put any more in the fire, he is straight and right, and
needs to be no more shaven: he is full fashioned like Christ, and can have no
more added unto him. Nevertheless there is none so perfect in this life that
finds not let and resistance by the reason of original sin, or birth
poison that remains Our birth poison that remains in us. resists the
spirit.
in him, as thou may see in the lives of all the saints throughout all the
scripture, and in Paul Romans 7. The will is present (says he) but I find no
means to perform that which is good. I do not that good thing which I
would: but that evil do I which I would not. I find by the law that when I
would do good, evil is present with me. I delight in the law as concerning the
inner man, but I find an other law in my members rebelling against the law of
my mind, and subduing me unto the law of sin. Which law of sin is nothing
but a
corrupt and a poisoned nature which breaks into evil lusts, and from evil
The right cross of Christ.
lusts into wicked deeds, and must be purged with the true purgatory of the
cross of Christ: that is, thou must hate it with all thine heart, and desire
God to take it from thee. And then whatsoever cross God puts on thy back,
bear it patiently, whether it be poverty sickness or persecution or what
soever it be, and take it for the right Purgatory and think that God has
nailed thee fast to it, to purge thee thereby. For he that loves not the law
He that loves not the law and hates sin has no part with Christ.
and hates his sin, and has not professed in his heart to fight against it,
and mourns not to god to take it away and to purge him of it, y^ same has no
part with Christ. If thou love the law and fyndest that thou have yet sin
hangyng on thee, where of thou sorowest How to try the do* ctrine of our
spirituality.
to be delivered and purged: as for an example, thou have a covetous mind and
mistrustest God and therefore art moved to begyle thy neighbor and art unto
him mercylesse, not caring whether he sink or swymme so thou may win by
him or get from him that he has: then get thee to the obseruaunte which is so
purged from that sin that he will not once handle a penny and with that wyle
does the subtle fox make the goose come flying into his hole ready prepared
for his mouth without his labor or swet, and buy of his incrites, which he
has in store, and give thy money not into his holy hands but to offer him that
he has hired either with part of his prayers or part of his pray to take the
sin upon him and to handle his money for him. In like manner if any parson
that is under obedience unto Gods ordinance (whether it be son or daughter,
servant, wife or subject) consent unto the ordinance, and yet find contrary
motions: let him go also to the^ that have professed an obedience of their own
making, and bye part of their merits. If thy wife give the ix. words for
three, go to the charterhouse and bye of their silence: And so if the
absteinyng of the obseruaunt If the prayers and merits of our religious men
purge our lusts then are they of value and else not.
from handling money heal thine heart from desiryng money, and the obedience of
them that will obey nothing but their own ordinance, heal thy disobedience
to Gods ordinance, and the silence of the charterhouse Monk tan^e thy wives
tongue, the^ believe that their prayers shall deliver thy soul from the pains
of that terrible and fearful Purgatory which they have feigned to purge thy
purse withal.

The spirituality increases daily.
Mo prelates, mo Priests, mo monks, friars, chanons, nuns and mo heretics,
I would say heremites with like draffe, Set before the y^ increase of S.
Frau^ces disciples in so few years. Reke^ how many thousands, yea how many
twenty thousa^des, not disciples only: but whole cloisters are sprung out of
hell of them in so little space. Pateryng of prayers increases daily. Their
service as they call it, waxes longer and longer and the labor of their
lips greater, new Saints, new service, new festes, and new holy days. What
take all these away? Sin? Nay. For we ^ee the contrary by experience and that
sin grows as they grow. But they take away first What the spiritualtis
takes away with their prayers.
Gods word with faith, hope, peace, unity, love and concord then house and
la^d, rent and see, tower and town, goods and cattle, and the very meat out
of men's mouths. All these live by Purgatory. When other weep for their
friends they sing merely when other When other wept, they sing, and when other
loose, they win.
loose their friends, they get friends. The Pope with all his Pardons is
grounded on Purgatory. Priests Monks, Chanons, Friars with all other swermes
of hypocrites do but empty Purgatory and fill hell. Every Mass, say they,
delivers one soul out of Purgatory. If that were true, All is of Purgatory.
^ese Physicians give none other medicines save purgations only.
yea if ten Masses were enough for one soul, yet were the Parish Priests and
Curates of every Parish sufficient to scour Purgatory. All the other costly
workmen might be well spared.

The four senses of the Scripture.
THey divide the Scripture in to four senses, the litterall, tropological,
allegorical and anagogicall. The litterall sense is become nothing at all. For
the pope has taken it clean away and has made it his possession. He has
partly locked it up with the false and counterfayted keys of his traditions
ceremonies and feigned lies. And partly drives men from it with violence of
sword. For no man dare abide by the litterall sense of the text, but under a
Protestation, if it shall please the Pope. The chopologicall sense pertains
to good manners (say they) and teaches what we ought to do. The allegory is
appropriate to faith, and the anagogicall to hope and things above.
Tropologicall and anagogicall are terms of their own fayning and all together
unnecessary. For they are but allegories both two of the^ and this word
allegory comprehe^deth them both and is enough. For tropologicall is but an
Allegory of manners and anagogicall an Allegory of hope. And Allegory is as
much to say as strange Allegory. and what it signifies.
speaking, or borrowed speech. As when we say of a wanton child, this sheep
has magottes in his tail, he must be anointed with byrchin salve, which
speech I borow of the shepheardes.

Thou shall understand therefore The scripture has but one sense.
that the Scripture has but one sense, which is the litterall sense. And that
litterall sense is the root and ground of all, and the ancre that never
fails whereunto if thou cleave thou can never err or go out of the way. And
if thou leave the litterall sense thou can not but go out of the way. Never
the latter the Scripture uses proverbs, similitudes, redels, or allegories as
all other speeches do, but that which the proverb, similitude, redell, or
allegory signifies is ever the litterall sense which thou must seek out
diligently. As in the English we borow words and sentences of o^e thing and
apply them unto another and give the^ new significations. We say let the sea
rise as hye as he will, yet has God appointed how far he shall go: meaning
that the tyrauntes shall not do what they would* but that only which God has
appointed them to do,(...)thou lepe* whose litterall sense(...)nothing suddenly
or without ad^ Cut not the bow that thou(...)upon: whose litterall sense
is,(...)not the comyns and is borrowed ^ers. When a thing spedeth not we^, (...)
borow speech and say, the bishop has ^orowe^ ^peach*
blessed it, because that nothing spedeth well that they meddle with all. If the
porage be burned to, or the meat over roasted, we say, the Bishop has put his
foot in the pot or the Bishop has played the Cook, because the Bishops
burn who they lust and whosoever displeases them. He is a pontifical fellow,
that is, proud and stately. He is Popish, that is, superstitious and faith
less. It is a pastime for a Prelate. It is a pleasure for a Pope. He would be
free and yet will not have his head shaven. He would that no man should smite
him and yet has not the Popes mark. And of him yt is betrayed and woteth not
how, we say, he has been at shrifte. She is master Persons sisters daughter.
He is the Bishops sisters son, he has a Cardinal to his uncle, she is a
spiritual whore, it is the Gentlewoman of the Personage, he gave me a
Kyrieleyson. And of her that answers her husband vj. words for one we say,
she is a sister of ye charter house, as who should say, she thinks that she
is not bound to keep silence, their silence shall be a satisfaction for her. And
of him that will not be saved by Christ's merits, but by the works of his
own imagination we say it is a holy workman. Thus borow we and feign new
speech in every tou^g. All fables prophesies and redles are allegories as
Ysopus fables and Marliens prophesies and the interpretation of them are the
litterall sense.

So in like manner the Scripture boroweth words and sentences of all manner
things and makes proverbs and similitudes or allegories. As Christ says
Luke. iiij. Physician heal thy self. Whose interpretation is do that at whom
which thou do in strange places, and that is the litterall sense. So when I
say Christ is a lamb, I mean not a lamb that bears woll, but a meke and a
paciente lamb which is beaten for other men's fautes, Christ is a vine, not
that bears grapes: but out of whose root the branches that believe, suck
the sprit of life, and mercy, and grace, and power to be the sons of God and
to do his will. The similitudes of ye Gospel are allegories borrowed of worldly
matters to express spiritual things. The Apocalipse or reuelatio^s of John
are allegories whose litterall The right use of allegories.
sense is hard to find in many places.

Beyond all this, when we have found out the litteral sense of ye Scripture by
the process of the text or by a like text of another place. Then go we and as
the Scripture boroweth similitudes of worldly things even so we again borow
similitudes or allegories of the Scripture and apply them to our purposes,
which allegories are Allegories are no sense of Scripture.
no sense of the scripture: but fre things besides the Scripture and all
together in the liberty, of the spirit. Which allegories I may not make at
all the wild adventures: but must keep me with in the compass of the faith
and ever apply mine allegory to Christ and unto the faith. Take an ensample,
thou
have the story of Peter how he smote of Malchuses ear and how Christ healed
it again. There have thou in the plain text great learning, great fruit and
great edifieng which I pass over because of tediousnes. Then come I, when I
preach of the law and the Gospel, and borow this example to express the
nature of the law and of the Gospel and to paynt it unto thee before thine
eyes. And of Peter and his sword make I the law and of Christ the Gospel
saying, as Peter's sword cutteth of the ear so does the law. The law damneth,
the law kills, and mangleth the conscience.

There is no care so righteous that can abide y^ hearing of the law. There is
no deed so good but that the law damneth it. But Christ, that is to say the
Gospel, the promises and Testament that God has made in Christ heals the
ear and conscience which the law has hurt. The Gospel is life, mercy and
forge^enes freely, and all together an healing plaster. And as Peter does but
hurt and make a wound where was none before: eue^ so does the law. For when we
think that we are holy and righteous and full of good deeds if y^ law be
preached a right, our righteousness and good deeds vanish away, as smoke in the
wind and we are left damnable sinners only. And as thou see how that Christ
heals not till Peter had wounded, and as an healyng plaster helps not till
y^ corrosie has troubled the wound, eue^ so the Gospel helps not, but when
the law has wounded ye conscience and brought the sinner into ye knowledge of
his sin. This allegory proves nothing neither ca^ do. For it is not the
Scripture, Allegories prove nothing.
but an example or a similitude borrowed of the Scripture to declare a text or a
conclusion of the Scripture more expressly and to root it and grave it in the
heart. For a similitude or an example does printe a thing much deper in the
wits of a man then does a plain speaking and leaves behynd him as it were a
stinge to prick him forward and to awake him with all. Moreover if I could not
prove with an open text If thou c^ not prove the allegory with an open text
then is it false doctrine.
that which the Allegory does express, then were the Allegory a thing to be
gested at and of no greater value then a tale of Robyn hode. This allegory as
touching his first part is proved by Paul in ye. iij. chap. of his Epistle to
the Romans, where he says. The law causes wrath. And in ye vij. chapter to
the Romans. When the law or commandment came, sin revived, and I become
dead. And in the ij. Epistle to the Cor. in the third chap. the law is called
the minister of death and damnation. etc. And as concerning the second part
Paul says to the Romans in the v. chap. In that we are justified by faith we are
at peace with God. And in the ij. Epistle to the Corinthia^s in the. iij. The
Gospel is called the ministratio^ of justifying and of the spirit. And Gala.
iiij. The spirit comes by preaching The litterall sense proves the allegory.
of the faith etc. This does the litterall sense prove the allegory and bear
it, as the foundation bears the house. And because that allegories prove
nothing therefore are they to be used soberly and seldom and only where the
text offers thee an allegory.

And of this manner (as I above have done) does Paul borow a similitude, a
figure or allegory of Genesis to express the nature of the law and of the
Gospel, and by Agar and her son They th^^ justify the^ selves by their
works are the bond children of the law.
declares the property of the law and of her bond children which will be
justified by deeds, and by Sara and her son declares the property of the
Gospel and of her free children which are justified by faith, and how the
children of the law which believe in their works persecute the children of the
Gospel which believe in the mercy and truth of God and in the Testament of his
son Jesus our Lord. And likewise do we borow likenesses or allegories of the
Scripture, as of Pharao and Derode and of the Scribes and Phariseis, to
express our miserable captivity and persecution under Antichrist the Pope.

The greatest cause of which captivity The faith was lost thorough Allegories
and the decay of the faith and this blindness wherein we now are, sprang first
of allegories. For Origene and the doctors of his time drew all ye Scripture
unto allegories. Whose ensample they that came after followed so long, till at
the last they forgot y^ order, and process of the text, supposing that ye
scripture served but to feign allegories upon. In so much that twenty doctors
expound one text xx. ways, as children make descant upon plain song. Then
came our sophisters with the^^ Chopologicall sophisters.
Anagogicall and Chopologicall sense and with an antetheme of half an inch,
out of which some of them draw a threde of ix. days long. Yea thou shall
find enough that will preach Christ, and prove what soever point of thee
faith that thou will, as well out of a fabell of Ouide or any other Poet, as
Poetry is as good divinity as the Scripture to our schole men.
out of S. John's Gospel or Paul's Epistles. Yea they are come unto such
blyndnes that they not only say the litterall sense profits not, but also
that it is hurtful and noisome and kills the soul. Which damnable doctrine
The litterall sense kills say sophisters.
they prove by a text of Paul ij. Corinth. iij. Where he says the letter
kills but the spirit gives life. Lo say they the litterall sense kills and
the spiritual sense gives life. We must therefore, say they, seek out some
choplogicall sense.

Here learn what sophistry is, and how blind they are, that thou may
abhor them and spue them out of thy stomach for ever. Paul by the letter
means Moses law, which the process of the text following declares more
bright then the sun. But it is not their guise to look on the order of any
text, but as they find it in their doctors so allege they it, and so
understand it. Paul makes a comparion between The letter kills expound this
the law and the Gospel, and calls the law the letter, because it was but
letters graven in two tables of cold sto^e. For the law does but kill and damn
the consciences, as long as there is no lust in the heart to do that which the
law commands. Contrary wise he calls the Gospel the administration of the
spirit and of righteousness or justifying. For when Christ is preached and the
promises which God has made in Christ are believed, the spirit enters the
heart, and loses the heart, and gives lust to do the law, and makes the law a
lively thing in the heart. Now as soon as the heart lusts To love the law is
righteousness.
to do the law, then are we righteous before God, and our sins forgeuen.
Nevertheless the law of the letter graued in stone, and not in the hearts was
so glorious, and Moses his face shone so bright that the children of Israel
could not behold his face for brightness. It was also given in thunder and
lightning and terrible signs, so that they for fear came to Moses and desired
him that he would speak to them and let God speak no more. Lest we dye (said
they.) If we hear him any more: as thou may see. Exodus xx. Whereupon Paul
makes his comparison saying: if the ministratio^ of death thorough the letters
figured in stones was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not
behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance: why shall not the
administration of the spirit be glorious? And again: if the administration of
damnation be glorious: much more shall the administration of righteousness
excede in glory: That is, if the law that kills sinners and helps the^ not
to be glorious: then the Gospel which pardons sinners and gives them power
to be the sons of God and to over come sin, is much more glorious. And the
text that goes before is as clear.

For the holy Apostle Paul says, ye Corinthians are our Epistle, which is
understand and read of all men, in that ye are known how that ye are the
Epistle of Christ ministered by us and written: not with ynke (as Moses law)
but with the spirit of the living God: not in tables of stone (as the ten
commandments) but in the fleshy tables of the heart, as who should say, we
writ not a dead law with ink and in parchemen^, nor grave that which damned
you in tables of stone: but preach you that which brings the spirit of life
unto your breasts, which spirit writes and graueth the law of love in your
hearts and gives you lust to do the will of God. And furthermore, says he our
ablenes comes of God which has made us able to minister the new Testament,
not of the letter (yt is to say not of the law) but of the spirit. For the
letter (that is to say the law) kills: but the spirit gives life (that is
to say the spirit of God) which enters your hearts when ye believe the glad
tydinges that are preached you in Christ, quickens your hearts and gives
you life and lust and makes you to do of love and of your own accord without
compulsio^, that which the law compelled you to do and damned you, because ye
could not do with love, and lust, and naturally. Thus see thou that the
letter signifies not the litterall sense and the spirit the spiritual sense.
And Romans ij. Paul uses this term Littera for the law. And Romans vij. where he
sets it so plain, that it the great wrath of God had not blinded them they
could never have stombled at it.

God is a spirit and all his words The litterall sense is spiritual.
are spiritual. His litterall sense is spituall, and all his words are
spiritual. When thou read Math. j. she shall bear a son and thou shall
call his name Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins. This
litteral sense is spiritual and everlasting life unto as many as believe it. And
the litterall sense of these words, Math. v. blessed are the merciful, for
they shall have mercy, are spiritual and life. Whereby they that are merciful
may of right by the truth and promise of God challenge mercy. And like is it of
these words, Math. vj. If you forgive othermen their sins your heavenly
father shall forgive you yours. And so is it of all the promises of God.
Finally all gods words are spiritual, if thou have eyes of God to see the
right meaning of the text, and whereunto y^ Scripture perteyneth, and the final
end and cause thereof.

All the Scripture is either the promises What is to be sought in y^ Scripture
and in the litte^ sense.
and Testament of God in Christ and stories perteining thereunto, to strength
thy faith, either the law and stories perteining thereto to fear thee from evil
doing. There is no story nor gest, seem it never so simple or so vile unto the
world, but that thou shall find therein spirit and life and edifieng in the
litterall sense. For it is gods Scripture written for thy learning and
comfort. There is no cloute or tagge there that has not precious relics
wrapped therein of faith, hope, patience and long sufferyng and of the truth of
God, and also of his righteousness. The story of Ruben.
Set before thee the story of Ruben which defiled his fathers beo. Mark what
a cross God suffered to fall on the neck of his elect Jacob. Consider first
the shame among the heathen, when as yet there was no more of the whole world
within the Testament of God but he and his household. I report me to our
Prelates which swear by their honor whether it were a cross Swear^ they by
their honor? th^^ are they not ready to suffer shame for Christ's sake.
or no. See thou not how our wicked bylders rage, because they see their
bildynges burn, now they are tried by the fire of Gods word, and how they
stir up the whole world, to quench the word of God, for fear of loosing
their honor? Then what business had he to pacify his children? Look what a do
he had at y^ defiling of his daughter Dina. And be thou sure that the brethren
there were no more furious for the defiling of their sister, then the sons
hear for defiling of their mother. Mark what followed Ruben, to fear other
that they shame not their fathers and mothers. He was cursed and lost the
kingdom and also the Priestdome, and his tribe or generation was ever few in
number as it appears in the stories of the Bible.

The adultery of David with Barsabe The adultery of David.
is an ensample, not to move us to evil: but if (while we follow the way of
righteousness) any chance drive us aside, that we despair not. For if we saw
not such infirmities in Gods elect, we which are so weak and fall so often
should utterly despair and think that God had clean forsaken us. It is
therefore a sure and an undoubted conclusion, whether we be holy or unholy, we
are all sinners. But the difference The difference between gods sinners and the
devils.
is, that Gods sinners consent not to their sin. They consent unto the law
that it is both holy and righteous and mourn to have their sin taken away.
But the devils sinners consent unto their sin and would have the law and hell
taken away and are enemies unto the righteousness of God.

Likewise in the whomely gest of Nos.
Noe, when he was drunk, and lay in his tente with his privy members open,
have thou great edifyeng in the litteral sense? Thou see what became of the
curied children of wicked Ham which saw his fathers privy members and gested
thereof unto his brethren. Thou see also what blessing fell on Sem and Iaphet
which went backward and covered their fathers members and saw them not. And
thirdly thou see what infirmity accompanies Go^s elect be they never so
holy, which yet is not imputed unto the^. For the faith and trust they have in
God swalloweth up all their sins.

Notwithstanding this text offers The Pope is likened to Ham.
us an apt and an hansome allegory or similitude to describe our wicked Ham,
Antichrist the Pope, which many hundred years has done all the shame that
heart ca^ think unto the pri^ey member of God which is the word of promise or
y^ word of faith as Paul calls it Romans x. and the Gospel and Testament of
Christ wherewith we are begotten, as thou see. i. Peter. i. and James. i. And
as the cursed children of Ham grew into gyauntes so mighty and great that the
children of Israel seemed but greshoppers in respect of them: so the cursed
sons of our Ham the Pope his Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Monks, and Friars
are become mighty gyauntes above all power and authority, so that the children
of faith in respect of them, are much less then greshoppers. They heap
mountain upon mountain They will to heaven by away of their own making.
and will to heaven by their own strength by away of their own making and not
by the way Christ. Never the latter those gyau^tes for the wickedness and
abhominatio^s which they had wrought, did God utterly destroy, part of them by
the children of Loath, and part by the children of Esau and seven nations of
them by the children of Israel. So no doubt shall he destroy these for like
abominations and that shortly. For their kingdom is but the kingdom of lies
and falshead which must needs perish at the coming of the truth of Gods word,
as the night vanishes away at the presence of day. The children of Israel
slew not those gyauntes, but the power of God, Gods truth and promises as thou
may see in Deuteronomy. So it is not we that shall destroy those gyauntes, as thou
may see by Paul. ij. These. ij. speaking of our Ham Antichrist. Whom the
Lord shall destroy (says he) with the spirit of his mouth that is, by the
words of truth) and by the brightness of his coming (that is, by the preaching
of his Gospel.)

ANd as I have said of allegories, The use of similitudes
even so it is of worldly similitudes which we make either when we preach
either when we expound the Scripture. The similitudes prove nothing, but are
made to express more plainly that which is contained in the Scripture and to
lead thee into the spiritual understanding of the text. As the similitude of
Matrimony is taken to express the Marriage that is between Christ and our
souls and what excedyng mercy we have there, whereof all the Scriptures make
mention. And the similitude of the members, how every one of them cares for
other is taken to make thee feel what it is to love thy neighbor as thy
self. That A similitude without Scripture is a sure token of a false Prophet.
preacher therefore that brings a naked similitude to prove that which is
contained in no text of Scripture nor follows of a text, count a deceauer, a
leader out of the way and a false Prophet, and beware of his Philosophy and
persuasions of ma^s wisdom as Paul. i. Corinth. ij. says: my words Paul
preached not worldly wisdom.
and my preaching were not with entysing words and persuasions of man's
wisdom but in showyng of the spirit and power, that is, he preached not
dreams confirming them with similitudes: but Gods word confirmyng it with
miracles and with working of the spirit the which made them feel every thing
in their hearts. That your faith, says he, should not stand in the wisdom of
man: but in the power of God. For the reasons and similitudes Similitudes and
reasons of man's wisdom make no faith but waueryng opinions only.
of man's wisdom make no faith, but waueryng and uncertain opinions only:
one draws me this way with his argument, another that way, and of what
principle thou prouest black an other proves white, and so am I ever
uncertain, as if thou tell me of a thing done in a far land and an other
tell me the contrary, I wot not what to believe. But faith is wrought by the
Gods word makes sur^ faith for God can not lie,
power of God, that is, when Gods word is preached, the spirit enters thine
heart and makes thy soul feel it and makes thee so sure of it, that neither
adversity nor persecution, nor death, neither hell, nor the powers of hell,
neither yet all the pains of hell could ones prevail against thee or move
thee from the sure rock of Gods word, that thou should not believe that
which God has sworn.

And Peter. ij. Pet. i. says we followed Peter preached not fables and false
similitudes but the plain Scripture
not deceauable fables, when we opened unto you the power and coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ: but with our eyes we saw his majesty. And again, we have
(says he) a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto if ye take heed, as unto a
light shynyng in a dark place, ye do well. The word of prophecy was the old
Testament which bears record unto Christ in every place, without which
record the Apostles made neither similitudes nor arguments of worldly wit.
Hereof see thou, that all the allegories, similitudes,
persuasions and arguments which they bring without Scripture, to prove
praying to Saints, Purgatory, care confession and that God will hear thy
prayer more in one place the^ in another, and that it is more meritorious to
eat fish then flesh, and that to disguise thy self and put on this or that
manner cote is more acceptable then to go as God has made thee, and that
widowhode is better then matrimony and virginity then widowhode, and to prove
the Assumption of our Lady and that she was borne without original sin, yea
and with a kiss say some, are but false doctrine.

Take an example how they prove Schole do (...).
that widowhode and virginity excede matrimony they bring this worldly
similitude. He that takes most pain for a man deserves most and to him a man
is most bound, so likewise must it be with God and so forth: now the widow and
virgin take more pain in resisting their lusts then the married wife,
therefore is their state holier. First I say, that in their own sophistry a
similitude Similitudes are no good arguments among the sophisters own self.
is the worst and feblest argument that can be and proves lest and soonest
deceaueth. Though that one son do more service for his father then an other,
yet is the father free and may with right reward the^ all a like. For though I
had a thousand brethren and did more the^ they all, yet do I not my duty. The
fathers and mothers also care most for the lest and weakest and them that can
do lest: ye for the worst care they most and would spend, not their goods
only: but also their blood to bring them to the right way. And even so is it
of the kingdom of Christ as thou may well see in the similitude of the
riotous son. Luke. xv. Moreover Paul says. i. Cor. vij. It is better to
marie then to burn. For the person that burns can not quietly serve God in
as much as his mind is drawn away and the thoughts of his heart occupied with
wonderful and monstrous imaginations. He can neither see, nor hear, nor read
but that his wits are rapt and he clean from him self. And again, says
he, Circumcision is nothing uncircumcision is nothing: but the keeping of the
commandments is all together. Look wherein thou can best keep the
commandments thither get thy self and therein abide, whether thou be widow
wife or maid, and then have thou all with God. If we have infirmities that
draw us from the laws of God, We must ^ure our in(...)with the remedies that
God has ordained and not tempt god.
let us cure them with the remedies that God has made. If thou burn mary. For
God has promised thee no chastity, as long as thou may use the remedy that
he has ordained: no more then he has promised to slake thine honger without
meat.

Now to ask of God more then he has promised comes of a false faith and is
plain Idolatry: and to desire a miracle where there is natural remedy, is
temptyng of God. And of pain taking this wise understand. He that takes pain
to keep the commandments of God is sure thereby that he loves God and that
he has Gods spirit in him. And the more What (...).
pain a man takes (I mean patiently and without grudgyng) the more he loves
God and the perfecter he is and nearer unto that health which y^ souls of all
Christen me^ long for and the more purged from the infirmity and sin that
remains in the flesh: but to look for any other reward or promotion in heaven
or in the life to come then that which God has promised for Christ's sake and
which Christ has deserved for us with his pain taking, is abominable in the
sight of God. For Christ only has purchased the reward, and our pain
taking: to keep the commandments does but purge the sin that remains in
the flesh, and certify us that we are chosen and sealed with Gods spirit
unto the reward yt Christ has purchased for us.

I was once at the creatyng of Doctors of divinity, where the oppone^t
brought the same reason to prove that the widow had more merit then the
virgin, because she had greater pain for as much as she had once proved the
pleasures of Matrimony. Ego nego Domine Doctor said the respo^dent. For though
the virgin have not proved, yet she imagines that the pleasure is greater
then it is in deed and therefore is more moved and has greater temptation and
greater pain. Are not these disputers they that Paul speaks of in the sixth
chapter of the first Epistle to Timot. That they are not content with the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and doctrine of godliness. And
therefore know nothing: but wast their brains about questions and strift of
words, whereof spryng envy, strife and railing of men with corrupt minds
destitute of the truth.

As pertainyng to our Ladies body, where it is or where the body of Elyas, of
John the Enangelist and of many other be, pertains not to us to know. One
thing are we sure of, that they are where God has laid them. If they be in
heaven, we have never the
more in Christ: If they be not there, we have never the less. Our duty is to
prepare our selves unto the commandments and to be thankful for that which
is opened unto us, and not to search the unsearchable secrets of God. Of Gods
secrets can we know no more then he opens unto us. If God shut, who shall
open? How then can natural reason come by the knowledge of that which God has
hyd unto him self?

Yet let us see one of their reasons wherewith they prove it. The chief reason
is this, every man does more for his mother, say they, then for other, in like
manner must Christ do for his mother, therefore has she this pre-eminence, that
her body is in heaven. And yet Christ in the xij. chapter of Math. knows her
not for his mother: but as farrefoorth as she kept his fathers commandments.
And Paul in the ij. Epistle to the Corinthians v. chap. knows not Christ
himself fleshly or after a worldly purpose. Last of all God is free and no
further bound then he binds him self: if he have made her any promise he
is bound, if not, then is he not. Finally if thou set this above rehearsed
chapter of Math. before thee where Christ would not know his mother, and the
ij. of John where he rebuked her, and the ij. of Luke where she lost him and
how negligent she was to leave him behind her at Jerusalem vnwars and to go a
days journey ere she sought for him y^ might resolve many of their reasons
which they make of this matter, and that she was without original sin: read
also Erasmus annotations in the said places. And as for me I commit all such
matters unto those idle belyes which have naught else to do, then to move such
questions and give them free liberty to hold what they list, as long as it
hurts not the faith, whether it be so or no, exhortyng yet with Paul all
that will please God and obtain that salvation that is in Christ, that they
give no head unto unnecessary and braulyng disputations, and that they labor
for the knowledge of those things without which they can not be saved. And
remember that the sun was given us to guide us in our way and works bodyly.
Now if thou leave the natural use of the sun and will look directly on him
to see how bright he is and such like curiosity then will the sun blind
thee. So was the Scripture given us to guide us in our way and works ghostly.
The way is Christ and the promises in him are our salvation if we long for
them. Now if we shall leave that right use and turn our selves unto vain
questions and to search the unsearchable secrets of God: then no dout shall
the Scripture blind us as it has done our schole men and our subtle disputers.

ANd as they are false Prophets which prove with allegories, similitudes and
worldly reasons that which is no where made mention of in the Scripture. Even
so count them for false Prophets which expound the
scriptures drawing the^ unto a worldly purpose clean contrary unto the
example, living, and practisyng of Christ and of his Apostles and of all In
expoundyng of the Scripture we must have a respect unto the living and
practicing of Christ and of his Apostles and Prophets.
the holy Prophets. For says Peter. ij. Pet. i. no prophecy in the Scripture
has any private interpretation. For the Scripture* came not by the will of
man: but the holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the holy ghost. No
place of the Scripture may have a private exposition, that is it may not be
expound after the will of man or after the will of the flesh or drawn unto a
worldly purpose contrary unto the open textes, and the general articles of the
faith, and the whole course of the Scripture and contrary to the living and
practicing of Christ and the Apostles and holy Prophets. For as they came not
by the will of man so may they not be drawn or expound after the will of
man: but as they came by the holy ghost, so must they expound and understand by
the holy ghost. The Scripture is that wherewith God draws us unto him and not
wherewith we should be lead from him. The Scriptures spring out of God and
flow unto Christ, and were given to lead us to Christ. Thou must therefore go
alo^g The scripture was given to lead us unto Christ
by the Scripture as by a line, until thou come at Christ, which is ye ways
end and restyng place. If any man therefore use the Scripture to draw thee from
Christ and to nosell thee in any thing save in Christ, the same is a false
Prophet. And that thou may perceive what Peter means, it follows in y^
text. There were false Prophets among the people (whose prophesies
were belly wisdom) as there shall be false teachers among you: which shall
privily bring in damnable sects (as thou see how we are divided into Settes
or orders.
monstrous sects or orders of Religion) even denying the Lord that has bought
them. (For every one of them takes on him to sell thee for money, that which
God in Christ promises thee freely) and many shall follow their damnable ways,
by whom the way of troth shall be evil spoken of (as thou see how the way of
troth is become heresy, seditious, or cause of insurrectio^, and breaking of
ye kings peace, and treason unto his hyghnes.) And through conetousnes with
feigned words shall they make marchaundise of you. Covetousness Covetousness and
desire of honor is the end of all false doctrine, and that which false
prophets seek.
is the conclusion: for covetousness and ambition that is to say, lucre and
desire of honor is the final end of all false Prophets and of all false
teachers. Look upon the Popes false doctrine, what is the end thereof and what
seek they thereby? Wherefore serves Purgatory? but to purge thy Purgatory
purse, and to polle thee, and rob both thee and thy hayres of house and
lands, and of all thou have, that they may be in honor. Serve not Pardons for
Pardons.
the same purpose? Whereto pertains praying to Saints, but to offer unto
Praying to saints.
their belies? Wherefore serves confession, but to sit in thy conscience and to
Confession.
make thee fear and tremble at what soever they dream, and that thou worship
them as Gods: and so forth in all their traditions, ceremonies, and
coniurations they serve not the Lord: but their belies. And of their false
expoundyng the Scripture and drawyng it contrary unto the example of Christ,
and the Apostles and holy Prophets unto their damnable covetousness and filthy
ambition take an example.

Math. xvj. When Peter says to An example of false expou^ding y^ scriptures.
Christ, thou art the son of the living God, and Christ answered, thou art
Peter and upon this rock I will build my congregation. By the rock interpret
they Peter. And the^ comes the Pope and will be Peter's successor, whether
Peter will or will not, yea whether God will or will not, and though all the
Scripture say nay to any such succession, and says, lo I am the rock, the
foundation, and head of Christ's Church. Now says all the Scripture Christ the
^ayth, and Gods word
that the rock is Christ, the faith and Gods word. As Christ says Math. vij.
he that hears my words and does is the rock and not the Pope.
thereafter is like a man that builds on a rock. For the house that is build
on Gods word will stand, though heaven should fall. And John. xv. Christ is
the wine and we the branches, so is Christ the rock, the stock and
foundation whereon we be built. And Paul i. Cor. iij. calls Christ our
foundation, and all other, whether it be Peter or Paul, he calls them
servants to preach Christ, and to build us on him. If therefore the Pope be
Peter's successor, his duty is to preach Christ only The auctority of Peter's
successor ^o but to preach.
and other authority has he none. And. ij. xj. Paul marieth us unto Christ
and drives us from all trust and confidence in man. And Epht. ij. says Paul.
Ye are build on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, that is on y^
word which they preached, Christ being, says he, the head corner stone, in
whom every buildyng coupled together grows up into an holy temple in the
Lord, in whom also ye are built together and made an habitatio^ for God in the
spirit. And Peter in y^ ij. of his first Epistle builds us on Christ,
contrary to the Pope, which builds on himself. Hell gates shall not
prevail against it, that is to say, against the congregation that is build
upon Christ's says and upon Gods word. Now were the Pope the rock, hell
gates could not prevail against him. For the house could not stand if the
rock and foundation whereon it is builte did perish: but the contrary see we in
our Popes. For hell gates have prevailed against them many hundred years, and
have swalowed them up: if Gods word be true and the stories that are written of
them: yea or if it be true that we see with our eyes. I will give thee the
keys of heaven says Christ, and not I give. And John xx. after yt
resurrection paid (...), and gave y^ keys to them all indifferently. What
soever thou byndest on earth, it shall be bound in heaven, and what soever thou
lousest on earth it shall be loused in heaven. Of this text makes the Pope what
he will, and expounds it contrary to all the Scripture, contrary to That
exposition to false which is against the o^en scripture or against the
practicing of Christ and of his Apostles.
Christ's practicing, and the Apostles, and all the Prophets. Now the
scripture gives record to himself and ever expounds it self by an other
open text. If the Pope the^ can not bring for his exposition the practisyng of
Christ or of the Apostles and prophets or an open text, then is his exposition
false doctrine. Christ expounds him self. Math. xviij. saying: If y^ brother
sin against the rebuke him betwixt him and thee alone. If he hear thee thou
have won thy brother: but if he hear thee not, the^ take with thee one or
two and and so forth as it stands in the text. He concludes saying to them
all, whatsoever ye bind in earth it shall be bound in heaven, and what soever ye
louse on earth it shall be loused in heaven. Where byndyng is but to rebuke them
that sin and lousing to forgive them that repent. And John. xx. Whose sins
ye forgive they are forgeuen and whose sins ye hold they are holden. And
Paul. i. Cor. v. byndeth, and ij. Cor. ij. louseth after the same manner.

Also this byndyng and lousyng is Binding (...) lowsing is one power.
one power, and as he byndeth so louseth he: yea and byndeth first ere he
ca^louse. For who can louse that is not bound. Now what soever Peter byndeth or
his successor (as he will be called and is not, but in dead yt very successor
of Satan) is not so to be understood, that Peter or the Pope has power to
command a man to be in deadly sin or to be damned or to go i^to hell
saying: be thou in deadly sin, be thou damned, go thou to hell, go thou to
Purgatory. For that exposition is contrary to the everlasting Testament that
God has made unto us in Christ. He sent his son Christ to louse us from
sin and damnation and hell, and that to testify unto the world sent he his
Disciples Acts. i. Paul also has no power to destroy, but to edify. ij.
Cor. x. and. xiij. How can Christ give his Disciples power against him self
and against his everlasting Testament? Can he send them to preach salvation and
give them power to damn whom they lust? What mercy and profit have we in
Christ's death and in his Gospel, if the Pope which passes all men in
wickedness has power to send whom he will to hell, and to damn whom he
lusts? we had the^ no cause, to call him Jesus, What Jesus signifies.
y^ is to say savior: but might of right call him destroyer. Wherefore then
this bynding is to be understood as Christ interprets it in the places above
rehearsed, What bynding means.
and as the Apostles practiced it and is nothing but to rebuke men of their
sins by preaching the law. A man must first sin against Gods law ere the
Pope can bind him: yea and a man must first sin against Gods law ere he
need to fear the Popes curse. For cursing and binding are both one, and
nothing saving to rebuke What cursing means.
a man of his sins by Gods law. It follows also then that the lousyng is of
like manner, and is nothing but forgeuing of sin to them that repent What
lowsing means.
through preaching of the promises which God has made in Christ in whom
only we have all forgeuenes of sins, as Christ interprets it, and as the
Apostles and Prophets practiced it. So is it a false power that the Pope
takes on him to louse Gods laws, as to give a man license to put away his
wife to whom God has bound him, and to bind them to chastity which God
commands to mary, that is to wite, the^ that burn and can not live chaste.
It is also a false power to bind that which Gods word makes free, making
sin in the creatures which God has made for man's use.

The Pope which so fast lowses and
purges in Purgatory, can not with all the lousinges and purgations that he
has, either louse or purge our appe tites and lust and rebellion that is in us
against the law of God. And yet the purging of them is the right Purgatory. If
he can not purge them that are alive, where with purges he the^, that are
dead? The Apostles knew no no other ways to purge, but through preaching Gods
word which word only is that that purges the heart, as thou may see John.
xv. Ye are pure, says Christ, through the word. Now the pope preaches not to
them whom they feign to lie in Purgatory, no more then he does to us that are a
live. How the^ purges he them? The pope The Pope is Robyn goodfelow.
is kynne to Robin good fellow which swepeth the house, washes the dishes and
purges all by night. But when day comes there is nothing found clean.

Some man will say the Pope byndeth them not, they bind them selves. I
answer he that byndeth him self to the pope and had lever have his life and
soul ruled by the Popes will the^ by the will of God, and by the Popes word
then by the word of God, is a fool. And he that had lever be bond then free
is not wise. And he that will not abide in the freedom wherein Christ has set
us, is also mad. And he that makes deadly sin where none is and seeks
causes of hatred between him and God is not in his right wits. Furthermore no
man ca^ bind him self further then he has power over him self. He that is
under the Of our selves we can perform noth^ng, further the^ God ^ll give us
power.
power of an other man can not bind him self without license, as son,
daughter, wife, servant and subject. Neither can thou give God that which is
not in thy power. Chastity can^ thou not give further then God lends it
thee, if thou can not live chaste thou art bound to mary or to be damned. Last
of all for what purpose thou byndest thy self must be seen. If thou do it to
obtain thereby that which Christ has purchased for thee freely, so art thou
an infidel, and have no part with Christ, and so forth. If thou will see more
of this matter look in Deuteronomy. and there shall thou find it more largely
entreated.

Take an other ensample of there Another example.
false expounding the Scripture. Christ says Math. xxiij. The Scribes and the
Phariseis sit on Moses seat, what soever they bid you observe, that observe
and do: but after their works do not. Lo say our sophisters or hypocrites,
line we never so abhominably, yet is our authority never the less. Do as we
teach therefore (say they) and not as we do And yet Christ says they sit on
Moses seat, that is as long as they teach Moses do as they teach. For the
law of Moses is the law of God. But for their own traditions and false
doctrine Christ rebuked the^, and disobeyed them, and taught other to beware of
their leven. So if our Phariscis To sit on Christ's sea^e. is to preach and
confess Christ.
sit on Christ's seat and preach him, we ought to hear them: but when they
sit on their own seat, then ought we to beware as well of their pestilent
docrine as of their abominable lining.

Likewise where they find mention ma^e of asword, they turn it unto the Popes
power. The disciples said unto Christ Luke. xxij. Lo here be two swords. And
Christ answered two is enough. Lo, say they the Pope has ij. swords, the
spiritual sword and the te^porall sword. And therefore is it lawful for him to
fight and make war.

Christ a little before he went to his passion, asked his Disciples saying: when
I sent you out without all proiusion lacked ye any thing. And they said nay.
And he answered, but now let him, that has a walet take it with him and he
that has a scrippe likewise, and let him that has never a sword sell his come
and by one: As who should say, it shall go otherwise now then the^. Then ye went
forth in faith of my word, and my fathers promises, and it fed you and made
provision for you, and was your sword and shilde and defender: but now it shall
go as thou read Zacharias. xiij. I will smite the shephearde and the sheep
of the flock shall be scattered. Now shall my father leave me in the hands of
theswicked, and ye also shall be forsaken and destitute of faith, and shall trust
in your selves, and in your own provision, and in your own defense. Christ
gave no commandment, but prophesied what should happen. And they because they
understood him not, answered here are two swords. And Christ (to make an end
of such babblyng) answered two is enough. For if he had commanded every man
to by a sword, how had two been enough? Also if two were enough, and pertained
to the Pope only, why are they all commanded to buy every man a sword? By the
sword therefore Christ prophesied that they should be left unto their own
defense. And two swords were enough yea never a one had been enough. For if
every one of them had had ten swords they would have fied ere mydnight.

In the same chapter of Luke not. Christ rebuked desire of pre-eminence in his
Disciples, but the Pope chalengeth it above all men as hy^ own inheritance.
xij. lines from the foresaid text. The Disciples even at the last Supper asked
who should be the greatest. And Christ rebuked them and said it was an
heathenish thing and there should be no such thing among them, but that the
greatest should be as the smailest, and that to be great was to do service as
Christ did. But this text because it is brighter then the sin, that they ca^
make no sophistry of it, therefore will they not hear it nor let other know it.

FOr as much now as thou partly see the salshed of our prelates, how all
their study is to disceaue us and to keep us in darkness, to sit as Gods in our
co^scie^ces, and handle us at their pleasure, and to lead us whether they
lust: therefore, I read thee, get thee to Gods word, and thereby try all
doctrine and against that receive nothing. Neither any exposition contrary unto
the open textes, neither contrary to the general articles of the faith:
neither contrary to the living and practisyng of Christ and of his Apostles.
And when they cry fathers fathers, remember that Fathers fathers.
it were the fathers that blinded and robbed the whole world and brought us
into this captivity wherein these enforce to keep us still. Furthermore as
they of the old time are fathers to us, so shall these foul monsters be
fathers to them that come after us, and the hypocrites that follow us will cry
of these and of their doings fathers, fathers, as these cry fathers, fathers,
of the^ that are past. And as we feel our fathers, so did they that are past
feel their fathers: neither were there in the world any other fathers then
such as we both see and feel this many hundred years, as their Decrees bear
record and the stories and Chronicles well testify. If Gods word appeared any
where they agreed all against it. When they had brought that a sleep, then
strove they one with an other about their own traditions and one Pope
condemned an others Decrees and were sometime ij. yea three Popes at once. And
one Bishop went to law with an other and one cursed an other for their own
fantasies, and such things as they had falsely gotten. And the greatest Samts
are they that most defended the liberties of the church (as they call it) which
they falsely got with blynding kings, neither had the world any rest this many
hundred years for reformyng of Friars and Monks and ceasyng of schisms that
were among our Clergy. And as for the holy Doctors as Augustine, Hierome,
Cyprian, Chrisostomus and Bid, will they not hear. If they wrote any thing
negligently (as they were men) that draw they clean contrary to their meaning
and thereof triumph they. Those Doctors knew of none authority that one
Bishop should have above another, neither thought or once dreamed that ever any
such should be, or of any such whisperyng or of Pardons, or scouryng of
Purgatory, as they have feigned.

And when they cry miracles miracles Miracles miracles.
remember that God has made an everlasting Testament with us in Christ's
blood, against which we may receive no miracles no neither y^ preaching of
Paul him self if he came again, by his own teaching to the Galathians,
neither yet the preaching of the angels of heaven. Wherefore either The woman
of Lemster was a solemn miracle.
they are no miracles, but they have feigned the^ (as is the miracle that S.
Peter hallowed Westminster) or else if there be miracles that confirm doctrine
contrary to Gods word, the^ are they done of the devil (as the maid of Ipswich
and of Kent) to prove us whether we will clean last to Gods word and to
deceive them that have no love to the truth of Gods word nor lust to walk in
his laws.

And for as much as they to deceive with all, arm them selves against the^ The
armor of the spirituality.
with arguments and peri^nasions of fleshly wisdom, with worldly similitudes
with shadows, with false Allegories, with false expositions of the Scripture
contrary unto the living and practicing of Christ and the Apostles, with lies
and false miracles, with false names, domne ceremonies, with disguising of
hypocrisy, with the authorities of the fathers and last of all with the
violence of the temporal sword: therefore do thou contrariwise arm thy The
armor of a Christ man is Gods word and faith.
self, to defend thee with all, as Paul teaches in the last chapter to y^
Ephesians Gyrde on thee the sword of the spirit which is Gods word and take
to thee the shilde of faith, which is not to believe a ^ate of Robynhode or
Gestus Romanorum or of the Chronicles, but to believe Gods word that ^asteth
ever.

And when the Pope with his falshead chalengeth temporal authority above King
and Emperor: set before thee y^ xxv. chapter of S. Math. Where Christ
commanudeth Peter to put up his sword. And set before thee Paul. ij. Cor. x.
Where he says the weapons of of our war are not carnal things, but mighty
in God to bring all understanding in captivity under the obedience of Christ,
that is, the weapons are Gods word and doctrine and not swords of iron and
stele, and set before thee the doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles and their
practice.

And when the Pope chalengeth anthoritie over his fellow Bishops and over all
the congregation of Christ by succession of Peter set before thee y^ first of
the Acts where Peter for all his authority put no man in the rowme of Judas,
but all the Apostles chose two indifferently and cast lottes desiring God to
temper them that the lot might fall on ye most ablest. And Acts. viij. the
Apostles sent Peter, and in the xi. call him to rekening and to give accomptes
of that he has done.

And when the Popes law commands
saying: though that the Pope live never so wickedly and draw with him through
his evil ensample innumerable thousa^des unto hell, yet see that no man
presume to rebuke him, for he is head over all and no man over him: set before
thee Gallates. ij. Where Paul rebukes Peter openly. And see how both to the
Corinthia^s, and also to the Galathians he will have no superior but Gods
word, and he that could teach better by Gods word. And because Gods word
about all men's judge mentes.
when he rehearsed his preaching and his doings unto the high Apostles, they
could improve nothing, therefore will he be equal with the best.

And when the Friars say, they do more the^ their duty, when they preach,
Friars be not bound to preach.
and more the^ they are bound to: to say our service are we bound (say they)
and that is our duty, and to preach is more then we are bound to. Set thou
before thee how that Christ's blood shedyng has bound us to love one an other
withal our might and to do the uttermost of our power one to an other. And
Paul says. i. Cor. ix. Woe be unto me if I preach not: yea woe is unto him y^
has wherewith to help his neighbor and to make him better and do it not. If
they think it more then their duty to preach Christ unto you then they
think it more then their duty to pray that ye should come to the knowledge of
Christ. And therefore it is no marvel though they take so great labor: yea
and so great wages also to keep you still in darkness.

And when they cry furiously hold the heretics unto the wall, and if they
will not revoke, burn them without any more a do, reason not with the^, it is
an Article condemned, by the fathers. Set thou before thee the saying of Peter.
i. Pet. iij. To all that ask you, be ready to give an answer of the hope
that is in you, and that with mekenes. The fathers of the Jews and the
Bishops, which had as great authority over them as ours have over us,
condemned Christ and his doctrine. If it be enough to say the fathers have
condemned it, the^ are y^ Jews to beholde^ excused: yea they are yet in the
right way and we in the false. But and if the Jews be bound to look in the
Scripture and to see whether their fathers have done right or wrong, then are
we likewise bound to look in the Scripture whether our fathers have done right
or wrong, and ought to believe nothing without a reason of the Scripture and
authority of Gods word.

And of this manner defend thy self against all manner wickedness of our
spirits, armed always with Gods word and with a strong and a steadfast faith
thereunto. Without Gods word do nothing. And to his word add nothing neither
pull any thing ther^ro^, as Moses every where teaches thee. Serve God in the
spirit, and thy neighbor How God ought to be served.
with all outward service. Serve God as he has appointed thee and not with thy
good intent and good zeal. Remember Saul was cast away of God for ever for
his good intent. God requires obedience unto his word and abhors all good
intentes and good zeales which are without Gods word. For they are nothing else
then plain Idolatry and woorshyppyng of false Gods.

And remember that Christ is the end In Christ to rest of conscience only.
of all thing. He only is our restyng place and he is our peace. Ephe. ij.
chap. For as there is no salvation in any other name, so is there no peace in
any other name. Thou shall never have rest in thy soul neither shall y^ worm
of conscience ever cease to gnaw thine heart till thou come at Christ: till thou
hear the glad tidings, how that God for his sake has forgeuen thee all
freely. If thou trust in thy works there is no rest. Thou shall think, I have
not done enough. Have I done, it with so great love as I should do? Was I so
glad in doing as I would be to receive help at my need? I have left this or
that undone and such like. If thou trust in confession, then shall thou think.
Have I told all? Have I told all the circumstances? Did I repent enough? Had I
as great sorrow in my repentance for my sins as I had pleasure in doing them?
Likewise in our holy Pardons and pilgrimages, gettest thou no rest. For thou
see that the very Gods the^ selves which sell their pardon so good cheap or
some whiles give the^ freely for glory sake, trust not therein them selves.
They build Colleges and make perpetuities to be prayed for, for ever, and
ladey^ lyppes of their beadmen, or chaplaynes with so many Masses, and Diriges,
and so long service, that I have known some that have bid the devil take
their founders souls, for very impaciencie and werines of so paynefull labor.

As pertainyng to good deeds therefore, do the best thou can, and desire Do
good deeds and trust in Christ.
God to give strength to do better daily, but in Christ put thy trust and in
the Pardon and promises that God has made thee for his sake, and on that rock
build thine house and there dwell. For there only shall thou be sure from all
storms and te^pestes and from all wyly assaults of our wicked spirits which
study with all falshead to undermine us. And the God of all mercy give the
grace so to do, unto whom be glory for ever. Amen.

A compendious rehearsal of that which goes before.
I Have described unto you the obedience of children, servants, wines, and
subjects. These iiij. orders Gods word is the rule of children, servants,
wives and subjects.
are of Gods making and ye rules thereof are Gods word. He that keeps the^
shall be blessed: yea is blessed all ready and he that breaks them shall be
cursed. If any person of impaciency or of a stubburne and rebellious mind
withdraw him self from any of these, and get him to any other order: let him
not think thereby to avoid the vengeance of God in obeying rules and
traditions of man's imagination. If thou poulledst thine head in the worship of
thy father and breakest his commandments, should y^ so escape? Or if thou
payntedst thy masters image on a wall and stickedst up a ca^dle before it,
should thou therewith make satisfaction, for the breaking of his
commandments. Or if thou warest a blew coat in the worship of the king and
brakest his laws should thou so go quyte. Let a man's wife make her self a
sister of the charterhouse and answer her husband when he byddeth her hold
her peace, my brethren keep silence for me, and see whether she shall so escape.
And be thou sure God is more gelouse over his commandments then man is over
his, or then any man is over his wife.

Because we be blind, God has appointed in ye Scripture how we should serve him
and please him. As perteynyng unto his own person he is abounda^tly ^o please
God ^o to believe his promises, and to love his commandments.
pleased when we believe his promises and holy Testament which he has made unto
us in Christ, and for the mercy which ^e there showed us, love his
commandments. All bodyly service must be done to man in Gods stead. We must
give obedience, honor, toll, tribute, custom, and rent unto who^ they
belong. Then if thou have ought more to bestow, give unto yt pore which are
left here in Christ's stead that we show mercy on them. If we keep the
commandments of love the^ are we sure that we fulfill the law in the sight of
God and that our blessing shall be everlasting life. Now when we obey patiently
and without grudgyng evil Princes that oppress us, and persecute us and be
kind and merciful to them that are mercylesse to us, and do the worst they
ca^ to us, and so take all fortune patiently, and kiss what soever cross God
lays on our backs: then are we sure that we keep the commandments of
love.

I declared that God has taken all vengeance into his own hands, and will
aue^ge all unright him self: either by the powers or officers which are
appointed thereto or else, if they be negligent, he will send his curses upon
the tra^sgressours and destroy them with his secret judgments. I showed also
that whosoever auengeth him self is He that will aue^ge, robs God of his
honor.
damned in the deed doing and falls into the hands of the temporal sword,
because be takes the office of God upon him and robs God of his most high
honor, in that he will not patie^tly abide his judgment. I showed you of the
authority of Princes, how they are in Gods stead and how they may not be
resisted, do they never so evil, they must be reserved unto the wrath of God.
Never the latter if they command to do evil we must then disobey and say we
are otherwise co^mau^der of God: but not to rise against the^. They will kill us
the^ say thou. Therefore, I say is a Christen called, to suffer even the
bitter death for his hopes sake, and because he will do no evil. I How (...)
soever the king is. (...) unto the great gift of God.
showed also that the Kings and rulers (be they never so evil) are yet a
great gift of the goodness of God, and defend us from a thousand things that
we see not.

I proved also that all men without exception are under the temporal sword,
what soever names they give them selves. Because the Priest is chosen out of
the lay men, to teach this obedience, is that a lawful cause for him to
disobey? Because he preaches that the lay man should not steal, is it
therefore lawful for him to steal unpunished? Because thou teach me that I
may not kill, or if I do, the king must kill me again, is it therefore lawful
for thee to kill and go free? Either whether is it rather mete that thou which
are my guide to teach me the rightwaye should walk therein before me? The
Priests of the old law with their high bishop Aaron. and all his successors,
though they were anointed by Gods commandment and appointed to serve God in
his temple and exempte from all offices and ministering of wordly matters, were
yet nevertheless under the temporal sword, if they brake ye laws. Christ
says to Peter, all that take ye sword, shall perish by the sword. Here is none
exception. Paul says, all souls must obey. Here is none exception. Paul him
self is here not exempt. God says Gene. ix. Who soever sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed again. Here is none exception.

Moreover Christ became poor to make other men rich, and bound to make other
free. He left also with his Disciples the law of love. Now love The Pope has a
law that none of his sprites may be suerty.
seeks not her own profit: but her neighbors, love sceketh not her own
fredome, but becomes surety and bond to make her neighbor fre. Damned
therefore are the spirituality by all the laws of God, which through falshead
and disguised hypocrisy have sought so great profit, so great riches, so great
authority and so great liberties, and have so bedgerd the lay, and so brought
them in subjection and bondage and so despised the^, that they have set up
fra^chises in all towns and villages for who soever robs, murthereth or
slays them, and even for traitors unto the kings person also.

I proved also that no king has power to grant them such liberty: but are as
well damned for their geuyng, as they for their false purchasing. For as God
gives the father power over his children: even so gives he him a
commandment to execute it, and not to suffer them to do wickedly unpunished
but unto his damnation, as thou may see by Hely the high Priest. etc. And as
the master has authority over his servants: even so has he a commandment
to govern them. And as the husband is head over his wife: even so has he
commandment to rule her appetites and is damned if he suffer her to be an
whore and a miss liver, or submit him self to her, and make her his head. And
even in like manner as God makes the king head over The king is but a servant
to execute the laws of God.
his Realm, even so gives he him commandment to execute the laws upon all
men indifferently. For the law is Gods and not the kings. The king is but a
servant to execute the law of God, and not to rule after his own imagination.

I showed also that the law and the king are to be feared, as things that were
geue^in fire, and in thunder, and lightning, and terrible signs. I showed the
cause why rulers are evil, and by what means we might obtain better. I
showed also how wholesome those bitter medicines evil Princes are to right
Christen men.

I declared how they which God has made gouerners in the world ought to rule
if they be Christian. They ought to remember that they are heads and arms, to
defend the body, to minister peace, health, and wealth, and eue^ to save the
body, and that they have received their offices of God to minister and to do
service unto their brethren. King, subject, Master, servant, are names in the
world: but not in Christ. In Christ we are all one and even brethren. No man is
his own, but we are all Christ's servants bought with Christ's blood.
Therefore ought no man to seek him self or his own profit: but Christ and his
will. In Christ no man rules as a king his subjects, or a master his
servant: but serves as one hand does to an other and as the hands do unto
the feet and the feet to the hands, as thou see. 1. Cor. xij. We also
serve not as servants unto masters: but as they which are bought with
Christ's blood serve Christ him self. We be here all servants unto Christ.
For what soever we do one to an other in Christ's name, that do we unto Christ,
and the reward of that shall we receive of Christ. The king counts How far
a king ought to seek at his commons hands.
his co^mo^s Christ himself, and therefore does the^ service willingly, seeking
no more of the^ the^ is sufficient to maintain peace and unity, and to
defend the realm, And they obey again willingly and lovingly as unto Christ.
And of Christ every man seeks his reward.

I warned the judges that they take not an ensample how to minister their
offices, of our spirituality, which are bought and solo to do the will of
Satan: but of the Scripture whence they have their authority. Let that which
is secret abide secret till God open it, which is the judge of secrets. For it
is more then a cruel thing to break Note. 4
up into a man's heart and to compel him to put either soul or body in ieopardy
or to shame him self. If Peter that great pillar for fear of death forsook
his master, ought we not to spare weak consciences?

I declared how the king ought to rid his Realm from the wily tyranny of the
hypocrites, and to bring the hypocrites under his laws: yea and how he ought
to be learned, and to hear, and to look upon the causes him self, which he
will punish, and not to believe the hypocrites, and to give them his sword to
kill whom they will.

The king ought to count what he has spent in the Popes quarrel sens he was
king. The first viage cost upon xiiij. hundred thousand pounds. Reke^ sens
what has been spent by sea and land between us and Frenchmen, and Scotts, and
then in triumphs, and in Ambasiasies, and what has been sent out of the
Realm secretly, and all to maintain our holy father, and I doubt not but that
will surmount the some of. xl. or. l. hundred thousand pou^des. For we had no
cause to spend one penny but for our holy father. The king therefore ought to
make them pay this money every farthing, and fette it out of their myters,
croses, shrines and all manner treasure of the Church, and pay it to his commons
again: not that only which the Cardinal and his Bishops compelled the commo^s
to lend, and made the^ swear with such an ensample of tyranny as was never
before thought on: but also all that he has gathered of them. Or else by the
consent of the commons to keep it in store for the defense of the realm. Yea
the king ought to look in the Chronicles what the Popes have done to kings in
time past and make them restore it also, And ought to take away from them their
lands which they have gotten with their false prayers, and restore it unto
the right heirs again, or with consent and aduiseme^t turn them unto the
maynteinyng of the poor and bringyng up of youth virtuously and to maynteine
necessary officers and ministers for to defend the common wealth.

If he will not do it: then ought the commons to take patience and to take it
for Gods scourge, and to think that God has blinded the king for their sins
sake and commit their cause to God: And then shall God make a scourge for them
and drive them out of his Temple after his wonderful judgment.

ON the other side I have also uttered the wickedness of the spirituality, the
falshead of the Bishops, and iugglyng of the Pope, and how they have disguised
them selves, borowyng some of their pomp of ye Jews, and some of the
Gentiles, and have with suttill wyles turned the obedience that should be given
to Gods ordinance unto them selves. And how they have put out Gods Testament
and Gods truth and set up their own traditions and lies, in which they have
taught ye people to believe and there by sit in their consciences as God, and
have by that means robbed the world of lands and goods, of peace and unity,
and of all temporal authority, and have brought the people into the ignorance
of God and have heaped the wrath of God upon all realms and namely upon the
kings. Whom they have robbed (I speak not of worldly things only) but even
of their very natural wits. They make the^ believe that they are most
Christen, when they live most abhominably, and will suffer no man in their
Realms that believes on Christ, and that they are defenders of the faith, when
they burn the Gospel and promises of God, out of which all faith springs.

I showed how they have ministered Christ, King and Emperor out of their
rowmes, and how they have made them a several kingdom which they got at the
first in deceauyng of Princes, and now pervert the whole scripture to prove
that they have such authority of God. And lest the lay men should see how
falsely they allege the places of the Scripture, is the greatest cause of this
persecution.

They have fained confession for the same purpose to stablish their kingdom
Confession.
with all. All secrets know they thereby. The Bishop knows the confession of
whom he lusts throughout all his Dioces. Yea and his Chaunceler commands
the ghostly father to deliver it written. The pope, his Cardinals and Bishops
know the confession of the Emperor, Kings, and of all Lords: and by
confession they know all their captives. If any believe in Christ, by confession
they know him. Shriue thy self where thou will, whether at The manifold
enormities which their auricular confession did breed.
Sion charterhouse or at the obserua^ts thy confession is known well enough.
And thou, if thou believe in Christ, art waited upon. Wonderful are the
things that thereby are wrought. The wife is feared and compelled to utter not
her own only but also the secrets of her husband, and the servant the
secrets of his master. Besides that thoraugh confession they quench the faith
of all the promises of God, and take away the effect and virtue of all ye
Sacraments of Christ.

They have also corrupted y^ Saints lives with lies and feigned miracles and
have put many things out of the sentence or great curse, as raising of ^ente
and fines and hyring men out of their houses, and whatsoever wickedness they
them selves do, and have put a great part of the stories and Chronicles ont of
the way lest their falshead should be seen. For there is no mischieues or The
Pope and his chapteyns were the fountains of all evils in spiritual^ regiment,
or te^porall.
disorder, whether it be in the temporal regiment, or else in the spiritual
whereof they are not the chief causes and eue^ the very fountain and springes,
and as we say, the well head so that it is impossible to preach against mischief
except thou begin at them, or to set any reformation in the world except thou
reform them first. Now are they indurate and tough as Pharao, and will not bow
unto any right way or order. And therefore persecute they Gods word and the
preachers thereof, and on the other side lie awayte unto all princes and stir
up all mischief in the world and send them to war, and occupy their minds
therewith or with other voluptuousnes, lest they should have laysure to hear
the word of God and to set an order in their realms.

By them is all thing ministered and by them are all kings ruled: yea in every
kings conscience sit they ^re he be king and persuade every king what they
lust, and make the^ both to believe what they will and to do what they will.
Neither can any king or any realm have rest for their businesses. Behold king
Henry the v. whom they sent out for such a purpose as they sent out our king
that now is. See how the Realm is inhabited. Ask where the goodly towns and
their walls and the people that was wont to be in the^ are become, and where
the blood royal of the Realm is become also. Turn thine eyes whether thou will and thou shall see nothing prosperons but their subtle pollyng. With that
it is flowyng water: yea and I trust it will be shortly a full see.

In all their doings though they Under an outward pretense of Gods honor, the
po^^^ Clergy procured their own dignity.
pretend outwardly the honor of God or a common wealth, their intent and
secret Council is only to bring all under their power and to take out of the
way who soever lets them, or is to mighty for them. As when they send the
Princes to Jerusalem to co^quere the holy land and to fight against the
Turks. What soever they pretend outwardly their secret intent is, while the
Princes there conquer them more Bishoprikes, to conquer their lands in the
mean season with their false hypocrisy, and to bring all under them, which
thou may easily perceive by that they will not let us know y^ faith of
Christ. And when they are ones on hye, then are they tyrauntes above all
tyrauntes, whether they be Turks or Saracenes. How minister they prouyng of
testamentes? How causes of wedlock? or if any man dye intestate? If a poor
man dye and leave his wi^e and half a dosen young children and but one cow to
find them, that will they have for a mortuary mercylesse: let come of wife and
children what will. Yea let any thing be done against their pleasure and they
will interdite the whole realm sparyng no person.

Read the Chronicles of England (out of which yet they have put a great part of
their wickedness) and thou shall find them all ways both rebellious and
disobedient to the kings and also churiish and unthankful, so that, when all
the Realm gave the king somewhat to maynteine him in his right, they would not
give a myte. Consider the story of K. John, where I dout not but they have put
the best and fairest for them selves, and the worst of king John, For I suppose
they make the Chronicles them selves. Compare the doings of their holy Church
(as they ever call it) unto the learning of Christ and of his Apostles. Did not
the Legate of Rome assoyle all the Lords of the realm of their due obedience
which they ought to the king by the ordinance of God? would he not have cursed
y^ king with his solemn pomp, because he would have done that office which
God commands every king to do and wherefore God has put the sword in every
kings hand? that is to wete, because king John would have punished a wicked
Clerk that had coined false money. The lay men that had not done half so
great fautes must dye, but the Clerk must go escape fre. Sent not the Pope
also unto the king of France remission of his sins to go and conquer king
John's Realm. So now remission of sins comes not by faith in the Testament
that God has made in Christ's blood: but by fightyng and murtheryng for the
Popes pleasure. Last of all was not king John feign to deliver his crown unto
the Legate and to yield up his Realm unto the Pope, wherefore we pay Peter
pe^ce. They might be called the pollyng pence of false Prophets well enough.
They care not by what mischief they come by their purpose. War and co^quering
of lands is their harvest. The wickeder the people are, the more they have the
hypocrites in reverence, the more they fear them and the more they believe in
them. And they that co^quere other men's lands, when they dye, make them their
heirs, to be prayed for for ever. Let there come one The keepyng down of Gods
word, promoted the Popes spiritualties honor.
conquest more in the Realm, and thou shall see them get yet as much more as
they have (if they can keep down Gods word that their iugglyng come not to
light) yea thou shall see them take y^ Realm whole into their hands and
crown one of them selves king thereof. And verily I see no other likelyhode,
but that the land shall be shortly conquered. The stars of the Scripture
promise us none other fortune, in as much as we deny Christ with the wicked
Jews, and will not have him reign over us: but will be still children of
darkness under Antichrist, and Antichrists possession, burning the Gospel of
Christ, and defendyng a faith that may not stand with his holy Testament.

If any man shed blood in the church, it shall be interoited, til he have paid
for the halowing. If he be not able the parish must pay or else shall it stand
always interdited. They will be avenged on them that never offended. Full well
prophesied of them. Paul in the ij. Epistle to Timo. iij. Some man will say,
would thou that men should fight in the Church unpunished? Nay but let the
king ordeine a punishment for them, as he does for them that fight in his
palace and let not all the Parish be troubled for ons faule. And as for their
halowing it, is yt iuggling of Antichrist. A Christen man is the temple of God
and of the holy ghost, and hallowed in Christ's blood. A Christian man is holy in
him self by reason of the spirit yt dwells in him and the place wherein he
is, is holy be reason of him, whether he be in the field or town. A Christen
husband sanctifies an vnchriste^ wife, and a Christen wife an unchristian
husband (as concerning the use of matrimony) says Paul to the Corinthians. If
now while we seek to be hallowed in Christ, we are found unholy, and must be
hallowed by the ground or place or walls, the^ died Christ in vain. How beit
Antichrist must have wherewith to sit in men's consciences, and to make them
fear where is no fear, and to rob them of their faith, and to make them
trust in that can not help them, and to seek holiness of that which is not
holy in it self.

After that the old king of France was brought down out of Italy, mark what
pageau^tes have been plays, and what are yet a playeng to separate us from the
Emperor (lest by the help or aid of us he should be able to recover his
right of the Pope) and to couple us to the Fre^chme^, whose might the pope ever
abuses to keep the Emperor from Italy. What preuayleth it for any king to
mary his daughter or his son or to make any peace or good ordinance for the
wealth of his realm? For it shall no longer last the^ it is profitable to them.
Their treason is so secret that the world ca^ not perceive it. They dissimule
those things which they are only cause of, and simul discord among them
selves when they are most agreed. One shall hold this, and another shall
dispute the contrary: But the conclusion shall be that most maynteineth their
falshead, though Gods word be never so contrary. What have they wrought in our
days, yea and what work they yet, to the perpetual dishonor of the King and
rebuke of the Realm, and shame of all the nation in what soever Realms they
go?

I uttered unto you partly the malicious The Bishop of Rochester as a fit
paterna to(...)^ll y^(...)a^.
blindness of the Bishop of Rochester, his iuggling his co^neying, his foxi
wilenes, his bopepe, his wresting, rentyng and shameful abusyng of the
Scripture, his Oratory and aliegyng of heretics and how he would make the
Apostles authors of blind ceremonies without signification contrary to their
own doctrine, and have set him for an ensample to judge all other by. What
soever thou art that read this. I exhort thee in Christ, to compare his
sermon and that which I have written, and the scripture together and judge.
There shall thou find of our holy fathers authority, and what it is to be
great, and how to know the greatest.

Then follows the cause why lay me^ can not rule te^porall offices which is
the falshead of the Bishops. There shall thou find of miracles and ceremonies
without signification, of false annoynting and lyeng signs and false names and
how the spirituality are disguised in falshead, and how they roll the people
in darkness and do all thing in the Latin tongue and of their pety pyllage,
Their polling is like a soking consu^ption wherein a man co^plaineth of feebleness
and of fayntynes and wotteth not whence his disease comes: it is like a pocke
that freateth inward and consumes the very marow of the bones.

There see thou the cause why it is impossible for kings to come to the The
cause why kings could not come to the knowledge of y^ truth.
knowledge of the truth. For the sprites lay awaite for them and serve their
appetites at all points and through confession buy and sell and betray both
them, and all their true friends and lay beytes for them and never leave them
till they have blinded them with their sophistry and have brought them into
their nets. And the^ when the king is captive, they compel all the rest with
violence of his sword. For if any man will not obey them be it right or wrong
they cite him, suspe^de him, and curse or excommunicate him. If he then obey
not they deliver him to Pylate, that is to say, unto the temporal officers to
destroy him. Last of all there find thou the very cause of all persecution,
which is the preaching against hypocrisy.

Then come we to the Sacraments, where thou see that the work of the
Sacrament saves not, but the faith in the promise which the Sacrament
signifies justifies us only. There have you that a Priest is but a servant
to teach only and what soever he takes upon him more then to preach and to
minister the Sacraments of Christ (which is also preaching) is falshead.

Then comes how they iuggle thorough do^me ceremonies and how they make
marchau^dise with fained words, penance, a poena and a culpa, satisfaction,
attrition, character, Purgatory pickepurse and how through confession they make
the Sacraments and all the promise of none effect or value. There see thou
that absoluyng is but preaching the promises and cursing or excommunicating
preaching the law, and of their power, and of their keys, of false miracles
and prayeng to Saints. There see Miracles are done by faith and not by
ceremonies.
thou that ceremonies did not the miracles but faith: eue^ as it was not Moses,
rod that did y^ miracles but Moses faith in the promise of God. Thou see
also that to have a faith where God has not a promise is Idolatry. And there
also see thou how the pope exalts him self above God and commands him to
obey his tyranny. Last of all thou have there that no man ought to preach but
he that is called.

The^ follows the belly brotherhead of Monks and Friars. For Christ has
deserved naught with them. For his sake gettest thou no favor. Thou must offer
unto their belyes and the^ they pray bitterly for thee. There see thou that
Christ is the only cause: yea and all the cause why God does ought for us and
hears our complaint. And there have thou doctrine how to know and to be sure
that thou art elect and have Gods sprite in thee. And have there learning to
try the doctrine of our spirits.

Then follow the four senses of the Scripture of which three are no senses and
the fourth that is to wite the litterall sense which is the very sense has the
Pope taken to him self. It may have no other meaning the^ as it pleases his
fatherhode. We must abide his interpretation. And as his belles think so must
we think, though it be impossible together any such meaning of the Scripture.
Then have thou the very use of Allegories and how they are The use of
Allegories.
nothing but ensamples borrowed of the Scripture to express a text or an open
conclusion of the Scripture and as it were to paynte it before thine eyes, that
thou may feel the meaning and the power of the Scripture in thine heart.
Then comes the use of worldly similitudes, and how they are The use of
similitudes*
false Prophets which bring a worldly similitude for any other purpose, save
to express more plainly y^ which is contained in an open text. And so are they
also which draw the Scripture contrary to the open places and contrary to the
ensample living and practicing of Christ, the Apostles and of the holy
Prophets. And then finally have thou of our holy fathers power and of his
keys and of his bindyng and excommunicatyng and of his cursyng and blessyng
with ensamples of every thing.

The end of the obedience of a Christen man.
An exposition upon the v. vi. vii. chapters of Matthew, which three chapters
are the keye and the door of the scripture, and the restoring again of Moses
law corrupt by the Scribes and Pharisees. And the exposition is the restoring
again of Christ's law corrupt by the Papists.
Item before the book, thou have a Prologe very necessary, containing the
whole sum of the covenant made between God and us, upon which we be
baptized to keep it.

Set forth by William Tyndall.

The Prologe.
HEre have thou dear Reader an exposition upon the v. vi. and vij. chapters of
Matthew, wherein Christ our spiritual Isaac, diggeth again the wells of To
dig the wells of Abraham, is to open and to make plain the scriptures,
which is the kingdom of God.
Abraham: which wells yt Scribes and Phareses, those wicked and spiteful
Philistines, had stopped and filled up with the earth of their false
expositions. He opens the kingdom of heaven which they had shut up that
other men should not enter, as they themselves had no lust to go in. He
restores the keye of knowledge which they had taken away and broken the wards
with wresting the text contrary to his due and natural course, with their false
gloses. He plucketh away from the face of Moses, the veil which the Scribes
and Phareises had spread thereon, that no man might perceive the brightness of
his countenance. He wedeth out the thorns and bushes of their Pharesaicall
gloses, wherewith they had stopped up the narrow way and straight gate, that
few could find them.

The wells of Abraham, are the scripture. Abraham's wells.
And the Scripture may well be called the kingdom of heaven, which is eternal
The kingdom of heaven what it (...). Moses face.
life, and nothing save the knowledge of God the father and of his son Jesus
Christ. Ioh. xvij. Moses face is the law in her right understanding, and the
law in her right understanding is the keye, or at the least way The keye what
it is.
the first and principal keye to open the door of the Scripture. And the law
is the very way that brings unto y^ door Christ, as it The law is the way
that leads to Christ.
is written Gala. iij. The law was our scholemaster to bring us to Christ, that
we might be justified by faith. And Romans x. the end of the law: that is to
say, the thing or cause why the law was given, is Christ, to justify all that
believe. That is to say: the law was given to prove us unrighteous and to drive
us to Christ, to be made righteous the row forgeuenes of sin by him. The law
was given to make the sin known says Law what her office is.
Saint Paul Romans iiij. and that sin committed under the law might be the
more sinful. Romans vij. The law is that thing, which Paul in his inward man
granted to be good, but was yet compelled often times of his members to do those
things which that good law condemned for evil. Romans vij.

The law makes no man to love the law, The law(...)^^reth sin, condemns
our deeds, and drinks us to Christ.
or less to do or commit sin: but gendereth more lust, Romans vij. and
increases sin. Romans v. For I cannot but hate the law, in as much as I find
no power to do it, and it nevertheless condemns me because I do it not. The
law sets not at one with God, but causes wrath. Romans iij.

The law was given by Moses, but grace and verity by Jesus Christ. Ioh. j.
Behold though Moses gave the law, yet he gave no Moses (...) the law but Christ
only gives grace to do it, and understand it aright.
man grace to do it or to understand it aright, or wrote it in any man's heart,
to consent that it was good, and to wish after power to fulfill it. But Christ
gives grace to do it, and to understand it aright, and writes it with his
holy spirit in the tables o^ the hearts of men, and makes it a true thing
there, and none hypocrisy.

The law truly understood, is those fiery serpents that strong the
children of Israel with present death: But Christ is the brazen serpent on
whom whosoever being stoge The (...) ser^ent. Number. (...).
with conscience of sin, and looks with a ^ure faith, is healed immediately
of that stinging and saved from the pains and sorrows of hell.

It is one thing to condemn and pronounce The (...)(...)contra^ pe^acio^s.
the sentence of death, and to flyng the conscience with fear of everlasting
pain. And it is an other thing to justify from sin: that is to say, to
forgive and remitte sin, and to heal the conscience, and certify a man, not
only that he is delivered from eternal death, but also that he is made the
son of God and heir of everlasting lise. The first is the office of the
law. The second pertayneth unto Christ only through faith.

Now if thou give the law a false gloss (...) The (...) ^ure (...) is looked up
say: that the law is a thing which a man may do of his own strength, even
out of the power of his free will: and that by the deeds of the law thou may
deserve forgeuenes of thy foresinnes. Then dyed Christ in vain Galat. ij. and
is made almost of no sleade, seeing thou art become thine own savior. Nether
can Christ (where that gloss is admitted) be otherwise taken or esteemed of
Christen men (for all his passion and promises made to us in his blood) then
he is of the turks: how that he was an holy prophet, and that he prays for
us as other Saints do: save that we Christen think that he is somewhat more
in favor then other saints be (though we imagine him so proud that he will
not hear us but through his m^^de mother and other holy saints, which all we
count much more meek and merciful then he, but him most of might) and that he
has also an higher place in heaven, as the graye Friars and obseruaunts set
him, as it were from the chinne upward above S. Fraunces.

And so when by this false interpretation of the law, Christ which is the
door, the Christ is the door, the way, and foundation, of all the Scriptures.
way, and the gro^und or foundation of all the scripture, is lost concerning
the chiefest fruit of his passion, and no more seen in his own likeness: then
is the scripture locked up, and henceforth extreme darcknes and a maze,
wherein if thou walk, thou wottest neither where thou art, nor can find any
way out. It is a confused Chaos, and a minglyng of all things together without
order, every thing contrary to an other. It is an hedge or grove of briers,
wherein if thou be caught, it is impossible to get out, but that if thou lowse
thy self in one place, thou art tangled and caught in an other for it.

This wise was the scripture locked up When by gloses of out own imaginacio^
we darken the clear text of gods word, the^ is the Scripture locked by from us.
of the Scribes and Phareseis, that the Jews could not see Christ when he
came, nor yet can. And though Christ with these iij. chapters did open it
again: yet by such gloses, for our unthankfulness sake, that we had no lust to
live according: have we Christen lost Christ again, and the understanding of
the most clear text, wherewith Christ expounds and restores the law again.

For the hipocrites whatsoever seems impossible to their corrupt nature
vnrenued in Christ, that they cover ouerwith the mist of their gloses, that the
light thereof should not be seen. As they have interpreted here y^ words of
Christ, wherewith he restores the law again, to be but good councelles only,
but no precepts that bind the consciences.

And thereto they have so ruffled and tangled the temporal and spiritual
regiment together, Christ used (...) temporal regiment.
and made thereof such confusion that no man can know the one from the other:
to the intent that they would seem to have both by the authority of Christ,
which never usurped temporal regiment unto him.

Notwithstanding (most dear reader) if thou read this exposition with a good
heart only to know the truth for the amendyng cheifely of thine own living,
and the^ of other men's (as charity requires where an occasion is given)
the^ shall thou perceive their falshod, and see their mist expelled with the
brightness of the incuytable truth.

An other conclusion is this: all the good promises which are made us through
out all Christ is a g^ given only to the^ that love the law and profess it.
the scripture for Christ's sake, for his love, his passion or suffering, his
bloudsheding or death all are made us on this condition and covenant on our
party, that we henceforth love the law of God, to walk therein and to do it and
fashion our lives thereafter. In so much that whosoever has not the law of God
written in his heart, that he love it, have his lust in it, and record therein
night and day, understanding it as God has given it, and He that professes
not the law has(...)in the promises.
as Christ and the Apostles expound it: the same has no part in the promises,
or can have any true faith in the blood of Christ: because there is no promise
made him, but to them only that promise to keep the law.

Thou will happily say to me again: if I cannot have my sins forgeuen except
I love the law, and of love endeavor my self to keep it: then the keeping of
the law justifies me. I answer that the argument is Works do not justify.
false and but blind sophistry, and like unto this argument: I cannot have
forgeuenes of my sin except I have sinned, Ergo to have sinned is the
forgeuenes of sin. And it is like to this also: No man can be healed of the
pockes but he that has them: Ergo to have the pockes does heal the pockes.

And like sophistry are these arguments: if thou will enter into life, keep
the commandments. Math. xix. Ergo the deeds of the law justify us. Item
the hearers of y^ law are not righteous in the sight of God, but the do^rs of
the law shall be justified. Romans ij. Ergo the deeds of the law justify from
sin. And again: we must all stand before the judgment feate of Christ, to
receive every man according to the deeds which he did in the body: Ergo the
law or the deeds 2. Cor. (...).
of the law justify.

These and all such are naughty arguments. For ye see that the king pardons
no murderer but on a condition, that he henceforth keep the law and do no
more so, and yet ye know well enough that he is saved by grace, favor, and
pardon, yet the keeping of y^ law come.. Howbeit, if he break the law
afterward, he falls again into the same danger of death.

Even so, none of us can be received to The law. By keepyng the law we
continue in grace.
grace but upon a condition to keep the law, neither yet continue any longer
in grace then that purpose lasts. And if we break the law, we must sue for a
new pardon, and have a new sight against sin, hell, and desperation, ye^ we
can come to a quiet faith again and feel that the sin is forgeuen. Neither
can there be in the a stable and an undoubted faith that thy sin is forgeuen
thee, except there be also a lusty courage in thine heart, and a trust that thou will sin no more, for on that condition that thou endeavor thy self to sin
no more, is the promise of mercy and forgeuenes made unto thee.

And as thy love to the law increases, so Faith, love and hope are
insepararable in this life.
does thy faith in Christ, and so does thine hope and longing for the life to
come. And as thy love is cold, so is thy faith weak, and thine hope and
longing for the life to come little. And where no love to the law is, there is
neither faith in Christ for the forgeuenes of sin, nor longing for the life
to come: but in steed of faith, a wicked imagination that God is so
unrighteous that he is not offended with sin. And instead of hope, a desire
to live ever here, and a gredines of worldly voluptuousness.

And unto all such is the Scripture locked They that love not the law cannot
understand the Scripture to salvation.
up and made impossible to understand. They may read it and rehearse the
stories thereof, and dispute of it, as the turks may, and as we may of the
turks law. And they may suck pride, hipocrisye and all manner of poison there
out to slaye their own souls, and to put stombling blocks in other men's
ways, to thrust them from the truth? and get such learning therein as in
Aristotle's Ethikes and moral philosophy, and in the precepts of old
philosophers. But it is impossible for them to apply one sentence thereof to
their souls health for to fashion their lives thereby for to please God, or to
make them love the law or understand it, either to feel the power of Christ's
death and might of his resurrection and swetnes of the life to come. So that
they ever remain carnal and fleshly, as thou have an ensample of the Scribes,
Phariseis, and Jews in the new testament.

An other conclusion is this: of them that Care.
believe in Christ for the remission of sin and love the law, are a thousand
degrees and not How God cares for the weak.
so few, one perfecter or weaker the^ another: of which a great sort are so
feeble that they ca^ neither go forward in their profession and purpose, nor yet
stand except they be help and borke of their stronger brethren, and tended as
young children are by the care of their fathers and mothers. And therefore does
God command the elder to care for the younger. As Paul teaches Romans xv,
saying: we that be stronger, ought to bear the feebleness of the weaker. And
Gala. vj. brethren if any man be caught in any fault, ye that be spiritual
(and By bearyng each other weakness we fulfill the law of Christ.
are grown in knowledge and have gotten the victory of your flesh) teach such
with the spirit of softenes, not calling them heretics at the first choppe,
and threatenyng them with fire and fagottes. But alter alterius onera portate
(says he) and sic adimplebitis lege^ Christi. That is to say: bear each
others burden, and so shall ye fulfill the law of Christ. Even so verily shall
ye fulfill the law of Christ, and not with smiting your brethren, and puttyng
stomblyng blocks before their weak feet, and killyng their consciences, and
making them more afraid of shadows and bugges, then to break their fathers
commandments, and to trust in words of wind and vanity more then in their
fathers promise.

And for their sakes also, he has ordained Rulers why they were ordained.
rulers both spiritual and temporal, to teach them and exhort them, to warn
them and to keep occasions from them, that with custom of sin they fall not
from their profession.

Now when they that take upon them to be the elder brethren, are become
hypocrites, Why God scourges his.
and turned to wily Foxes and cruel wolves and fierce Lions, and the officers
be waxen evil and servants to Mammon, ministryng their offices for their
own lucre only, and not for the profit of their brethren, but fauouryng all
vices whereby they may have a vauntage. Then is God compelled of his fatherly
pity to scourge his weak him self, with poverty, oppression, wrong, loss,
danger, and with a thousand manner of diseases, to bring them again if they be
fallen, and to keep their hearts fast to their profession. So that diligentibus
Deum omnia cooperantur in bonum. Roma. viij. They that love God, that is to
say, the law of God (for that is to love God) unto them god turns all to the
best, and scourges them with the lusts of their own weakness to their own
salvation.

An other conclusion is this: God receaueth both perfect and weak in like
grace for Christ's sake, as a father receaueth all his children both small and
great in like love. He receaueth them to be his sons and makes The
conditions of the covenant.
a covenant with them, to bear their weakness for Christ's sake, till they be
waxen stronger, and how often soever they fall, yet to forgive them if they
will turn again, and never to cast of any, till he yield him self to sin,
and take sins part, and for affection and lust to sin, fight against his
own profession to destroy it. And he corrects and chastises his children
ever at home with the rod of mercy and love, to make the^ better: but he
brings them not forth to be judged after the condemnation of the law.

An other conclusion is this: every man is two men, flesh and spirit. Which so
fight perpetually one against an other, that a man must go either back or
forward, and can not stand long in on state. If the spirit overcome Flesh and
spirit.
the temptation: then is she stronger and the flesh weaker. But and if the
flesh get a custom, then is the spirit none otherwise oppressed of the
flesh, then as though she had a mountain upon her back, and as we sometime in
our dreams think we bear heuyer then a millstone on our breasts, or when we
dream now and then that we would run away for fear, our legs seem heauyer
then lead. Even so is the spirit oppressed and over laden of the flesh
through custom, that she struggeleth and strives to get up and to break
lowse in vain, until the God of mercy which hears her groan through Jesus
Christ, come and lowse her with his power, and put his cross of tribulation on
the back of the flesh to keep her down, to minish her strength and to
mortify her.

Wherefore every man must have his cross Cross.
to nail his flesh to, for the mortifieng of her. Now if thou be not strong
enough and discrete thereto, to take up thy cross thy self and to tame thy
flesh with prayer and fasting, watchyng, deeds of mercy, holy meditations
Evil lusts and affections are to be purged with the cross of Christ.
and readyng the Scripture, and with bodily labor and in withdrawyng all manner
of pleasures from the flesh, and with exercises contrary to the vices which
thou markest thy body most inclined to, and with absteinyng from all that
courage the flesh against the spirit: as readyng of wanton books, wanton
communication, foolish iestyng and effeminate thoughts, and talkyng of
covetousness, which Paul forbyddeth Ephe. v. and magnifieng of worldly
promotions: And take I say up such a cross by thine own self or by the
counsel of other that are better learned and exercised then thou. Then must
God put his cross of adversity upon thee. For we must have every man his
cross in this world, or be damned with the world.

Of this ye see the difference between the To sin under grace, and to (...)
under the law.
sin of them that believe in y^ blood of Christ for the remission of sin,
and consent and submit themselves unto the law: and the sin of them that yield
themselves unto sin to serve it. etc. The first sin under grace, and their
sins are venial, that is to say: forgeueable. The other sin under the law
and under the damnation of the law, and fight (for a great part of them)
against grace and against the spirit of grace, and against the law of God and
faith of Christ, and corrupt the text of the covenant with false gloses, and
are disobedient to God, and therefore s^ deadly.

O^ this also ye see the difference between the lambs of true beleuers, and
between the Lambs. Swyne. Dogs.
unclean swyne that follow carnal lusts and fleshly liberty, and the
churlishe and hypocr^e dogs. Which for the blind zeal of their own
righteousness, persecute the righteousness of the faith in Christ's blood. The
effeminate and careless swyne which continue Swyre have ^o faith.
in their fleshlines, and cease not to wallow themselves in their old podell,
think that they believe very well in Christ's blood, but they are deceived (as
thou may clearly perceive) because they fear not the damnation of evil
works, nor love the law of good works, and therefore have no part in the
promise.

The cruel and doggishe hypocrites which Dogs love not the law.
take upon them to work, think they love the law, which yet they never saw,
save under a veil. But they be deceived (as thou may perceive) by that they
believe not in Christ for the forgeuenes of sin. Whereby also (I mean that
they believe not) thou may perceive that they understand not the law. For if
they understood the law, it would either drive them to Christ or make them
despair immediately.

But the true beleuers behold the law in her own likeness and see the
impossibility True faith to coupled with love to the law.
thereof to be fulfilled with natural power, and therefore flee to Christ for
mercy, grace, and power: and then of a very thankfulness for the mercy received,
love the law in her own likeness, and submit themselves to learn it and to
profit therein, and to do to morrow that they can not do to day.

Ye see also the difference of all manner of faythes. The faith of the true
beleuers is, The difference of faythes, and how it is to be understood faith
justifies.
that God justifies or forgeueth, and Christ deserves it, and the faith or
trust in Christ's blood receaueth it, and certifieth the conscience thereof,
and saves and delivers her from fear of death and damnation. And this is
that we mean when we say, faith justifies: that faith (I mean in Christ and
not in our own works) certifieth the conscience that our sins are forgiven
us for Christ's bloudes sake.

But the faith of hypocrites is that God Faith of hipocrites.
forgeueth and works deserve it. And that same false faith in their own
works receaueth the mercy promised to the merits of their own works: and so
Christ utterly excluded.

And thus ye see that faith is the thing that to affirmed to justify, of all
parties. For faith in Christ's blood (which is Gods promise) quieteth the
conscience of the true beleuers. And a false faith or trust in works (which is
their own fayning) beguileth the blind hypocrites for a season, till God for
the greatness of their sin, when it is ^ull, opens their eyes, and then they
despair. But the swyne say: God is so good that he will save deuilles and all,
and damn no man perpetually, faith of (...).
whatsoever he do.

An other conclusion is this, to believe in Christ for the remission of sins,
and of a thankfulness for that mercy to love the law truly: that is to say, to
love God that is father of all and gives all, and Jesus Christ that is Lord of
us all and bought us al, with all our hearts, souls, power, and might, and our
brethren for our fathers sake (because they be created after his image) and for
our Lord and master Christ's sake, because they be the price of his blood: and
to long for the life to come, because this life cannot be fed without sin.
These ^tes (I say) are the profession and religion of a Christen man, and the
inward baptime of the heart signified The ^ight bapt^.
by the outward washing of the body. And they be that spiritual character,
badge or sign, wherewith God thorouge his spirit marketh all his immediately
and as soon as they be joined to Christ and made members of his Church by true
faith.

The Church of Christ then, is the multitude The church of Christ.
of all them that believe in Christ for the remission of sin, and of a
thankfulness for that mercy, love the law of God purely and without gloses, and
of hate they have to the sin of this world, long for the life to come. This
is the church that cannot err dampnably nor any long time, nor all of them:
but as soon as any question aryseth, the truth of Gods promise stirs up one
or other to teach them the truth of every thing needful to salvation out of
Gods word, and lighteneth the hearts of the other true members to see the same
and to consent thereto.

And as all they that have their hearts washed with this inward baptyme of the
sprite are of the church and have the keys of the scripture. ye and of binding
and lowsing, and do not err: Even so they that sin of purpose and will not
hear when their faults Whosoever derogate any thing from the (...) of Christ
are not of the church.
be told them, but seek liberties and priuilegies to sin unpunished, and
gloss out the law of God, and maintain ceremonies, traditions and customs,
to destroy the faith of Christ: the same be members of Satan, and all their
doctrine is poison. Error and darcknes, ye though they be Popes, Bishops,
Abbotes, Eurates and Doctoures of divinity, and though they can rehearse all
the scripture without book, and though they be seen in Greek, Ebrew and
Latin: ye and though they so preach Christ and the passion of Christ that they
make the poor women weep and howl again. For when they They that have not
the law written in their hearts* cannot understand the passion of Christ to
salvation.
come to the point that they should minister Christ's passion unto the
salvation of our souls, there they poison all together, and gloss out the law
that should make us feel our salvation in Christ, and drive us in that point
from Christ, and teach us to put our trust in our own works for the remission
and satisfaction of our sins, and in the Apish play of hypocrites which sell
their merits in steed of Christ's blood and passion*

^o now (dear reader) to believe in Christ's A (...) re peting.
blood for the remission of sinn^ and putchasing of all the good promises that
help to the life to come: and to love the law, and to What the inward baptism
of the soul i^.
long for the life to come, is the inward Baptism of the soul, the Baptism
that only avails in the sight of God, the new generation and image of
Christ, the only keye also to bind and ^owse sinners. The touchstone to try
all doctrines. The lantern and light that scatters and expels the mist
and darkness of all hypocrisy, and a preservative against all error and
heresy: The mother of all good works. The earnest of everlasting life and
title whereby we challenge our inheritance.

And though faith in Christ's blood make the marriage between our soul and
Christ, and is properly the Marriage garment, yea and the sign Thau, that
defends us Thau.
from the s^tyng and power of the evil angels, and is also the rock whereon
Christ's Church is built, and whereon all that is built, stands against all
weather of wind and tempests: yet might the profession of the faith in
Christ's blood, and of the love to the law, and longyng for the life to come,
Faith ^ope, and charity are inseparable.
be called all these things, were malice and froward understanding away:
because that where one of them is, there be all three and where all are not,
there is none of them.

And because that the one is known by the other and is impossible to know any
of them truly, and not be deceived, but in respect and comparison of the other.

For if thou will be sure that thy faith be Faith hope, and charity are known
one by the other.
perfect, then examine thy self whether thou love the law. And in like manner,
if thou will know whether thou love the law aright: then examine thy self
whether thou believe in Christ only, for the remission of sin, and obtaining
the promises made in the Scripture. And even so compare thy hope of the life to
come unto faith and love, and to hatyng the sin of this life: which hate,
the love to the law engendereth in thee. And if they accompany not one
another, all three together, then be sure that all is but hypocrisy.

If you say: seeing faith, love, and hope be three virtues inseparable. Ergo
faith only justifies not. I answer: though they be inseparable, yet they
have seperable and sundry offices, as it is above said of the law and faith.
Faith only which is a sure and an The office of faith.
undoubted trust in Christ, and in the father through him, certifieth the
conscience that the sin is forgeuen and the dampnation and impossibility of
the law taken away (as it is above rehearsed in the conditions of the
covenant.) And with such persuasions mollesieth the heart and makes her love
God again and his law.

And as often as we sin, faith only keeps that we forsake not our profession,
and that love utterly quench not, and hope fail, and only makes the peace
again. For a true beleuer trusts in Christ only, and not in his own works
or ought else, for the remission of sin.

And the office of love is to power out again The office of love.
the same goodness that she has received of God, upon her neighbor, and to be
to him as she feleth Christ to her self. The office of love only is to have
compassion and to bear with her neighbor the burden of his infirmities. And
as it is written. 1. Pet. 4. Operit multitudinem peccatorum, covers the
multitude of sins. That is to say: considers the infirmities and
enterpreteth all to the best, and takes for no sin at all, a thousand
things of which the least were enough (if a man loved not to go to law for,
and to trouble and unquiet an whole town, and sometime an whole realm or two.

And the office of hope is to comfort in adversity The office of hope.
and make patient, that we faint not and fall down under the cross, or cast
it o^ our backs. And thus ye see that these three inseparable in this life
have yet seperable and sundry offices and effects, as heat and drith being
inseparable in the fire, have yet their seperable operations. For the drith
only expels the moystnes of all that is consumed by fire, and heat only
destroys the coldenes. For drith and cold may stand together, and so may
heat and moystnes. It is not all one to say the dryth only, and the dryth
that is alone: nor all one to say, faith only and faith that is alone.

Go to then and desire God to print this profession in thine heart, and to
increase it daily more and more, that thou may be full shape^ like unto the
image of Christ in knowledge and love, and meek thy self and creep low by
the ground, and cleave fast to the rock of this profession, and tie to thy
ship The anchor of our salvation is perfect faith in Christ's blood.
this anchor of faith in Christ's blood, with the gable of love, to cast it out
against all t^pests: and so set up thy sail and get thee to the main sea of
Gods word. And read here the words of Christ with this exposition following,
and thou shall see the law, faith, and works, restored each to his right use
and true meaning. And thereto the clear difference between the spiritual
regiment and the temporal, and shall have an entrance and open way into the
rest of all the scripture. Wherein, and in all other things the spirit of
verity guide thee, and thine understanding.

Amen.
The fifth Chapter of Matthew.
WHen he saw the people, 1.
he went up into a mountain and sat him down, and his Disciples came to him,
and he opened his mouth and taught them saying. Blessed be the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

CHrist here in his first Sermon begins to restore the law of the ten
commanndements unto her right understanding, against the Scribes and Phariseis
which were hipocrites, false Prophets, and false preachers, and had corrupt
the scripture with the leaven of their gloses. And it is not without a great
mystery that Christ begins Pouerth in spirit.
his preaching at poverty in spirit, which is neither beggerie nor against
the possessing of richesse. But a virtue contrary to the vice of
covetousness, the inordinate desire and love of richesse and puttyng trust in
richesse.

Riches is the gift of God given man Riches.
to mayntaine y^ degrees of this world, and therefore not evil: yea and some
must be poor and some rich, if we shall have an order in this world. And God
our father deuideth richesse and poverty among his children according to his
godly pleasure and wisdom. And as Neither riches or poverty exclude, or
assure us of Gods blessing.
richesse does not exclude the from the blessing, so does not poverty certify
thee: But to put thy trust in the living god makes y^ heir thereof. For if
thou trust in the living God: The^ if thou be poor, thou couetest not to be
rich, for thou art certified y^ thy father shall minister unto thee fode and
rayme^t, and be thy defe^der: and if thou have riches thou know that they be
but vanity, and that as thou broughtest them not into the world, so shall thou
not carry them out: and that as they be thine to day, so may they be an other
man's to morrow, and that the favor of God only both gave and also keeps thee
and them, and not thy wisdom or power: and that they, neither ought else ca^
help at need, save the good will of thy heavenly father only. Happy and
blessed then Who are poor in spirit is here pithely declared.
are the poor in spirit: that is to say the rich that have not their
confidence nor consolation in the vanity of their richesse: and the poor that
desire not inordinatly to be rich, but have their trust in the living: God for
fode and rayme^t and for all that partayneth either to the body or the soul:
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

And contrariwise, unhappy and accursed Rich in spirit.
and that with the first and depest of all curses, are the rich in spirit:
that is to say, the covetous that being rich trust in their richesse, or being
poor long for the consolation of richesse, and comfort not their souls with
the promises of their heavenly father, confirmed with y^ blood of their Lord
Christ. For unto them it is harder to enter into y^ kingdom of heaven, then
for a camel to enter through y^ eye, of an nedle. Mar. 10. No they have no part
in the kingdom of Christ, and God Ephe. v. Therefore is it evident why Christ
so diligently warns all his to beware of covetousness, and why he admits
none to be his Disciples except he first forsake all together. For there was
never couetouse person true yet either to God or man.

If a covetous man be chose^ to preach Gods word, he is a false Prophet
immediately. Covetousness is a thing contraris to the word of God and to the
ministers of the same.
If he be of the lay sort, so joins he him self unto the false Prophets, to
persecute the truth. Covetousness is not only above all other lusts, those
thorns that choke yt word of God in them that possess it: But it is also a
deadly enemy to all that interpret Gods word truly. All other vices though
they laugh the^ to scorn that talk godly, yet they can suffer the^ to live
and to dwell in the country. But covetousness cannot rest as long as there is
one that cleaves to Gods word in all the land.

Take heed to thy preacher therefore: By covetousness is a false Prophet chiefly
known.
and be sure, if he be covetous and gape for promotion, that he is a false
Prophet and leaueneth the Scripture, for all his crying fathers fathers, holy
Church, and fiften hundred years, and for all his other holy pretenses.

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. 2.


This mournyng is also in the spirit, and no kin to the sour lokyng Some
cry the world is naught, not ^or their own, and others iniquity: but for
waywardnes they ca^ not enjoy their own lusles.
of hipocrites, nor to the impacie^t weywardnesse of those fleshely which ever
whyne and complain that the world is naught, because they cannot obtain and
enjoy their lusts therein. Neither forbids it always to be merry and and to
laugh, and make good chere now and then, to forget sorrow, that overmuch
heaviness swalow not a man clean up. For the wise man says, sorrow has cost
many their lives.

And Prouer. xvij. an heavy spirit dries up the bones. And Paul commands,
Philip. iiij. to rejoice ever. And Roma. xij. he says rejoice with them that
rejoice, and sorrow with the^ that sorrow, and weep with them that weep, which
seem two contraries.

This mourning is that cross without which was never any Disciple of Godly
mournyng.
Christ or ever shall be. For of what soever state or degree thou be in this
world, if thou profess y^ Gospel, there follows the a cross (as warmenesse
As warmeth acco^panieth the s^nne so follows the cross a true Christian man.
accompanies the son shynyng) under which thy spirit shall groan and mourn
secretly, not only because the world and thine own flesh carry thee away
clean contrary to the purpose of thine heart. But also to see and behold the
wretchedness and misfortunes of thy brethren: for which) because thou love
them as well as thy self) thou shall mourn and sorrow no less the^ for thy
self. Though thou be King or Emperor, yet if thou know Christ and God
through Christ, and entendest to walk in the fight of God, and to minister
thine office truly, thou shall (to keep justice with all) be compelled to do
daily that, which thou art no less loath to do, then if thou should cut of
arm, hand or any other member of thine own body: yea and if thou will follow
the right way, and neither turn on the right hand nor on the left, thou shall
have immediately thine own subjects, thine own servants, thine own Lords,
thine own cou^sellours and thine own Prophets thereto against thee. Unto
whose froward malice and stubburnesse, thou shall be compelled to permit a
thousand things against thy conscience, not able to resist them, at which
thine heart shall blede inwardly, and shall sawse thy sweet soppes which the
world weneth thou have, with sorrows mough and still mournyng, studyeng either
alone or else with a few fre^des secretly night and day, and sighing to God for
help, to mitigate the furious frowardness of them who^ thou art not able to
with stand, that all go not after the will of the ungodly. What was David
compelled to suffer all the days of his life, of his own servants the sons
of Seruia. Beside the mischau^ces of his own children? And how was our king
John K. John.
forsaken of his own Lords, when he would have put a good and godly
reformation in his own land? How was Henry the second compassed in like manner
Henry the second.
of his own Prelates whom he had promoted of naught, with the secret
conspiracy of some of his own temporal Lords with the^? I spare to speak of
ye mournyng of the true preachers, and the poor common people which have none
other help, but the secret hand of God, and the word of his promise.

But they shall be comforted of all their The promise of Gods word, is y^
comfort of y^ afflicted in this world for Christ's sake.
tribulation and their sorrow shall be turned into joy and that infinite and
everlasting in the life to come. Neither are they without comfort here in this
world: for Christ has promised to se^d them a comfortour to be with them for
ever, the spirit of troth which the world knows not. John. xiiij. And they
rejoice in hope (of the comfort to come) Romans xij.

And they overcome through faith, as it is written Hebr. xj. the Saints
through faith overcame kingdoms and obtained the promises. And. i. John. v.
this is the victory that overcomes Faith is our victory
the world, eue^ our faith. But the blind world, neither sees our comfort nor
our trust in God, nor how God thorough faith in his word, helps us and makes
us overcome.

How overcome they (will thou say) that be always persecuted and ever slain?
verily in every battle some of them that win the field, be slain: yet they
leave the victory unto their dear fre^des for whose sakes they took the fight
upon them, and therefore are conquerours, seeing they obtain their purpose and
maynteine that they fought for. The cursed rich of this world which have
their joy and comfort in their riches, have sense the beginning fought against
them, to wede the^ out of the world. But yet in vain. For By persecution and
death, for y^ truths sake, we obtain life and get the victory.
though they have always slain some, yet those that were slain, wanne the
victory for their brethren with death, and ever increased the number of them.
And though they seemed to dye in the sight of the foolish, yet they are in peace
and have obtained that everlasting kingdom for which they fought. And beside
The mourners for righteousness are saved when God takes vengeance on y^ unright
(...) wise.
all this when God plagueth the world for their sin, these y^ mourn and
sorrow are marked with the sign of Thau in their foreheades, and saved from
the plague, that they perish not with the wicked, as thou see Ezech. ix. and
as Lot was delivered from among the Sodomites.

And contrariwise, cursed are they that laugh now* that is to say, which have
their joy, solace, and comfort in their riches: for they shall sorrow and
weep. Luke. vj. And as it was answered the rich man. Luke. xvj. son remember
how that thou receauedst thy good days in thy life time, and Lazarus likewise
evil, And therefore is he comforted and thou tormented.

Blessed are the meek, for they 3.
shall enherite the earth.

By the earth understand all that we Mekenes possesses the earth.
possess in this world, which all, God will keep for us, if we be soft and
me^ke. And whatsoever trouble arise, yet if we will be patient and abide, the
end will go on our side: as it is written in the 36. Psalm. The wicked shall be
weded out, but they that abide the Lords laysure, shall enherite y^ earth. And
again: within a while the wicked shall be gone, thou shall behold the place
where he was, and he shall be away, but the meek or soft shall enherite the
earth. Even as we say, be still and have thy will, and of little meddling
comes much rest: for a patient man shall wear out all his enemies.

It is impossible to dwell in any place where no displeasure should be done
thee. If it be done unwillingly, as when thy neighbors beasts break into thy
corn by some chance against his will, then it is reason that thou be soft
and forgive. If it be done of malice and self will, then with revenging thou
do but with pottering in the fire, make the flame greater, and geuest an
occasion of more evil to be done thee. If any man rail on thee and rebuke
thee, answer not again, and the heat of his malice shall die in it self, and
go out immediately, as fire does when no more wood is laid thereon. If the
wrong that is done, be greater Refer y^ revenge of thy cause to the
Magistrate who^ God appoints to forbid such violence.
then thou art able to bear, trust in God and complain with all meekness
unto the officer that is set of God to forbid such violence. And if ye
Gentlemen that dwell about thee be tyrauntes, be ready to help to fet home
their wood, to plow their land, to bring in their harvest and so forth, and
let thy wife visit my Lady now and then with a couple of fat Hens, or a fat
Capon, and such like, and then thou shall possess all the remnaunt in rest, or
else one quarrel or other may be picked to thee, to make thee quite of all
together.

Choose whether thou will with softness and suffering have God on thy side,
ever to save thee, and to give thee ever enough, and to have a good conscience
and peace on the earth, or with furiousness and impatiencie to have God
against thee, and to be polled a littel and little of all together, and to have
an evil conscience and never rest on earth, and to have thy days shortened
thereto. God has promised if thou be meke and soft and suffer a little
persecution, to give thee not only Hundred fold.
the life to come, but also an hundred fold here in this life: that is to say,
to give thee his own self, and to be thy protector, and minister to thee
ever enough, which may of right be called an hundred fold: and is a treasure
passing the treasure of all Princes.

Finally Christ teaches here how The private person may not aduenge, but the
officer must.
every man must live for him self among them to whom he is a neighbor, and in
private matters in which he is but as a neighbor (though he be a king) and in
which thou can not be to soft. But and if thou be an officer, the^ thou must
be good, kind, and merciful, but not a milkesoppe and negligent. And to whom
thou art a father, them must thou rule, and make obedient, and that with
sharpness, if softness will not be heard, and so in all other offices.

Blessed are they that honger and thirst for righteousness, for they 4.
shall be fulfilled.

Righteousness in this place is not taken for the principal righteousness
Righteousness.
of a Christen man, through which the parson is good accepted before God. For
these viij. points are but doctrine of the fruits and works of a Christen
man, before which the faith must be there: to make righteous without all
deserving of works, and as a tree out of which all such fruits and works
must spryng. Wherefore understand here the outward righteousness before How this
word righteousness ought here to be understood.
the word, and true and faithful dealing each with other, and just executing of
the offices of all manner degrees, and meke obedience of all that are under
power. So that the meaning is: happy are they which not only do their duties
to all men, but also study and help to the uttermost of their power with
word, deed, counsel, and exhorting, that all other deal truly also
according to the degree that every man bears in the world, and be as desirous
to further good order and righteous dealyng, as the hungry and thirsty be
desirous to eat and drink.

And note that it is not for naught that he says hunger and thirst. For except
thy soul hunger and thirst for this righteousness of her new nature, as the
body does for meat and drink of his old nature, the devil and the children
of this world (which cannot suffer Monks.
that a man either deal truly himself, or help other) will so resist thee,
Monks why they run into Religion.
plague thee, and so weary thee, that thou had lever of very mystrust and
desperation, that thy state should be better, to forsake all and make thy self
a Monk or a Friar, yea and to ru^ne into a strange country, and leave all thy
friends, then to abide in the world, and to let it choose whether it will sink or
swim.

But to comfort us, that we faint not, or be weary of well doing, Christ
promises that all that have this thyrst and honger, shall have their lust
satisfied, and be translated into a kingdom, where none unrighteousness is,
besides that thou shall here at length see many come to the right way and help
with thee, and many things that cannot be all together mended, yet somewhat
bettered and more tolerable, so that all righteousness shall not be quenched.

And contrariwise cursed be all they that are full, as Luke in the vj. says,
Luc. vi.
that is to say, the hypocrites which to avoid all labor, sorrow, care,
combraunce and suffering with their brethren, get them to dens, to live at
Monks be cursed.
rest and to fill their bellies, the wealth of other me^ not regarded. No, it
were a grief to them that other were better, that they alone may be taken for
holy, and that whosoever will to heaven, must buy it of them, yea they be so
full, that they prefer them selves before poor sinners, and look as narowly
on them as the Pharisey did on the Publican^, thanking God that he alone was
good, and the other evil. Cursed are they yet for all their fullness, for they
shall hunger with everlasting hunger, where none shall give them to eat, nor
they have any refreshing of their pains.

Blessed be the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 5.


To be merciful, is to have compassion To be mercyful, what it is: and how
many ways mercy may be showed.
and to feel an other ma^s disease, and to mourn with the^ that mourn, and
suffer with them that suffer, and to help and succor them that are in
tribulation and adversity, and to comfort them with good counsel and wholesome
instruction and loving words. And to be merciful, is lovingly to forgive them
that offended thee, as soon as they knowledge their misdoyng and ask thee
mercy. To be merciful, is patiently long to abide the conversion of sinners
with a lusty courage and hope that God will at the last convert them, and in
the mean time to pray instantly for them, and ever when he sees an occasion,
to exhort the^, warn them, monishe the^, and rebuke them. And to be merciful,
is to interpret all to the best, and to look through the fingers at many
things, and not to make a grievous sin of every small trifle, and to suffer
and forbear in his own cause the malice of them that will not repent nor be a
known of their wickedness, as long as he can suffer it, and as long as it
ought to be suffered, and when he can no longer, then to complain to them that
have authority to forbid wrong and to punish such evil doers.

But the hypocrites clean contrary Monks.
condemn all me^ for grievous sinners, save them only that buy their holiness
of them. And because they will suffer with no man, they get them to silence.
And because they will help no man, all that they have (say they) pertayneth to
the Covent, and is none of theirs. And if they be offended, they Covent.
will be avenged immediately. And to clooke, that they should not seem to
adue^ge themselves, the matter (say they) pertayneth to God and holy Church, or
to some Saint, or to one or other holy thing: as if thou smite one of them on
the one cheke, he will turn to thee the other yer he will aduenge himself. But
the injury of the holy oil wherewith he O^le.
was anointed, that must he aduenge, and that with a spiritual punishment,
Holy oil must be aduenged.
that thou must be accursed as black as a Colyer, and delivered to Satan. And
if thou come not in and ask absolution, and to offer thy self to penance and
to paying thereto, they will not suffer till the Devil fetch thee. But will
deliver thee to the fire in the mean time. And all for zeal of righteousness
(say they.)

O hypocrites, the zeal of righteousness Zeal of righteousness what it is.
is to hunger and thyrst for righteousness, as it is above described: that is,
to care and study and to do the uttermost of thy power, that all things went
in the right course and due order both through all degrees of the temporaltie
and also of the spirituality, and to ieoparde life and goods thereon.

All the world can bear record Car^.
what pain ye take and how ye care for the temporal common wealth, that How
the spirituality* care for the temporal common wealth.
all degrees therein did, and had their duty: and how ye put your lives in
adventure to preach the truth: and to inform Lords and Princes, and to cry
upon them to fear God and to be learned, and to minister their offices truly
unto their subjects, and to be mercyful and an example of virtue unto them.
And how help ye that youth were brought up in learning and virtue, and y^ the
poor were provided for of food and raiment etc. And how provide ye that your
Priests be all learned, and preach and do their duties truly every man in his
Parish? how provide ye that sects arise not to polle the people and lead them
out of the way* under a color of long praying and hypocritish holiness,
living them selves idle and being utterly unto the common wealth improfitable?
who smells not y^ sweet odoure of chastity that is among you? What
righteousness is in your sa^ctuaries, and what indifferent equity is in all
your exemptions, privileges and liberties? By your works we judge you and
your zeal to righteousness, and not by your sophistical subtle reasons, with
which ye would claw our ears, bleare our eyes, and beguile our wits, to take
your tyrannous covetous crudelitie for the zeal of righteousness.

Finally he that will not be merciful, to be blessed of God and to obtain As
thou (...)(...), ^o shall (...) ob(...) mercy in y^ life to come.
mercy of him, both hear and in the life to come, let him be accursed with the
vnmercyful, and to him be judgment without mercy, according to y^ words of S.
James in the second chapter of his Epistle.

Blessed be the pure in heart, for 6.
they shall see God.

That which enters into a man defiles not a man. But y^ things that defile a
man, proceed first out of his heart, as ^hou may see Math. xv. Thence come out
evil thoughts (says Christ) as murder, adultery, fornication, theft, false
witnessynges and blasphemies. The filthiness of the heart, what.
These are the things that make a man foul. A man then is not foul in the
sight of God, till his heart be foul. And the filthiness of the heart are
thoughts that study to break Gods commandments. Wherefore the pureness of
the The pureness of the heart, what.
heart is the consenting and studious purpose to keep the law of God, and to
mean truly in all thy words and works, and to do them with a true intent.

It follows then that thou may be pure hearted and therewith do all that God
has commanded or not forbidden. Thou may be pure hearted and have a wife and
get children, be a judge and condemn to death them that have deserved it, hang
or behead evil doers, after they be by a just process conde^pned. Thou may
be pure hearted, and do all the drudge in the world. Lot was pure hearted among
the Sodomites. Nicodem^s being in the council among them that conspired the
death of Christ was pure hearted and consented not with them to the death of
that innocent.

If the law be written in thine heart The end of the law (...), to iusti^ all
that ^leue.
it will drive thee to Christ, which is the end of the law to justify all that
believe Romans x. And Christ will show thee his father. For no man sees the
father but the son, and he to whom the son will show him Luke. x. If thou
believe in Christ, that he is thy Savior: that faith will lead thee in
immediately, and show thee God with a lovely and amiable countenance, and make
thee feel, and see how that he is thy father, al together merciful to thee,
and at one with thee, and thou his son and highly in his favor and grace,
and sure that thou please him, when thou do an hundred things which some
holy people would suppose them selves defiled, if they should but think on
the^. And to see God is the blessing of a pure heart.

Impure and unclean hearted then are all they that study to break Gods Impure
hearted, who are.
commandments. Impure hearted are all that believe not in Christ to be
justified by him. Impure hearted are all hypocrites yt do their work for a
false purpose: either for praise, profit, or to be justified thereby, which
painted sepulchers (as Christ calls them) can never see God, or be sure that
they be in the state of grace, and that their works be accepted because they
have not Gods word with them, but clean against them.

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of 7.
God.

To inherit this blessing, it is not Peacemaking, what.
only required that thou have peace in thy self, and that thou take all to
the best, and be not offended lightly and for every small trifle, and always
ready to forgive* nor sow no discord, nor aduenge thine own wrong: But also
that thou be fervent and diligent to make peace and to go between, where thou
know or hear malice and envy to be, or see bate or strife to arise
between person and person, and that thou leave nothing unsought, to set them at
one.

And though Christ here speak not of the temporal sword, but teaches how
every man shall live for him self toward his neighbor: yet Princes (if
Princes what they ought to (...) yet they make war.
they will be Gods children) must not only give no cause of war, nor begin
any, but also (though he have a just cause) suffer him self to be entreated,
if he that gave the cause repent, and must also seek al ways of peace before
he fight. Howbeit, when all is sought, and nothing will help, then he ought
and is bound to defend his land and subjects, and in so doing he is a
peacemaker, as well as when he causes thieves and murderers to be punished
for their evil doing and breakyng of the common peace of his land and
subjects.

If thou have peace in thy self and When thou may assure thy self to be y^
son and heir of God.
love the peace of thy brethren after this manner, so is God through Christ at
peace with thee, and thou his beloved son and heir also.

Moreover if the wrong done thee, be greater, then thou may bear: as when
thou art a person, not for thy self only. But in respect of other, in what
soever worldly degree it be, and have an office committed thee: then (when thou
have warned with all good manner him that did it, and none amendment will be had)
keep peace in thine heart and love him still, and complain to them that are set
to reform such things, and so art thou yet a peacemaker and still the son of
God. But if thou aduenge thy self or desire more then that such wrongs be
forbidden, Vengeance pertayneth to God only.
thou sinnest against god, in taking the authority of God upon thee without
his commandment. God is father over all, and is (of right) judge over all his
children, and to him only partayneth all adue^ging. Who therefore without his
commandment aduengeth either with heart or hand, the same does cast him self
into the hands of the sword, and loses the right of his cause.

And on the other side, cursed be the peacebreakers, picquarels, whisperers,
backbyters, sowers of discord, dispraysers of the^ that be good to bring the^
out of favor, interpreters to evil that is done for a good purpose, finders
of faults where none is, stirrers up of Princes to battle and war: and
above all cursed be they that falsely belly the true preachers of Gods word, to
bring them into hate, and to shed their blood wrongfully for hate of the truth.
For all such are children of the devil.

Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for 8.
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

If the faith of Christ and law of God, in which two all righteousness is
contained, In ye faith of Christ and law of God* all o^r righteousness is
contained.
be written in thine heart: that is, if thou believe in Christ to be justified
from sin or for remission of sin, and co^sentest in thine heart to the law
that it is good, holy, and just and thy duty to do it and submittest thy self
so to do, and thereupon go forth and testifiest that faith and law of
righteousness openly unto the world in word, and deed. Then will Satan stir
up his members against thee, and thou shall be persecuted on every side. But be
of good comfort and faynte not. Call to mind the saying of Paul. ij. Timo.
iij. how all that will live godly in Christ Jesus. shall suffer persecution.
Remember how all the Prophets that went before thee, were so dealt with Luke.
vj. Remember the examples of the Apostles, and of Christ him self, and that
the Disciple is no better then his Maistee, and that Christ admits no
disciple which not only leaves not all, but also takes his cross to. We be
not called to a soft living and to peace in this world. But Peace. The peace of
Christ is a peace of conscience.
unto peace of conscience in God our father through Jesus Christ, and to war
in this world.

Moreover comfort thy self with the hope of the blessing of the inheritance
To suffer with Christ in this world, is to be glorified with him in the world
to come.
of heaven, there to be glorified with Christ, if you here suffer with him. For
if we be like Christ here in his passions, and bear his image in soul and
body, and fight manfully, that Satan blot it not out, and suffer with Christ
for bearyng record to righteousness: the^ shall we be like him in glory. S.
John. iij. of his Epistle: yet appears not what we shall be. But we know, that
when he appears, we shall be like him. And Paul Phil. iij. our conversation is
in heaven, whence we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ which shall
change our vile bodies and make the^ like his glorious body.

It is an happy thing to suffer for righteousness sake, but not for
unrighteousness. For what praise is it (says Peter in the second of his first
epistle) though ye suffer, when ye be buffeted for your offenses. Wherefore in
ye fourth of the same he says, see that none of you suffer as a murderer or a
thief, or an evil doer, or a busy body in other men's matters. Such suffering
glorifieth not God, nor thou art thereby heir of heaven. Beware therefore that
thou deserve not that thou suffer. But if thou do: then beware much more of
them that would bear thee in hand, bow that such suffering should be
satisfaction of thy sins and a deserving Pain. No (...) pain ca^ be a
satisfaction to God (...) Christ's passion.
of heaven. No, suffering for righteousness (though heaven be promised thereto)
yet does it not deserve heaven, nor yet make satisfaction for the foresinnes:
Christ does both twain. But and if thou repent and believe in Christ for the
remission of sin, and then confess, not only before God, but also open
before all that see thee suffer, how that thou have deserved that thou
suffrest, for breaking the good and righteous law of thy father, and then
take to^ punishment patiently, as an wholesome medicine to heal thy flesh
that it sin no more, and to fear thy brethren that they fall not into like
offense, as Moses teaches every where: then as thy patience in suffering is
pleasant in the sight of thy brethren which behold thee, pity thee, and
suffer with thee in their hearts, even so is it in the sight of God, and it is
to thee a sure token that thou have true faith and true repentance.

And as they be blessed which suffer for righteousness: even so are they
accursed which run away and let it be trodden under the feet, and will not
suffer for the faith of their Lord and law of their father, nor stand by
their neighbors in their just causes.

Blessed are ye, when they revile you, and persecute you, and say all 9.
manner of evil sayings against you for my sake, and yet lie. Rejoice, and be
glad, for your reward is great in heaven. Eue^ so verily they persecuted the
Prophets that were before you.

Here see thou the uttermost what a Christen man must look for. It is not
enough to suffer for righteousness: But that no bitterness or poison be left
out of thy cup, thou shall be reviled and rayled upon: and even when thou art
condemned to death then be What the most cruel persecution is.
excommunicat and delivered to Satan, deprived of the fellowship of holy
Church, the company of y^ Angels, and of thy part in Christ's blood, and shall
be cursed down to hell, defied, detested, and execrat with all the blasphemous
raylinges that the poysonfull heart of hypocrites can think or imagine, and
shall see before thy face when thou go to thy death, that all the world is
persuaded and brought in belief that thou have said and done that thou never
thoughtest, and that thou dyest for that thou art as giltlesse of, as the
child that is unborn.

Well, though iniquity so highly prevail, and the truth, for which thou
die, be so low kept under and be not once known before the world, in so
much that it seems rather to be hindered by thy death, then furthered (which
is of all griefs the greatest) yet let not thine heart fail thee, neither
despair, as though God had forsaken thee, or loved thee not. But comfort thy
self with old ensamples, how God has suffered all his old friends to be so
entreated, and also his only and dear son Jesus. Whose ensample Set the
example of Christ before thee.
above all other set before thine eyes, because thou art sure he was beloved
above all other, that thou doubt not, but thou art beloved also, and so much
the more beloved, the more thou art like to the image of his ensample in
suffering.

Did not the hipocrites watch him in all his sermons, to trappe him in his own
words? was he not subtelly apposed, whether it were lawful to pay tribute to
Caesar? were not all his words wrong reported? were not his miracles ascribed
to Belsebud? said they not, he was a Samaritane and had a devil in him? was he
not called a breaker of the Saboth, a wine drinker, a friend of Publicans and
sinners? did he ought wherewyth no fault was found, and that was not
interpreted to be done for an evil purpose? was not the pretense of his death
the destroying of the temple, to bring him into the hate of all men? was he not
thereto accused of treason, that he forbad to pay tribute to Caesar: and that he
moved the people to insurrection? Rayled they not on him in the bitterest of
all his passion, as he hanged on the cross, saying: save thy self thou that
sauest other: come down from the cross and we will believe in thee: fie wretch
that destroyest yt temple of God.

Yet he was beloved of God, and so art thou. His cause came to light also, and
so shall thine at the last: yea and thy reward is great in heaven with him, for
thy deep suffering.

And on the other side, as they be cursed which leave righteousness destitute
Cursed.
and will not suffer therewyth: Most accursed, who?
so are they most accursed which know the truth, and yet not only flee
therefrom because they will not suffer: But also for lucre, become the most
cruel enemies thereof, and most subtle persecutors, and most falssy lie
thereon also.

Finally though God when he promises to bless our works, do bind Works
justify no^.
us to work if we will obtain the blessing or promise: yet must we beware of
this pharesaicall pestilence, to think that our works did deserve the
promises. For whatsoever God commands us to do, that is our duty to do,
though there were no such promise made to us at all. The promise therefore
comes not of the deserving of the worker (as though God had need of ought
that we could do) but of the pure mercy of God, to make us the more wylling to
do that is our duty. etc. For if when we had done all that God commands us
to do, he then gave us up into the hands of tyrauntes. and killed us, sent us
to purgatory (which me^ so greatly fear) or to hell, and all the Angels of
heaven with us, he did us no wrong nor were unrighteous for ought that we or
they could challenge of deserving, howsoever that God uses his creatures, he
ever abides righteous: till Not the worker, but ye pure mercy of God is cause
of the promise made unto.
thou can prove that after he has bound him self with his own word of
mercy, he then break promise with them that keep covenant with him. So now,
if naught were promised, naught could we challenge, whatsoever we did. And
therefore the promise comes of the goodness of the promiser only, and not of
the deserving of those works, of which God has no need, and which were no
less our duty to do, though there were no such promise.

Ye be the salt of the earth. But if the salt be waxen unsavory, what can be
salted therewith? It is henceforth nothing worth. But to be cast out, and to be
trodden under foot of men.

The office of an Apostle and the preacher is to salt, not only the corrupt
The office of a true preacher.
manners and conversation of earthly people, but also the roten heart within and
all that springs out thereof: their natural reason, their will, their
understanding and wisdom: yea and their faith and belefe and all that they
have imagined without Gods word, concerning righteousness justifying,
satisfaction and seruyng of God. And the nature of salt is to byte, frete, and
make smarte. And the sick pacientes of the world are marvelous impacie^t: so
that though with great pain they ca^ suffer It is a leopardous thing to salt
hypocrisy.
their gross sins to be rebuked under a fashion, as in a parable a far of,
yet to have their righteousness their holiness and serving of God and his
Saints, disalowed, improued and condemned for damnable and deuilish, that may
they not abide. In so much that you must leave thy salting or else be prepared to
suffer again: even to be called a rayler, seditious, a maker of discord, and
a troubler of the common peace, yea a schismatike and an heretic also, and to
be lied upon, that thou have done and said that thou never thoughtest, and the^
to be called coram nobis, and to sing a new song and forswear salting, or else
to be sent after thy fellows that are gone before, and the way thy master went.

True preaching is a salting that Salt.
stirs up persecution, and an office Who is mete to salt.
that no man is mete for, save he that is seasoned himself before with
poverty in spirit, softness, meekness, patience, mercifulness, pureness of
heart, and hunger of righteousness, and lookyng for persecution also: and has
all his hope, comfort and solace in the blessing only, and in no worldly thing.

Nay will some say, a man might A true preacher of gods word must use no
parcialitie for fear of persecution.
preach long enough without persecution, yea and get favor to, if he would not
meddle with the Pope, Bishops, Prelates, and holy ghostly people that live in
contemplation and solitarines, nor with great men of the world. I answer,
true preaching is saltyng, and all that is corrupt must be salted. And those
persons are of all other most corrupt: and therefore may not be left untouched.

The Popes pardons must be rebuked, the abuse of the Mass, of the Sacraments,
and of all the ceremonies must be rebuked and salted. And selling of merits
and of prayers must be salted. The abuse of fasting, and of pilgrimage must be
salted. All idolatry and false faith must be rebuked. And those Friars that
teach men to believe in S. Fraunces coat, how that they shall never come in
hell or purgatory, if they be buried therein, may not be passed over with
silence.

The pain and grief of salting made Monks why they run to cloystures.
Monks flee to their cloysture. Nay (say they) we went thither of pure
denotion to pray for the people. Yea but for all that the more ye increase, and
ye more ye multiply your prayers, the worse the world is. That is not our fault
(say they) but theirs, that they dispose not themselves but continue in sin,
and so are unapt to receive the influence of our prayers. O hipocrits, if ye
weee true salt and had good hearts and loved your neighbors (if dead men be
neighbors to them that are alive) and would come out of your dens and take
pain to salt and season them, ye should make a great many of them so apt, that
your prayers might take effect. But now seeing as ye say, they be so unsavory
that your prayers be to the^ improfitable, though their goods be to you
profitable, and yet ye have no compassion to come out and ^alt the^, it is
manifest that ye love not them, but theirs, and that ye pray not for them, but
under the color of praying mock them and rob them.

Finally salt which is the true understanding By salt is vndersteod the true
v^de^^tandin^ of the ^as of faith, of wo^kes. etc*
of the law, of faith, and of the intent of all works, has in you lost her
virtue, neither be there any so unsavory in the world as year, nor any that so
sore kick against true saltyng as ye: and therefore are ye to be cast out and
trodden under foot and despised of all men, by the righteous judgment of God.

If salt have lost his saltness, it is good for nothing but to be trodden under
Spirituality: why (...) be dispi^^d.
foot of men. That is, if the preacher which for his doctrine is called salt,
have lost ye nature of salt: that is to say, his sharpness in rebukyng all
unrighteousness, all natural reason, natural wit and understanding, and all
trust and confidence in what soever it be, save in the blood of Christ, he is
condemned of God, and disalowed of all them that cleave to the truth. In what
case stand they then that have benefices and preach not? verily though they
stand at the altar, yet are they excommunicat and cast out of the living Church
of almighty God.

And what if the doctrine be not true salt? verily then is it to be trodden
under foot: As must all werish and unsavory Ceremonies must be salted.
ceremonies which have los^e their significatio^s, and not only teach not,
and are become unprofitable and do no more service to man: But also have
obtained authority as God in the heart of man, that man serves them and
puts in them the trust and confidence that he should put in God his maker
thorough Jesus Christ his redemer. Are the institutions of man better then
Gods? yea are Gods ordinances better now the^ in the old time? The Prophets
trod under foot and defied the temple of God and the sacrifices of God and
all ceremonies that God had ordained, with sastinges and prayinges, and all
that the people perverted and committed idolatry with. We have as strait a
commandment to salt and rebuke all ungodliness as had ye Prophets. Will
they then have their ceremonies honorably spoken of? then let them restore
them to the right use, and put the salt of the true meaning and significations
of them to the^ again. But as they be now used, none that loves Christ, ca^
speak honorably of them. What true Christen man can give honor to that that
takes all honor from Christ? who can give honor to that that slays the
soul of his brother and robs his heart of that trust and co^^^de^ce which he
should give to his Lord that has bought him with his blood*

Ye are the light of the world. A City that is set on an hill, cannot be hid,
neither do men light a candle. And put it under a bushel, but on a
ca^dlesticke, and so gives it light to all that are in the house. Let your
light so shine before me^, that they may see your good works, and praise your
father that is in heaven.

Christ goes forth and describes y^ office of an Apostle and true preacher by
another likeness, calling them as before the salt of the earth. Eue^ so here
the light of the world^ signifiyng thereby that all ye doctrine, all the wisdom
and hie knowledge of the world, whether it were Philosophy of natural
conc^usions, of manners and virtue, or of laws of righteousness, whether it were
of the holy scripture and of God Darcknes, all knowledge is darcknes, (...) the
knowledge of Christ's blood shed^ing be in the heart.
himself, was yet but a darcknes, until the doctrine of his Apostles came:
that is to say, until the knowledge of Christ came, how that he is the
sacrifice for our sins, our satisfaction, our peace, atonement and
redemption, our life thereto and resurrection. Whatsoever holiness, wisdom,
virtue, perfectness or righteousness is in ye world among men, howsoever
perfect and holy they appear, yet is all dampnable darcknesse, except the
right knowledge of Christ's blood be there first, to i^ftifie the heart before
all other holiness.

An other conclusion. As a city built on a hill can not be hid, no more can
the light of Christ's Gospel. Let the world rage as much as it will, yet it
will shine on their sore eyes whether they be content or no.

An other conclusion: as men light not a candle to whelme it under a busshell,
but to put it on a candlestick to light all that are in the house: even so the
light of Christ's Gospel may nor be hid nor made a several thing, as though
it pertayned to some certain holy persons only. Nay it is the light of the
whole world, and pertains to all men, and therefore may not be made several.
It is a madness that diverse men say, the lay people may not know Lay. The
lay ought to have the Gospel.
it: except they can prove that the lay people be not of the world. Moreover
it will not be hid, but as the lightning that breaks out of the clouds,
shyneth over all, even so does the Gospel of Christ. For where it is truly
received, there it purifieth the heart, and makes the person to consent to the
laws of God, and to begin a new and a godly living, fashioned after Gods
laws, and without all dissimulation. And then it will kendle so great Gospel.
The property of y^ Gospel.
love in him toward his neighbor, that he shall not only have compassion on
him in his bodily adversity, but much more pity him over the blyndenes of his
soul, and to minister to him Gospel. The tr^e Gospel is not hid in dens.
Christ's Gospel. Wherefore if they say, it is here or there, in Saint Fraunces
coat, or Dominickes and such like, and that if thou will put on that coat,
thou shall find it there it is falfe. For if it If y^ spiritualty were a light
as they ought to be, they would make them ^ues pore to make other rich: but
they make other poor and themselves rich.
were there, thou should see it shine abroad though thou creptst not into a
sell or a monks coule, as thou see y^ lightning without crepyng into the
clouds, yea their light would so shine that men should not only see y^ light
of the Gospel, but also their good works, which would as fast come out, as
they now run in. In so much that y^ should see the^ make the^sel es pore,
to help other as they now make other poor to make themselves rich.

This light and salt pertayned not then to the Apostles, and now to our Kings
ought to be learned.
Bishops and spirituality only. No it pertayneth to the temporal men also.
For all kings and all rulers are bound to be salt and light, not only in
example of living, but also in teaching of doctrine unto their subjects, as well
as they be bound to punish evil doers. Does not the scripture testify that
king David was chosen to be a shepeheard and to feed his people with Gods
word. It is an evil scholemaster that cannot but beat only. But it is a
good scholemaster that so teaches that few need to be beaten. This salt and
light therefore partayne to the temporaltie also, and that to every member of
Christ's Church: so that every man ought to be salt and light to other. The
order how every man may be a preacher, and how not.


Every man then may be a common preacher thou will say, and preach every where
by his own authority. Nay verily: No man may yet be a common preacher save he
that is called and chosen thereto by the common ordinance of the congregation,
as long as the preacher teaches the true word of God. But every private man
ought to be in virtuous living, both light and salt to his neighbor: in so
much that the poorest ought to strive to ouerrun the Bishop, and to preach to
him in ensample of living. Moreover every man ought to preach in word and
deed unto his household, and to them that are under his governance. etc. And
None ought to preach: ^ly, but such as are admitted by y^ ordinance of the
congregation.
though no man may preach openly save he that has the office committed unto
him, yet ought every man to endeavor himself, to be as well learned as the
preacher, as nie as it is possible. And every man may privately inform his
neighbor, yea and the preacher and Bishop to, if need be. For if the preacher
preach wrong, then may any man whatsoever he be rebuke him, first privately,
and then (if that help not) to complain further. And when all is proved,
according to the order of charity, and yet none amendment had: the^ ought
every man that ca^ to resist him, and to stand by Christ's doctrine, and to
ieoparde life and all for it. Look on the old ensamples and they shall teach
thee.

The Gospel has an other fredome with her then the temporal regiment.
Spiritual and temporal req^ do biffer.
Though every man's body and goods be under y^ king, do he right or wrong, yet
is the authority of Gods word free and above the king: so that the worst in
the realm may tell ye king, if he do him wrong, that he does naught and
otherwise the^ God has commanded him, and so warn him to avoid the wrath of
God which is the pacient aduenger of all unrighteousness. May I then and ought
also, to resist father and mother and all temporal power with Gods word, when
they wrongfully do or command that hurts or kills the body: and have I no
power to resist the Bishop or preacher that with false doctrine slays the
souls, for which my master and Lord Christ has shed his blood: Be we
otherwise under our Bishops then Christ and his Apostles, and all the other
Prophets were under the Bishops of the old law? Nay verily: and therefore may
we and also ought to do as they did, and to answer as the Apostles did. Act.
v. Oportet magis obedire deo Every man must defend Christ's doctrine in (...)
own person.
quam hominibus. We must rather obey God then men. In the Gospel every man is
Christ's Disciple and a person for himself to defend Christ's doctrine in his
own person. The faith of the Bishop will not help me, nor the bishops
keeping the law is sufficient for me. But I must believe in Christ for the
remission of all sin, for mine own self and in mine own person. No more is
the Bishops or preachers defending Gods word enough for me, But I must
defend it in mine own person, and ieopard life and all thereon when I see
need and occasion.

I am bound to get worldly substance for my self and for mine household with
my just labor and somewhat more for the^ that cannot, to save my neighbors
body. And am I not more bound to labor for Gods word to have thereof in store,
to save my neighbors soul? And when is it so much time to resist with Gods
word and to help, as when they which are believed to minister the true word, do
slay the souls with false doctrine, for covetousness sake? He that Whose
refuses tad^ for Christ's sake, ca^ not be the disciple of Christ.
is not ready to give his live for the maintenance of Christ's doctrine
against hypocrites, with what soever name or title they be disguised, y^ same
is not worthy of Christ nor can be Christ's Disciple, by the very words and
testimony of Christ. Nevertheless we must use wisdom, patience, mekenes and
a discrete process after the due order of charity in our defendyng the word
of God, least while we go about to amend our Prelates we make the^ worse. But
when we have proved all that charity binds us and yet in vain: then we must
come forth openly and rebuke their wickedness in the face o^ the world and
ieoparde life and all thereon.

Ye shall not think that I am come to destroy the law or the propheres, no, I
am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them. For truly I say unto you,
till heaven and earth perish, there shall not one jot or one title of the law
escape, till all be fulfilled.

A little before Christ calls his Disciples the light of the world, and the
salt of the earth, and that because of their doctrine, wherewith they should
lighten the blind understanding of man, and with true knowledge drive out y^
false opinions and sophistical persuasions of natural reason, and deliver the
Scripture out of y^ captivity of false gloses: which the hypocritishe
Phariseis had p^^ched thereto: and ^o out of the light of trueknowledge, to
stir up a new living, and to salt and season the corrupt manners of the old
blind conversation. For where false doctrine, corrupt opinions, and sophistical
gloses reign in False doctrine causes* (...) works.
the wit and understanding: there is the living deuilish in the sight of God,
how soever it appear in the sight of the blind world. And on the other side,
True doctrine is cause of good works.
where the doctrine is true and perfect, there follows godly living of
necessity. For out of the inward believe of the heart, sloweth* the outward
conversation of the members. He that believes that he ought to love his enemy,
shall never cease fightyng against his own self, till he have weeded a^
ra^cour and malice out of his heart. But he that believes it not, shall put a
visor of hypocrisy on his face, till he got opportunity to aduenge him self.

And here he begins to teach them to be that light, and that salt of which
he spoke, and says. Though the Scribes and Phariseis bear the people in hand,
that all I do, is of the devil, and accuse me of breakyng the law and the
Prophets (as they afterward rayled on the Apostles, that they drove y^ people
from good works, through preaching the justifying and righteousness of faith)
yet see that ye my Disciples* be not of that belefe. For heaven and earth shall
sooner perish, then one ^o^^ or the of the law should be put out. I come not to
destroy the law, but to repair it only, and to make it go upright where it
halteth: and eue^ to make crooked straight, and rough smoth, as John the Baptist
does in the wilderness, and to teach the true understanding of the law. Without
me the law cannot be fulfilled, nor ever could. For though the law were given
by Moses, yet grace Grace and truth thorough Jesus Christ.
and verity: that is to say, the true understanding and power to love it and
of love to fulfill it, comes and ever came through faith in me.

I do but only wype away the filthy and roten Gloses wherewith the Scribes
and the Phariseis have smered the law, and the Prophets, and rebuke their
damnable living which they have fashioned, not after the law of God, but after
their own sophistical gloses feigned to mock out the law of God, and to
beguile the whole world, and to lead them in blyndnesse. And that the Scribes
and Phariseis falsely belie me how that I go about to destroy the law, and to
set the people at a fleshly liberty, and to make them first disobedient, and
to despise their spiritual Prelates, and then to rise against the te^porall
rulers and to make all common, and to give license to sin unpunished: comes
only of pure malice, hate, envy, and furious impaciencie, that their visures
are plucked from their faces and their hypocrisy discovered. Howbeit what I
teach and what my learning is concerning the law, ye shall shortly hear and
that in few words.

Who soever breaks one of these least commandments and teach men so, shall be
called the least in the kingdom of heaven. But he that does them and teaches
the^, the same shall be great in the kingdom of heaven.

Whosoever studieth to destroy one of the commandments following, which are
yet the least and but childish things in respect of the perfect doctrine that
shall hereafter be showed, and of the mysteries yet hid in Christ: and Gloses.
They that destroy the law of God with gloses must be cast out.
teach other men even so, in word or ensample, whether openly or under a
color, and through false gloses of hypocrisy: that same doctor shall all they
of the kingdom of heaven abhor and despise, and cast him out of their
company, as a sething pot does cast up her foam and scome and purge her self.
So fast shall they of the kingdom of heaven cleave unto the pure law of God
without all men's gloses.

But whosoever shall first fulfill the^ himself, and then teach other, and set
all his study to the furtheraunce and mayntaining of them, that doctor shall
all they of the kingdom of heaven have in price, and follow him and seek him
out, as does an Egle her pray, and cleave to him as burres. For these
commandments are but the very law of Moses (the draffe of the Phareseis
gloses cleansed out) interpreted according to the pure word of God, and as the
open text compels to understand them, if ye look diligently thereon.

The kingdom of heaven take for The Church.
the congregation or church of Christ. And to be of the kingdom of heaven, is
to know God for our father, and Christ for our Lord and savior from all sin.
And to enter into this kingdom it is impossible except the heart of men be to
keep the commandments Law.
of God purely, as it is written. John. vij. if any man will obey his will,
that Except a man love Gods law: ^e cannot understand the doctrine of Christ.
is to say, the will of the father that sent me (says Christ) he shall know of
the doctrine: whether it be of God, or whether I speak of mine own head. For
if thine heart be to do the will of God, which is his commandments: he will
give thee a pure eye, both to discern the true doctrine from the false, and
the true Doctor from the howlyng hypocrite. And therefore he says.

For I say unto you, except your The righteousness of Phariseis.
righteousness excede the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye can
not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

The righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis can not enter into the kingdom
of heaven. The kingdom of heaven is the true knowledge of God and Christ: Ergo
the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis neither knows God nor Christ.
He that is willing to obey the will of God, understands the doctrine of
Christ, as it is proved above: the Scribes and the Phariseis understand not the
doctrine of Christ: Ergo, they have no will nor lust to obey the will of God. To
obey the will of God, is to seek the glory of God (for the glory of a master
is the meek obedience of his servants, the glory of a Prince is the humble
obedience of his subjects, the glory of an husband is the chaste obedience of
his wife, the glory of a father is the loving obedience of his children) the
Scribes and the Phariseis have no lust to obey y^ will of God: Ergo, they seek
not the glory of God. Glory?
Furthermore the Scribes and the Phariseis seek their own glory, they that He
that seeks his own glory, teaches his own doctrine and not his masters.
seek their own glory, preach their own doctrine, Ergo, the Scribes and the
Phariseis preach their own doctrine. The mayor thou have Math. xxiij the
Scribes and Phariseis do all their works to be seen of men: they love to sit
uppermost at feasts and to have ye chief seats in the Synagoges, and
salutations in the open markets, and to be called Rabbi. And ye minor follows
the text above rehearsed John vij. he that speaks of himself or of his own
head, seeks his own glory: that is to say, he that preaches his own
doctrine is ever known by seeking his own glory: so that it is a general
rule to know that a man preaches his own doctrine, if he seek his own glory.

Some man will happily say: the Scribes and Phariseis had no other law then Moses
and the Prophets nor any other Scripture: and grounded their sayings thereon.
That is truth: how the^ preached they their own doctrine? verily it follows
in the said seventh of John. He that seeks the glory of Glory* he that sek^
came glory alters his ma^s message.
him that sent him, the same is true and there is no unrighteousness in him:
that is to say, he will do his masters message truly, and not alter it. Where
contrariwise he that seeks his own glory, will be false (when he is sent)
and will alter his masters message, to turn his masters glory unto his own
self. Even so did the Scribes and Phariseis alter the word of God for their
own profit and glory. And when Gods Word. Gods word altered is not his word.
word is altered with false gloses, it is no more Gods word. As when God
says, love thy neighbor, and thou put to thy leue^ and say: if my
neighbor do me no hurt nor say me any, I am bound to love him, but not to give
him at his need my goods which I have gotten with my sore labor. Now this is
thy law and not Gods. Gods law is pure and single: love thy neighbor, whether
he be good or bad. And by love god means, to help at need. To love is to
help at ^eede.
Now when God byddeth thee to get thy living and somewhat over to help him that
cannot, or at a time has not wherewith to help him self: if thou and xxx.
or. xl. with thee get you to wilderness, Prayer. The prayer of Monks robs,
and helps not.
and not only help not your neighbors, but also rob a great number of two
or three thousand pound yearly, how love ye your neighbors? Such men help
the world with prayer, thou will say to me. Thou were better to say, they rob
y^ world with their hypocrisy, say I to thee: and it is truth in deed, that
they so do. For if I stick up to the middle in the mire like to perish without
present help, and thou stand by and wilt not succor me, but knelest down and
prayest, will God hear the prayers of such an hipocrite? God bids thee so to
love me, that thou put thy self in ieopardie to help me, and that thine heart
while thy body labors, do pray and trust in God, that he will assiste thee,
and through thee to save me. An hypocrite that will put neither body nor goods
in peril for to help me at my need, loves me not neither has compassion on
me, and therefore his heart ca^ not pray, though he wagge his lips never so
much. It is written, John. ix. If a man be a worshipper of God and do his will
(which is the true worship) him God hears. Now the will of God is, that we
love one an other to help at need. And such lovers he hears and not subtle
hypocrites. As love makes thee help me at my need: so when it is past thy
power to help, it makes thee pray to God. Even so Love prays.
where is no love to make thee take bodily pain with me: there is no love y^
makes thee pray for me. But thy prayer is in deed fo^y belly which y^ love.

What were the scribes and Phariseys? The scribes besides that they Scribes and
Ph^ what they were.
were Phariseys (as I suppose) were also officers: as are our Bishops,
Chauncellers, Comistaries, Archdeacones and Officialles. And the Phariseys were
religious men, which had professed, not as now, one dominicke, the other
Fraunces, an other Barnardes rules: But even to hold the very law of God, with
prayer, fasting, and alme^^eedes, and were the flower and persection of all the
Jews: as Saint Paul reioyseth of himself, Phil. ii^. saying: I was an Ebrue,
and concerning the law a Pharisey, and concerning the righteousness of the law,
I was faultlesse. They were more honorable then any sect of the Monks with
us, whether obseruau^t, or Ancre, or whatsoever other be had in price.

These might much better have reioysed The Phariseye^ might better have proved
themselves the true Church the^ our spiritual^^e way.
to have been the true Church, and to have had the spirit of God, and that
they could not have erred, then they whom all the world sees, neither to
keep Gods laws nor man's, nor yet that deuilles law of their own making. For
God had made them of y^ old testament as great promises, that he would be
their God, and that his spirit and all grace should be with them, if they
kept his laws, as he has made to us. Now seeing they kept the uttermost jot
of the law in the sight of the world and were faultlesse: and seeing thereto
that God has promised neither us nor them ought at all, but The promises are
made upon the profession of the keepyng of the law of God, so that the Church
that will not keep Gods law has no promise that they ca^ot err.
upon the profession of keepyng his laws: whether were more like to be the
right church and to be taught of the spirit of God, that they could not err,
those Phariseys or ours? Might not the general councelles of those, and the
things there decreed without scripture, seem to be of as great authority as
the general councelles of ours, and the things there ordained and decreed
both clean without and also against Gods word? Might not the ceremonies which
those had added to the ceremonies of Moses, seem to be as holy and as well to
please God, as the ceremonies of ours. The things which they added to the
ceremonies of Moses, were of y^ same kind as those ceremonies were, and no
more to be rebuked then the ceremonies of Moses. As for an ensample, if Moses
bad wash a table or a dishe, when an unclean worm had crept thereon, the
Phariseys did wash the table with a were cloute before every refection, least
any unclean thing had touched them unawares to all men: as we put unto our
tithes a mortuary for all forgotten tithes. What was then the wickedness The
wickedness of y^ Phariseies what it was.
of the Phariseys? verily the leven of their gloses to y^ moral laws, by
which they corrupted the commandments, and made them no more Gods: and their
false faith in the ceremonies that the bare work was a sacrifice and a service
to God, the significations lost: and the opinion of false righteousness in
their prayers, fastinges, and almeso^edes, that such works did justify a man
before God, and not that God forgeueth sin of his mere mercy, if a man
believe, repent, and promise to do his uttermost to sin no more.

When these thus sat in the hearts of the people, with the opinion of virtue,
holiness and righteousness, and their law the law of God, their works,
works commanded by God, Preacher. Why the true preacher is accused of treason
and heresy.
and confirmed by all his prophets, as prayer, fasting and al^nesdeede, and
they looked upon as the Church of God that could not err: and finally they
themselves either every where, were the chief rulers, or so sat in the hearts
of the rulers, that their word was believed to be the word of God. What other
thing could it be, to preach against all such, and to co^dempne their
righteousness for the most dampnable sin that can be, then to seem to go
about to destroy the law and the prophets? What other thing can such a
preacher seem to be before the blind world, then an heretic, scismaticke,
Ipocrisie. Why hypocrisy must be first rebuked, though it be ieopardie to
preach against it.
seditious, possessed with the devil, and worthy of shame most vile, and death
most cruel? And yet these must be first rebuked, and their false
righteousness detected, yer thou may preach against open sinners.

Or else if thou should convert an open sinner from his evil living, thou
should make him nine hundred times worse the^ before. For he would at once
be one of these sort: even an obseruaunt, or of some like sect, of which among
an hundred thousand, thou shall never bring one to believe in Christ. Where
among open sinners many believe at y^ hour of death, fall flat upon Christ, and
believe in him only, without al other righteousness. It were an hundred thousand
times better never to pray, the^ to pray such lip prayers: and never to fast
or do alms, then to fast, and to do alms with a mind thereby to be made
righteous, and to make satisfaction for the fore sins.

Ye have heard how that it was said to them of old time, kill not, for
whosoever kills shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you, whosoever
is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of judgment. And who soever says
unto his brother Racha, shall be in danger of a council. But who soever says
to his brother, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

Here Christ begins, not to destroy The law is restored.
the law (as the Phariseys had falsely accused him) but t^ restore i^ again
to the right understanding, and to purge it from the gloses of the Phariseys.
He that slays shall be guilty or in daunge: of judgment: that is to say, if a
man murder, his deed testifies against him: there is no more to do, then to
pronounce sentence of death against him. This text did the Phariseys The
Phariseis (...) exte^d(...)doings or acts, to y^ outward show (...) deed,
and nothing to the heart.
extend no further the^ to kill with the hand and outward members. But hate,
envy, malice, churlishness, and to withdraw help at need, to beguile and
circumuent with wyles and subtle bargayning, was no sin at all. No, to bring
him whom thou haredst to death with craft and falsehood, so thou did not put
thine hand thereto, was no sin at all. As when they had brought Christ to
death wrongfully, and compelled Pilate with subtiltis to slay him, they thought
themselves pure. In so much that they would not go into the hall for defaling
themselves and being partakers with Pilate in his blood. And Act. v. they said
to the Apostles: ye would bring this man's blood upon us, as who would say, we
slew him not. And Saul in the first book of the Kings in the xviij. chap.
being so wroth with David, that he would gladly have had him slain, determined
yet that he would not defile himself, b^t to thrust him into ye hands of the
Philistines, that they might slay him, and he himself abide pure.

And as our spirituality now offer a man mercy once, though he have spoken
against holy church, only if he will but periure and bear a faggot. But if he
will not, they do but diet him a season, to win him and make him tell more and
deliver him to the lay power saying: he has deserved death by our laws and
ye ought to kill him. how beit we desire it not.

But Christ restores the law again and says, to be angry with thy neighbor,
is to slay him and to deserve death. For the law goes as well on the heart as
on the ^a^d. He that hates his brother The law(...)w^^t on the heart as the
hand.
is a murderer. i. Ioh iij. If then the blind hand deserve death, how much
more those parts which have y^ sight of reason? And he y^ says Racha, lewd
or whatsoever sign of wrath Racha.
it be, or that provoke to wrath, has not only deserved that men should
immediately pronounce sentence of death upon him, but also that when death is
pronounced, they should gather a counsel, to decree what horrible death he
should suffer. And he that calls his brother fool, has sinned down to hell.

Shall then a man not be angry at all, nor rebuke or punish: yes, if thou be a
father or a mother, master, or ma^s^sse, How a man may be angry without sinning
husband, Lord, or ruler: yet with love and mercy, that the anger, rebuke, or
punishment exceed not the fault or trespass. May a man be angry with love?
ye, mothers can be so with their children. It is a loving anger that hates
only the vice, and studieth to mende the person. But here is forbidden not
only wrath against father, mother, and all that have governance over thee,
which is to be angry and to grudge against God himself, and that the ruler
shall not be wrath without a cause against the subject. But also all private
wrath against thy neighbor over whom thou have no rule, nor he over thee, no
though he do thee wrong. For he that does wrong lacks wit and discretion,
and cannot amend till he be informed and taught lovingly. Therefore thou must
refrain thy wrath, and tell him his fault lovingly, and with kyndenesse win
him to thy father: for he is thy brother as well made and as dear bought as
thou, and as well beloved, though he be yet childishe and lack discretion.

But some will say: I will not hate my neighbor nor yet love him or do him Love
is y^ keeping of the law.
good, yes y^ must love him: for the first commandment out of which all other
flow, is: thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart with all thy
soul and with all thy might. That is, thou must keep all his commandments
with love. Love must keep thee from killing or hurting thy neighbor and from
couetyng in thine heart what soever is his. And. 1. John. iiij. This
commandment have we of him, that he which loves God, love his brother also.
And again. 1. John. iij. he that has the substance of this world and sees
his brother have necessity, and shuts up his compassion from him, how is the
love of God in him? he then that helps not at need loves not God, but
breaks the first commandment. Let us love therefore says S. John, not with
word and tongue, but in deed, and truth. And again S. John says in the said
place, he that loves not his brother abides yet still in death. And of love
has Moses textes enough. But the Phariseis glosed the^ out, saying they were
but good councelles if a man desired to be perfect, but not precepts. Exodus
xxiij. if thou mete thine enemies Ox or Ass going astraye, thou shall in any
wise bring them to him again. And if thou see thine enemies Ass fall down
under his burden, thou shall help him up again. And Leuit. xix. thou shall
not hate thy brother in thine heart, but shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor,
that thou bear no sin for his sake. For if thou Sinnerse He that helps not
to m^nde sinners, must suffer with them when they be punished.
study not to amend thy neighbor when he sins, so art thou partaker of his
sins. And therefore when God takes vengeance and sends what soever plage
it be, to punish open sinners, thou must perish with them. For thou dyddest
sin in the light of God as deep as they because thou dyddest not love the
law of God to maintain it withal thiue heart, soul, power, and might. Is not
he that sees his neighbors house in ieopardie to be set on fire and warns
not, nor helps in time, to avoid the peril worthy (if his neighbors house
be burnt up) that his be burnt also: seeing it was in his power to have kept al
out of ieopardy, if he had would: as he would no doubt if he had loved his
neighbor? Eue^ so when God sends In doing out best to further our neighbor
in virtue, (although we prevail not) we are excused.
a general pestilence or war to thy City, to punish the sin thereof: art
y^ not worthy that thine house should be infected or perish, if thou might
have kept it from sinnyng, and thou had been willing thereto? But if thou
do thy best to further the law of God and to keep thy land or neighbors from
sinnyng against God, then (though it help not) thou shall bear no sin for
their sakes when they be punished. He therefore yt loves the law of God, may be
bold in time of pestilence and all ieopardy to believe in God. And again in the
same place, thou shall not adue^ge thy self nor bear hate in mind against the
children of thy people: But shall love thy fellow as thy self. I am the Lord.
As who should say, for my sake shall thou do it. And Deuteronomy. x. The Lord your
God, is the God of Gods and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and terrible,
which regards no ma^s person or degree, nor takes gifts: But does right to
the fatherless and the widow, and loves the stranger, to give him raiment
and fode, love therefore the stranger, for ye were strangers in ye la^d of
Egypt. And Leuit. 19. if a stranger soiourne by thee, in your land, see that
ye vex him not. But let the stranger that dwells among you, be as one of
your selves, and love him as thy self: For ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt. I am the Lord. As who should say, love him for my sake.

Notwithstanding when thy neighbor Hate. When a man may hate his neighbor.
has showed thee more unkindness then God has love, then may thou hate
him, and not before. But must love him for Gods sake, till he fight against God
to destroy the name and glory of God.

Therefore when thou offerest thy gift at the alter, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee. Leave there thy gift before the alter, and
go first and reconcile thy self unto thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. Agree with thine adversary at once^ while thou art in the way with him,
least thine adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to
the minister, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall
not come out thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthyng.

This text with yt similitude is somewhat subtle, and binds both him that has
offended to reconcile him self as much as in him is and him that is offended
to forgive and be at one. The offeringes were signs, and did certify
Offeringes or sacrifices what they meant.
a man that God was at one with him, and was his fre^d and loved him. For the
fat of beasts was offered and wine thereto, as though God had sat and eaten
and drunk with them: and the rest they and their housholdes did eat before
God, as though they had eat and drunk with God, and were commanded to be
merry and to make good cheer, fully certified that God was at one with them
and had forgot all old offenses, and now loved them, that he would fulfill all
his promises of mercy with them.

Now will God receive no sacrifice: that is to wete, neither forgive or fulfill
any of his promises, except we be first reconciled unto our brethren, whether
we have offended or be offended. In the chapter following thou read if ye
forgive, your father shall forgive you. And Osia. vj. I love mercy and not
sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then I do burnt offeringes: that is to
say, the knowledge of y^ appointementes made between God and us what he will
have us to do first, and then what he will do for us again. And Esaias.
lviij. God refuses fasting and punishyng of the body that was coupled with
cruelty and says that he desired no such fast. But says this fast require I,
that ye be mercyful and forgive, The fast that God require^.
and cloth the naked and feed the hungry. etc. Then call (says he) and the
Lord shall answer: cry, and he shall lay: see, here I am.

And that similitude will, that as a man here, if he will no other wise agree,
must suffer the extremity of the law, if he be brought before a judge (for the
judge has no power to forgive or to remit, but to condemn him in ye uttermost
of ye law) even so, if we will not forgive one another here, we shall have
judgment of God, without all mercy.

And that some make Purgatory of Last farthyng.
the last farthyng, they show their deep ignorance. For first no similitude
holds every word and syllabe of the similitude. Furthermore when they
dispute, till he pay the last farthyng, Ergo, he shall pay. But not in hell,
Ergo in Purgatory. A wise reason: Joseph knew not Marie till she had borne her
first son, Ergo she bare the second or he knew her after. I will not forgive
thee till I be dead or while I live, Ergo I will do it after my death, and a
thousand like.

Ye have hard how is was said to them of old time, commit not adultery. But
I say to you, that who soever looks on a wife, lustyng after her, has
committed aduoutrie with her all ready in his heart.

This commandment, commit none adultery, had the Phariseis blinded and
corrupt with their sophistry How corruptly the Phariseis did attribute all
evil to the deed only.
and leven, interpretyng the concupisce^ce of the heart, lewd toys, filthy
gestures, unclean words, clipping, kissing and so forth, not to be imputed
for sin. But even the act and deed alone, though Moses say in the text,
thou shall not covet, thy neighbors wife. etc. But Christ puts to, light,
and salt, and brings the precept to his true understanding and natural cast
again, and condemns the root of sin, the concupiscence and consent of the
heart. Before the world I am no murderer til I have killed with mine hand. But
before God I kill, if I hate: ye if I love not, and of love keep me both from
doing hurt, and also be ready and prepared to help at need. Even so the
consent of the heart with all other means that follow thereof, be as well
aduoutry before God, as the deed it self.

Finally I am an aduouterer before God, if I so love not my neighbor, that
very love forbid me to covet his wife. Love is the fulfilling of all
commandments. Love is the fulfillyng of the law.
And without love it is impossible to abstain from sinnyng against my
neighbor in any precept, if occasion be given.

Carnal love will not suffer a mother to rob her child, no it makes her
rob her self, to make it rich. A natural father shall never lust after his
sons wife: No, he cares more for her chastity then his son does him
self. Eue^ so would love to my neighbor, keep me from sinning against him.

Aduoutrie is a damnable thing in Aduoutrie.
the sight of God, and much mischief follows thereof. David to save his honor
was driven to commit grievous murder also. It is unright in ye sight of God and
man that thy child should be at an other man's cost, and be an other man's heir.
Neither can thou or thy mother have lightly a quiet conscience to God, or a
merry heart as long as it so is. Moreover what greater shame can thou do to
thy neighbor, or what greater displeasure? what if it never be known, nor
come any child thereof? The preciousest gift that a man has, in this world, of
God, is the true heart of his wife, to abide by him in wealth and woe, and to
bear all fortunes with him. Of that have thou robbed him: for after she has
once coupled her self to thee, she shall not lightly love him any more so
truly: But happily hate him and procure his death. Moreover thou have untaught
her to fear God, and have made her to sin against God. For to God promised
she and not to man only: for the law of Matrimony is Gods ordinance. For it
is written Genes. xxxix. When Putiphars wife would have had Joseph to lie with
her, he answered: how could I do this wickedness and sin against God? yea
verily it is impossible to sin against man, except thou sin against God
first. Finally read Chronicles and stories, and see what has followed of
adultery.

What shall we say, that some Doctors Some doctoure ^aue doubted in that,
which Christ has flatly condemned.
have disputed and douted whether single fornication should be sin, when it
is condemned both by Christ and Moses to. And Paul testifies. 1. Cor. 6. that
no fornicatour or whore keeper shall possess the kingdom of God. It is right
that all the that hope in God, should bring up their trute in the fear and
knowledge of God, and not to leave his seed where he cares not what come
thereof.

Wherefore if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee:
for it is better for thee that one of thy members perish, the^ that thy whole
body should be cast into hell. And even so if thy right hand offend thee, cut
it of and cast it from thee. For it is better for thee that one of thy members
perish, then that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

This is not meant of the outward members, For then we must cut of nose, ears,
hand and ^ote: ye we must procure to destroy the seeing, hearing, smelling,
tasting, and tealing, and so every man kill himself. But it is a phrase or
speech of the Ebrue tongue, and will that we cut of occasions, daunsing,
kissing, riotous cating, and drinking, and the lust of the heart and filthy
imaginations that move a man to coucupiscence. Let every man have his wife, and
think her the fairest and the best Filthy.
conditioned, and every woman her husband so to. For God has blessed A wife.
thy wife and made her without sin How good a thing.
to thee, which ought to seem a beautiful fayrenes. And all y^ ye suffer
together the one with the other, is blessed also, and made the very cross of
Christ and pleasant in the sight of God. Why should she the^ be loathsome to
thee, because of a little suffering, that you should just after an other,
that should defile thy soul and ^lea thy conscience, and make thee suffer
everlastingly?

It is said, whosoever puts away his wife, let him give her a testimonial
of the deuorceme^t. But I say unto you, who soever puts away his wife
(except it be for fornication) makes her to break wedlock, and who soever
marieth the deuorced, breaks wedlock.

Moses Deuteronomy. xxiiij. permitted his Israelites in extreme necessity, as when
they so hated their wives yt they abhorred the company of them, then to put
them away, to avoid a worse inconvenience. Whereof ye read also Mat. xix. And
he knitte thereto that they might not receive them again after they had been
known of any other persons. Which ^cence ye Jews abused and put away their
wives for every light or feigned cause, and whenever they lusted. But Christ
calls back again and enterpreteth ye law after the first ordinance, and
cutteth of all causes of deuorcement, save fornication of the wives party,
when she breaks her matrimony. In which case Moses law pronou^ceth her dead,
and so do ye laws of many other cou^treyes: which laws where they be used,
there is the man free without all question. Now where they be let live, there
the man (if he see sign of repentance and amendment) may forgive for once. If
he may not find in his heart (as Joseph as holy as he was, could not find in
his heart to take Christ's mother to him, when he spied her with child) he is
free no doubt to take an other, while the law interprets her deed: for her
sin ought of no right to bind him.

What shall the woman do, if she repent and be so tempted in her flesh that
she cannot live chaste? verily I can show you nothing out of the scripture. The
office of the preacher is, to The office of a preacher.
preach the x. commandments which are the law natural, and to promise them
which submit themselves to keep them of love and fear of God, everlasting
life for their labor, through faith in Christ: and to threate^ the disobedient
with everlasting pain in hell. And his punishment is, if any man have offended
through frailty, and when he is rebuked, turn and repent, to receive him unto
grace, and absolve him: and if any will not amend when he is rebuked, to cast
him out among the infidelles. This I say, if the temporal power shut her up,
as a convict person appointing her a sober living, to make satisfaction to the
congregation for her dampnable example, they did not amiss. It is better that
one misdoer suffer, then that a common wealth be corrupt.

Where the officers be negligent, and the woman not able to put her self to
penance, it she went where she is not known and there marry, God is the God
of mercy. If any man in the same place where she trespasseth, pitied her, and
married her, I could suffer it: were it not that the liberty would be the
next way to provoke all other that were once weary of their husbands, to
commit adultery, for to be deuorced from them, that they might marry other
which they loved better. Let the temporal sword take heed to their charge
therefore: For this is truth, all Law.
the temporal blessings set in the law of Moses for keeping their laws, as
What follows the keeping of the law.
wealth and prosperity, long life, the vpperhand of their enemies,
plenteousnesse of fruits, and cheap of all thing, and to be without
pestilence, war and famishment, and all manner other abominable diseases and
plagues pertayne to us as well as to them, if we keep our temporal laws.

And all the cursses and terrible plagues Law.
which are threatened throughout What follows the breaking of the law.
the law of Moses, as hunger, dearth, war and dissentio^, pestilence, fevers,
and wonderful and strange fearful diseases, as the sweat, pockes, and
falling sickness, shortyng of days, that the sword, hunger, and such
diseases shall eat them up in their youth, that their enemies should have ye
vpperhand, that the people of the land should be minished, and the towns
decayed, and y^ land brought to a wilderness, and that a plenteous land
should be made barren, or so ordered that dearth shall devour the enhabyters,
and wealth be among few that should oppress the rest, with a thousand such
like, so that nothing they begin, should have a prosperous end all those
cursses (I say) pertain to us as well as to them, if we break our temporal
laws.

Let England look about them, and mark what has chanced them since they
s^ue their right king whom God had anointed over them, King Richard The
enormities that have chanced since y^ slaughter of King Richard ye second,
unto this realm of England.
the second. Their people, towns and villages, are minished by the third
part. And of their noble blood remains not the third nor I believe the
sixte, yea and if I durst be bold, I wene I might safely swear that there
remains not the sixteneth part. Their own sword has eaten them up. And
though pastures be enlarged above all measure, yet rotte of sheep, Moren of
beasts, with parkes and warennes, with reising of fines and rent, make all
things twice so dear as they were. And our own commodities are so abused,
that they be the destruction of our own realm.

And right: for if we will not know God to keep his laws, how should
Tiraunts: Why God gives us up, and leaves us in the hands of titaunts and in
all misery.
God know us, to keep us and to care for us, and to fulfill his promises of
mercy unto us? says not Paul. To. i. of the heathen: Sicut non probauerunt
habere deum in noticia, ita tradidit illos Deus. As it seemed them not good, or
as they had no lust, or as they admitted it not, nor allowed for right in their
hearts to know God as God, to give him the honor of God, that is: to fear him
as God, and as auenger of all evil, and to seek his will: even so God gave
them up to follow their own blyndnesse, and took his spirit and his grace
from them, and would no longer rule their wits. Even so if we cast of us,
the yoke of our temporal laws which are yt laws of God, and drawn out of
the ten commandments and law natural, and out of love thy neighbor as thy
self: God shall cast us of and let us slip, to follow our own wit. And then
shall all go against us, what soever we take in hand: in so much that when we
gather a parliament to reform or ame^oe ought, that we there determine shall be
our own snare, confusion, and utter destruction, so that all the enemies we
have under heaven could not wish us so great mischief as our own counsel
shall do us, God shall so blind the wisdom of the wise. If any man have any
godly council, it shall have none audience: Error, madness, and dasing shall
have the upper hand.

And let the spirituality take heed and look well about them, and see whether
they walk as they have promised An admonition.
God, and in the steps of his son Christ, and of his Apostles whose offices
they bear. For I promise the^, all ye deuilles in hell, if God had let the^ lo
wse, could not have given the^ worse counsel, then they have given themselves
this xx. year long. God gave up his Israelites often time, when they would
not be ruled, nor know themselves and their duty to God, and brought them into
captivity under their enemies, to prove and feel (says the text) whether
were better service, either to serve God, and willingly to obey his law
coupled with so manifold blessings, or to serve their enemies, and to obey
their cruelnesse and tyranny (spite of their heads) in need and necessity.
And set the temporaltie remember, that because those nacious under which the
Israelites were in captivity, did deal cruelty with them, not to punish the^
for their idolatry and sin which they had committed against God, but to have
their lands and goods and service only, rejoicing to make them worse and
more out of their fathers favor: therefore when God had scourged his children
mough, he did beat the other for their labor.

But to our purpose, what if the man What rulers ought to do, touching such as
run.
run from his wife and leave her desolate. Verily the rulers ought to make a
law, if any do so and come not again by a certain day, as with in the space of
a year or so, that the^ he be banished the country: and if he come again, to
Fly from their wives without ^ust cause.
come on his head, and let the wife be free to mary where she will. For what
right is it that a lewd wretch should take his goods and run from his wife
without a cause and sit by a whore, yea and come again after a year or two
(as I have known it) and rob his wife of that she has gotten in ye mean
time, and go again to his whore? Paul says to the Corinthiaus, that if a man
or a woma^be coupled with an infidel, and the infidel depart, the other is
free to mary where they lust. And. 1. Timo. 5. he says, if there be any man
that provides not for his, and namely for the^ of his own how should, the
same denies the faith and is worse then an infidel. And even so is this man
much more to be interpreted for an infidel that causeless runs from his
wife. Let I say the gouerners take heed how they let sin be unpunished, and
how they bring the wrath of God upon their Realms. For God will be aduenged on
all iniquity, and punish it with plagues from heaven.

In like manner if the woman depart causeless and will not be reconciled,
though she commit none adultery, the man ought of right to be free to marie
again. And in all other causes if they separate them selves of impacie^cie
that the one can not suffer the others infirmities, they must remain unmarried.

If any part burn, let the same suffer y^ pain or infirmities of the other.
And the temporalitie ought to make laws to bridle the unruly party.

Again ye have heard how it was said to them of old time, forswear not thy
self, but pay thine oaths unto the Lord. But I say unto you, swear not at
all, neither by heaven, for it is the seat of God, neither by the earth, for
it is his footestole, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great
king, neither shalt thou swear by thine head, for thou can not make a white
here or a black. But your communicatio^ shall be yea yea, nay nay. For if ought
be above that, it proceeds of evil.

As to hate in the heart, or to covet an Swearing
other man's wife, was no sin with the Phariseis: no more was it to hide one
thing in the heart, and to speak an other with the mouth, to deceive a ma^s
neighbor, if it were not bound with an oath. And though Moses say Leuit. xix.
Lie not, nor deceive any man his neighbor or one an other, yet they
interpreted it but good council, if a man desired to be perfect: But no
precept to bind under pain of sin. And so by that means not only they
that spoke true, but also they that lied, to deceive, were compelled to swear
and to confirm their words with oaths, if they would be believed.

But Christ brings light, and salt to the text (which the Phari^eis had
darckened and corrupt with the stynkyng mist of their sophistry) and
forbids to swear at all, either by God or any creature of Gods: for thou
can swear by none oath at all, except the dishonor shall redound unto ye
name of God. If thou swear, by God it is To swear by God.
so, or by God I will do this or that, the meaning is, that thou make God
judge, to aduenge it of thee, if it be not as thou say or if thou shall not
do as thou promisest. Now if truth be not in thy words, thou shamest thine
heavenly father, and testifiest that thou beleuest that he is no righteous
judge nor will aduenge unrighteousness, but that he is wicked as thou art and
conse^teth and laugheth at thee, while thou deceauest thy brother, as well
created after the likeness of God and as dear bought with the precious blood
of Christ, as thou. And thus through thee (a wicked son) is the name of thy
father dishonored, and his law not feared nor his promises believed. And when
thou swearest by the Gospel book or Bible, the meaning is, that God, if thon
lie, shall not fulfill unto thee, the promises of mercy there in written. But
contrariwise to bring upon thee all the cursses, plagues and vengeance therein
threatened unto ye disobedient and evil doers. And even so when thou swearest
by any creature, as by bread or salt, the meaning is, that thou desire, that
the creator thereof shall aduenge it of thee, if thou lie, etc. Where Men ought
so (...) deal that their words may be credited without any oaths.
fore our dealyng ought to be so substa^tiall, that our words might be believed
without an oath. Our words are the signs of the truth of our hearts, in which
ought to be pure and single love toward thy brother: for what soever proceeds
not of love, is damnable. Now falsehead to deceive him and pure love can not
stand together. It can not therefore be but damnable sin to deceive thy
brother with lying, though you add no oath to thy words. Much more damnable
is it then to deceive and to add an oath thereto. etc.

Howbeit all manner of swearyng is Swearing in what sort it is lawful*
not here forbidden, no more then all manner of killyng, when the commandment
says, kill not: for judges and rulers must kill. Eue^ so ought they, when they
put any man in office, to take an oath of him that he shall be true and faithful
and diligent therein. And of their subjects it is lawful to take oaths, and
of all that offer the^ selves to bear witness. But if the superior would
compel the inferior, to swear that should be to the dishonor of God or
hurting of an innocent, the inferior ought rather to dye then to swear.
Neither ought a judge to compel a man to swear against him self, that he make
him not sin and forswear. Whereof it is enough spoken in an other place. But
here is forbidden swearyng between neighbor and neighbor, and in all our
private business and daily communicatio^. For customable swearyng, though we
lied not, does rob the name of God of his due reverence and fear. And in our
daily communication and business one with an other is so much vanity of
words that we can not but in many things lie, which to confirm with an oath,
though we beguile not, is to take the name of God in vain, and irreverently
against the second precept. Now to lie for the intent to beguile, is damnable
of it self, how much more then to abuse the holy name of God thereto, and to
call to God for vengeance upon thine own self?

Many cases yet there chance daily Charity moderareth the law.
between man and man, in which charity compels to swear: as if I know that
my neighbor is falsely sclaundered, I am bound to report the truth, and may
lawfully swear, yea and am bound if it need, and that though not before a
judge. And unto y^ weak where ye and nay have lost their credence through the
multitude of liars, a man may lawfully swear to put them out of doubt. Which
yet comes of y^ Oath.
evil of them that abuse their language to deceive withal. Finally to swear
To perform an evil oath is double^ sin.
to do evil is dampnable, and to perform that is double damnation. Herodes
oath made him not innocent and giltlesse of the death of John the Baptist,
though the hipocrite had not known what his wives daughter would have asked.
And when men say, a kings word must stand: that is troth, if his oath or
promise be lawful and expedient.

In all our promises it is to be added, if God will, and if there be no lawful
^et. And though it be not added, it is to be interpret, as added. As if I
borow thy sword, and by the hour I promise to bring it thee again, thou be
beside thy self. If I promise to pay by a certain day, and be in the mean
time robbed or decayed by chance, that I cannot perform it. I am not He is
not forsworn whose heart meant truly when he promised.
forsworn, if mine heart meant truly when I promised. And many like cases there
be of which are touched in other places. To lie also and to dissemble is not
always sin. David 1. Reg. 27. told king Achis the Philistine, that he had
robbed his own people the Jews, when he had been a rouing among the
Amalekites, and had flayne man, woman, and child, for telling To lie or
dissemble (...) some causes not culpable.
tales. And yet was that lie no more sin, then it was to destroy the
Amalekytes those deadly enemies of the faith of one almighty God. Neither
sinned Cusai David's trusty friend 2. Reg. 17. in fayning and beguilyng Absolon,
but pleased God highly. To bear a sick man in hand that wholesome bitter
medicine is sweet, to make him drink it, it is the duty of charity, and no
sin. To persuade him that pursues his neighbor, to hurt him or slay him,
that his neighbor is gone an other contrary way, is the duty of every Christen
man by the law of charity, and no sin: no though I confirmed it with an
oath. But to lie for to deceive and hurt, that is dampnable only. etc.

Ye have heard, how it is said, an eye for an eye, a toth for a toth. But I
say unto you, that ye withstand not wrong. But if a man give thee a blow on the
right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will go to law with
thee and take away thy coat, let him have thy clock thereto. And if any man
compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Give to him that asks, and
from him that would borow turn not away.

Christ here ente^deth not to disanull the temporal regiment, and to forbid
rulers to punish evil doers, no more then he meant to destroy matrimony, when
he forbad to lust, and to covet an other man's wife in the heart. But as he there
forbad, that which defiles matrimony, even so he forbids here that which
troubles, vnquieteth and destroys the temporal regiment, and that thing
which (to forbid) the temporal regiment was ordained: which is that no man
aduenge himself. Christ medleth not with the temporal regiment. But in all
this long sermon fights against the Phareseyes false doctrine, and salteth
the law, to purge it of the corruption of their filthy gloses, and to bring it
unto the right taste and true understanding again.

For the Phariseyes had so enterpret that law of Moses (which pertayned only
unto the rulers) that every private person might aduenge himself, and do his
adversary as much harm again as he had received of him.

Now if he that is angry have deserved that men pronounce death upon him, and
he that says Racha has deserved that me^ should gather a counsel to
determine some sundry and cruel death for so heinous a crime, and if he that
calls his brother fool, have deserved hell: what deserves he that smites
or aduengeth himself with his own hand? Here is forbidden therefore private
wrath only, and that a man aduenge himself.

To turn the other cheek, is a matter Cheke.
of speaking and not to be understand as the words sound, as was To turn
the other cheke what it is.
to cut of the hand and to pluck out the eye. And as we command our
children not only, not to come nie a brook or a water, but also not so hardy
as once to look that way, either to look on fire or once to think on fire,
which are impossible to be observed. More is spoken then meant to fear them,
and to make them perceive that it is earnest that we command. Even so is the
meaning here, yt we in no wise aduenge, but be prepared ever to suffer as much
more, and never to think it lawful to aduenge, how great soever the injury
be: for he himself turned not the other cheek, when he was smitten before the
Bishop, nor yet Paul when he was buffeted before the Bishop also. But ye
have heard a little above. Blessed are the meek, for Mekenes.
they shall possess the earth. Let all the world study to do thee wrong, yea
let them do thee wrong: and yet if thou be meek, thou shall have food and
raiment enough for thee and thine. And moreover, if the worst come, God shall
yet set such a tyrant over thee, that (if thou be meek and can be content
that he polle thee properly, and even as thou may bear) shall defend thee
from all other. Who is polled Pollyng how to avoid it.
intollerably, that his lite is bitter and even death to him, but he that is
impatient and cannot suffer to be polled. Yea, poll thy self and prevent
other, and give the Baylife or like officer, now a Capon, now a Pigge, now a
Goosse, and so to thy Landlord likewise: or if thou have a great Ferme. now a
Lamb, now a Calfe, and let thy wife visit thy Landladye three or four times
in a year, with spised cakes, and Apples, Pears, Cheries, and such like. And
be thou ready with thine Oxen or Horses three or four, or half a dosen days
in the year to set home their wood, or to plow their la^d: yea and if thou
have a good horse, let them have him good cheap, or take a worse for him, and
they shall be thy shilde and defend thee, though they be tyrau^tes and care not
for God, that no man else shall dare polle thee. And thereto thou may with
wisdom get of them, that shall recompense all that thou do to them: All
this I mean, if thou be patient and wise and fear God thereto, and love thine
neighbor, and do none evil. For if thou keep thy self in favor, with
hurting thy neighbor, thine end will be evil, and at the last desperation in
this world, and hell after.

But and if thou can not polle thy self with wisdom, and laugh and bear a
good countenance, as though thou reioysedst while such persons polle thee,
every man shall polle thee, and they shall maintain them, and not defend
thee. Let this therefore be a common proverb, be contented to be polled of
some man, or to be polled of every man.

Ye must understand that there be two states or degrees in this world: Two
manner states, and degrees of regime^tes.
the kingdom of heaven which is the regiment of the Gospel. And y^ kingdom
of this world which is the temporal regiment. In the first state there is
neither father, mother, son daughter: neither master, maystres, mayoe,
manseruaunt: nor husband, nor wife, nor Lord, or subject, nor man or woman. But
Christ is all, and each to other is Christ himself. There is none better then
other, but all like good, all brethren, and Christ only is Lord over all.
Neither is there any other thing to do, or other law save to love one an other
as Christ loved us. In the temporal regiment is husband, wife, father, mother,
son, daughter, master, maystresse, maid, manseruaunt, Lord and subject.

Now is every person a double person, Every man is of the spirituality and of
the temporalitie both.
and under both the regimentes. In the first regiment, thou art a person for
thine own self, under Christ and his doctrine, and may neither hate or be
angry, and much less fight or aduenge: But must after the ensample of Christ
humble thy self, forsake and deny thy self, and hate thy self, and cast thy
self away, and be meek and patient, and let every man go over thee, and
tread thee under foot and do thee wrong: and yet love them, and pray for them,
as Christ did for his crucifiers. For love is all, and what is not of love
that, is damnable and cast out of that kingdom.

For that kingdom is the knowledge of God and Christ. But he that loves not,
knows neither God nor (...) He that loves not his neighbor ^ath not ye true
faith of Christ.
Christ: therefore he that loves not is not of that kingdom. The minor is on
this wise proved, he that knows God and Christ sees light, for Christ is
light: But he that hates his brother, is in darcknes, and walks in darcknes,
and wotteth not whether he goes, for darcknes has blinded his eyes. 1. Ioh.
2. Ergo, he that hates his brother, knows not what Christ has done for him,
and therefore has no true faith, nor is of the spiritual kingdom of God.

To hate thy self, that shall thou get, if thou considerest thine own sins
and the deep dampnation that long thereto, with due repentance. And to love,
that thou shall obtain, if thou behold the great and infinite mercy of God
with strong faith. There is none so great an enemy to thee in this world, but
thou shall lightly love him, if thou look well on the love that God showed
thee in Christ.

In the temporal regiment thou art The temporal regiment.
a person in respect of other thou art an husband, father, mother, master,
maistresse, lord, ruler, or wife, son, daughter, servant, subject etc. And
there thou must do according to thine office. If you be a father thou must do
the office of a father, and rule, or else thou damnest thy self. Thou must
bring all under obedience whether by fair means or foul. Thou must have
obedience of thy wife, of thy servants, and of thy subjects: and the other
must obey. If they will not obey with love, thou must chide and fight, as far
as the law of God, and the law of the land will suffer thee. And when you can
not rule the^, thou art bound in many cases, to deliver the^ unto the hyer
officer of whom thou dyddest take the charge over the^.

Now to our purpose, whether a man Violence: Not to resist violence, how it is
understood.
may resist violence, and defend or aduenge him self. I say nay, in the first
state, where thou art a person for thy self alone and Christ's Disciple. There
thou must love, and of love do, study. and enforce: yea and suffer all things
(as Christ did to make peace, that the blessyng of God may come upon thee,
which says: Blessed be the peace makers, for they shall be the children of God.
If thou suffer and keep peace in thy self only, thy blessyng is, the
possession of this world. But if thou so love the peace of thy brethren, that
thou leave nothing undone or vnsuffred to further it, thy blessyng is, thou
shall be Gods son and consequently possess heaven.

But in the worldly state, where thou art no private man, but a person in
respect of other, thou not only may, but also must, and art bound under
pain of da^uation to execute thine office. Where thou art a father, thou must
have obedience by fair means or by foul: and to whom thou art an husband, of
her thou must require obedience and chastity, and to get that, attempt all
that the law of the land commands and will. And of thy servants thou must
exact obedience and fear, and may not suffer thy self to be despised. And
where thou art a ruler thereto Rulers must punish, ^ut for malice, but for
defense of the people, and maintenance of y^ laws.
appointed, thou must take, prison, and slay to: not of malice and hate, to
aduenge thy self, but to defend thy subjects, and to maintain thine office.

Concerning thy self, oppress not thy subjects with rent, fynes or custom
at all, neither pity them with taxes and such like, to maintain thyue own
lusts: But be loving and kind to them, as Christ was to thee, for they be his
and the price of his blood. But those that are evil doers among them and vex
their brethren, and will not know thee for their judge and fear thy law, them
smite, and upon them draw thy sword, and put it not up until thou have thine
office: yet without hate to thee person, for his masters sake, and because he
is in the first regiment thy brother, but to amend him euely, or if it cannot
be, but that thou must lose one to save many, then execute thine office with
such assertion, with such compassion and sorrow of heart, as thou would out of
thine own arm to save the rest of the body.

Take an example: thou art in thy fathers house among thy brethren and An
example how to understand y^ two regimentes.
sisters. There if one fight with an other, or if any do thee wrong, thou may
not aduenge nor smite: For that pertayneth to thy father only. But if thy
father give thee authority in his absence, and command thee to smite if if
they will not be ruled: now then art an other person. Notwithstanding yet thou
have not put of the first person, but art a brother still, and must ever love,
and prove all thing to rule with love. But if love will not serve: then thou
must use the office of the other person, or sin against thy father. Even so
when thou art a temporal person, thou put not of the spiritual. Therefore
thou must ever love. But when love will not help, thou must with love execute
the office of the temporal person or sin against God. A mother can smite and
love: and so may thou with love execute the office of thy second state. And
the wife, son, servant and subject are brethren in the first state and put
not that person of, by reason of the second degree: and therefore must they love
ever, and with love pay custom, tribute, What soever thou art bound to do, do
it with love.
fear, honor and obedience to whom they belong as Paul teaches Roma. xiij.
And though the other do not his duty and love thee, but rule the with
rigorousnesse and deal unkindly with thee, thou not deseruyng: yet cleave thou
to Christ, and love still, and let not his evil overcome thy goodness and make
thee evil also.

And as after the example above, thy father has power over thee to command
thee to use his power over thy brethren, even so has thy master, to give thee
his authority over thy fellows. Which when thou have, thou must remember that
thou art a fellow still, and bound to love still. But if love alone will not
help, then put thy masters authority unto thy love. And so has the ruler
power over thee, to send thee to use violence upon thy neighbor, to take him,
to prison him, and happly to kill him to. And thou must ever love thy neighbor
in thine heart by the reason that he is thy brother in the first state, and yet
obey thy ruler and go with the constable or like officer, and break open thy
neighbors door, if he will not open it in the kings name: yea and if he will
not yield in the kings name, thou must lay on, and smite him to ground till he
be subdued. And look what harm he gets, yea though he be slain, that be on
his own head. For thine heart loved him and yt desiredest him lovingly to obey,
and have not adue^ged thy self in that state where thou art a brother. But in
the worldly state where thou art an other manner person in this case, thou had
executed the authority of him that has such power of God, to command thee,
and where thou were damned of God if thou did not obey.

And like is it, if thy Lord or Prince How to be a warrior.
send thee a warfare into an other land, thou must obey at Gods commandment,
and go, and adue^ge thy Princes quarrel which thou know not but that it is
right. And when thou come thither, remember what thou art in the first state
with the^ against who^ thou must fight, how that they be thy brethren and as
deeply bought with Christ's blood as thou, and for Christ's sake to be beloved
in thine heart. And see that thou desire neither their life or goods, save to
adue^ge thy princes quarrel and to bring them under thy Princes power. And be
content with thy princes wages, and with such Thou (...) or (...), and (...).
part of the spoil (when thou have won) as thy prince or his deputy
appoints thee. For if thou hate the^ in thine heart and couetest their gods,
and art glad that an occasion is found (thou carest not whether it be right or
wrong) that thou may go a robbyng and murtheryng unpunished, then art thou a
murderer in ye sight of God, and thy blood will be shed again for it, either
in the same war following: or when thou art come home (as thou there dyddest
in thine heart) so shall thou rob and steal, and be hanged for thy labor, or
slain by some other mischief.

Now concerning the goods of this world, it is easy to judge. Goods.
In the first state or degree yt ought to be thankful to Christ, and to
love, to give and to lend to them that are bought with his precious blood, all
that thou art able. For all that thou owe to Christ whose servant thou art
to do his will, that must pay the^. And that thou do Math. xxv.
to the^, that same thou do to Christ, and that thou art not ready to do for
the^, that denyest thou to do for Christ. But and any of thy brethren will with
hold or take away by force above that thou may spare by the reason of some
office that thou have in the second state, or invade thee violently, and lay
more on thy back then thou can bear: the^ hold thine heart and hand, that
thou neither hate or smite, and speak fair and lovingly, and let neighbors
go between. And when thou have proved all means of love in vain, then
complain to the law and the officer that is set to be thy father and defend
thee, and to judge between thee and thy brother.

To go^ (...) law.
Thou will say the text forbids me to go to law: for it says, ^a man will
law with thee and take thy coat, thou must let him have gown and all. If I
must suffer my self to be robbed by ye law, will thou say, by what right can I
with law recover mine own? I answer: Behold the text diligently. For by no
right of law can a man take thy coat from thee: For ye law was ordained of
God, to maintain thee in thy right and to forbydde that wrong should be done
thee. Wherefore the text means thus, that where the law is unjustly ministered,
and the gouerners and judges corrupt, and take brybes and be parciall, there be
pacient and ready to suffer ever as much more, what soever unright be done
thee, rather To rise against the judge, or magistrate so to resist God.
them of impaciencie, thou should aduenge thy self on thy neighbor or
rail or make insurrection against the superiors which God has set over
thee. For to rise against them is to rebel against God and against thy father
when he scourges thee for thine offense, and a thousand times more sin then
to adue^ge thee on thy neighbor. And to rail on them is to rail on God, as
though thou would blasp^ him, if he made the sick, poor or (...) ^ow
degree or otherwise the^ thou would be made thy self.

Thou will happily say: the subjects ever chose the ruler and make Princes:
whether they may be resisted or put down of their subjects in any case.
him swear to keep their law and to maintain their priuilegies and ^erties,
and upon that submit their selves unto him: Ergo, if he rule amiss they are
not bound to obey. But may resist him and put him down again? I answer
your argument is naught. For the husband swears to his wife: yet though he
forswear him self. She has no power to compel him. Also though a master
keep not covenant with his servant, or one neighbor with an other: yet has
neither servant, no nor yet neighbor (though he be under none obedience)
power to aduenge: But the vengeance pertayneth ever to an higher officer, to
who^ thou must complain.

Yea but you will ^ay: it is not like. For the whole body of the subjects
chose those the ruler. Now, cuius est ligare: eius est soluere: Ergo, if he
rule amiss, they that set him up, may put him down again. I answer: God
(and not the common people) chooses the Prince, though he choose him by them.
For deuteronomy. xvi. God commands to choose and set up officers: and therefore is
God the chief chuser and setter up of them, and so must he be the chief
putter down of them again: so that without his special commandment, they
may not be put down again. Now has God given no commandment to put them
down again: But contrariwise, when we have anointed a king over us at his
commandment, he says: touch not mine anointed. And what ieopardy it is to
rise against thy Prince that is anointed over thee, how evil so ever he be,
see in the story of king David, and thoroughout all the books of the kings.
The authority of the king is the authority of God: and all the subjects The
king has Gods authority.
compared to the king, are but subjects still (though the king be never so
evil) as a thousand sons gathered together are but sins still, and the
commandment obey your fathers, goes over all, as well as over one. Even so
goes the commandment over all the subjects: obey your Prince and the higher
power, and he that resists him, resists God, and gets him dampnation.
And unto your argument, cuius est ligare, eius est soluere, I answer: he that
binds An answer to the former Argument
with absolute power, and without any higher authority, his is the might to
louse again. But he that binds at an other man's commandment, may not louse
again without y^ commandment of the same. As they of London, choose them a
Mayor: But may not put him down again how evil so ever he be without the
authority of him with whose license they chose him. As long as the powers or
officers be one under an other, if the inferior do thee wrong, complain to the
higher. But if the highest of all do thee wrong, thou must complain to God
only. Wherefore the only remedy against evil rulers is, that thou turn
thine eyes to thy self and thine own sin, and the^ look up to God and say:
O father, for our sin, and the sin of our fathers is this misery come upon
us, we know not thee as our father, to obey thee and to walk in thy ways, and
therefore thou know not us as thy sounes, to set loving scholemasters over
us. We hate thy law, and therefore have thou thorough the wickedness of
unrighteous Judges, made that law that was for our defense, to be a tyrant
most cruel and to oppress us and do us injury above all other kinds of
violence and robbing. And amend thy living, and be meek and patient, and let
them rob as much as they will, yet shall God give thee food and raiment, and
an honest possession in the earth, to mayntaine thee and thine withal.

Moreover concerning thy goods, Goods.
thou must remember how that thou art a person in the temporal regiment, and
the king; as he is over thy body, eue^ so is he Lord of thy goods, and of The
king as ^ee is Lord of thy body, so (...) he of thy goods.
him thou hold them, not for thy self only, but for to maintain thy wife,
children and servants, and to maintain the king, the realm, and the
country, and town or city where tho^ dwell. Wherefore thou may not
suffer the^ to be wasted, that thou were not able to do thy duty, no more the^
a servant may suffer his masters goods to go to wrack neghgently. For he that
provides not for his, and namely for them of his own household, says Paul,
denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. But every man is bound to
labor diligently and truly, and therewith so soberly to ^e, that he may have
enough for him, and his, and somewhat above for them that can not labor, or by
chance are fallen into necessity. And of that give and lend, and look not
for it again. And if that suffice not thy neighbors necessity: then speak
and make labor to thy brethren, to help also. For it is a common proverb,
many hands make light work, and many may beat that that one alone cannot.

And thy wife, thy children, and servants, art thou bound to defend. If any
man would force thy wife, thy daughter, or thy maid, it is not enough for thee
to look on, and say, God amede you. Nay thou must execute thine office and
authority which the king gives thee. And by the way y^ must defend thy
master and his goods, and the kings goods, which thou have to maintain thy
wife and household withal, and thine neighbor that goes with thee, against
thieves and murderers. And against all such persons lay about thee, and do as
thou would do if thou were under the kings standard against his enemies
which had invaded the realm. For all such persons are mortal enemies to the
realm, and seek to put down the king, and law, and altogether, and to make
that it might be lawful to sin unpunished. And of this manner if thou mark
well the difference of these two states and regimentes, thou may soil all
like doubts that shall be laid against thee.

Moreover when I say, there be two Regime^ts.
regiments, the spiritual and the temporal: Even so I say that every person
Every man is under both regimentes.
baptized to keep the law of God and to believe in Christ, is under both the
rigimentes, and is both a spiritual person and also a te^porall, and under the
officers of both the regime^tes: so that the king is as deep under the
spiritual officer, to hear ou^ of Gods word what he ought to believe and how
to live, and how to rule, as is the poorest beggar in the realm. And even so
the spiritual officer, if he sin against his neighbor, or teach As the
spiritualitie may rebuke kings vices, so may kings use temporal correction
against the spirituality.
false doctrine, is under the kings, or temporal correction, how high so ever
he be. And look how dampnable it is for the king to withdraw himself from the
obedience of the spiritual officer: that is to say, from hearing his duty, to
do it, and from hearing his vices rebuked, to amend them: so dampnable is it
for the spiritual officer, how high so ever he be, to withdraw himself from
under the kings correction, if he teach false, or sin against any temporal
law.

Finally ye must consider that Christ A preacher of ^e^ce.
here teaches his disciples, and them that should be the light and salt in
living and doctrine, to shi^e in the weak and feeble eyes of the world,
diseased with the mygrim, and accustomed to darcknesse, that with our great
pain they can behold no light, and to salt their old feasterd sores, and to
frete out the rotten flesh, even to the hard quick, that it sinert again,
and spare no degree. But tell all men, hie and low, their faults, and warn
them of the ieopardie, and exhort them to the right way. Now such scholemasters
shall Rulers do repene to hear of their ^es.
find small favor and friendship with the rulers of this world, or defense in
their laws. As Christ warns them, Math. x. saying (I send you out as sheep
among wolves. Beware therefore of men, for they shall deliver you up to their
counsels, and shall scourge you in their sinagoges or counselhouses, and ye
shall be brought before the chief rulers and kings, for my sake) and there
teaches them, as here, to arms themselves with patience, and to go forth
boldly with a strong faith, and trust in the succor and assistaunce of God
only, and to plant the gospel with all love and meekenes, and to water it
with their own blond, as Christ did. Thou may not in that state come with a
sword, to defend either thy self or thy Gospel, and to compel men to worship
thee as God, and to believe what thou will. Nay, ye sheep, v^e no such regiment
among Wolves. If thou be a sheep, thou art not(...)taking if thou can bring
to pass that Wolf be content with thy ^^ese only, and to shere thee yearly.

Give to him that asks, and from him that would borow, turn not away. Luke
says, give to whosoever asks thee: that is to say, whersoeuer thou see
need, or see not the contrary, but there may be need: to the uttermost of
thy power there open thine heart and be merciful only. And of mercifulnes set
God thy father, and Christ thy Lord and master for an ensample: and enforce to
be as like them as thou can. If thou be merciful, God has bound himself to
be merciful to thee again. Lo, is not this an excceding great thing, that God
which of no right ought to be bound to his creatures, has yet put it whole in
thine own hands, to bynd him against the day of thy tribulation, then to show
thee mercy.

Concerning lending, proceed by yt foresaid rule of mercy. Many in extreme In
lending we must follow the rule of mercy.
need, yet ashamed to beg, shall desire thee to lend. Unto such in steed
of lending give, or say thus, lo, here is as much as ye require. If ye can pay
it again well, do, and ye shall find me ready against an other time, to lend
or give (if need be) as much more. But and i^ ye shall not be able to pay it
again, trouble not your conscience, I give it you. We be all one man's
children: one man has bought us al with his blood, and bound us to help one
an other. And with so doing, thou shall win the heart of him to thy father.

Concerning marchaundise, and chapmen, the less borowyng were among them, the
better should the common wealth be: if it were possible, I would it were, ware
for ware, or money for ware, or part money and part ware. But if it will not
be: but that a man to get his living with, must needs lend, and call for it
again to find his household, and to pay his dettes: then in the lendyng, be
first single and harmeles as a Dove, and then as wise as a Serpent. and take heed to whom thou lendest. It when thou have lent an honest man, God visit
him, and take away his goods, with what chance it be, whether by sea or land,
that he is not able to pay thee: then to prison him, or to sue him at the law,
or once to speak an unkind word, were against the law of love, and contrary
to showing mercy. There thou must suffer with thy neighbor and brother as
Christ did with thee, and as God does daily. If an unthrift have beguiled thee,
and spent thy We must not revenge our selves upon our evil detters, but
refer our cause to God, and his officers (...)
goods away, and has not to pay, then hold thine hand and heart, that thou
aduenge not thy self: But love him, and pray for him, and remember how God
has promised to bless the pacient and meke. Nevertheless because such
persons corrupt the common manners and cause the name of God the less to be
feared, men ought to complain upon such persons to the officer that is
ordained of God to punish evil doers, and the officer is bound to punish them.
If thou have lent a fox which with canillation will keep thy goods from thee:
then if the ruler and the law will not help thee to thy right, do as it is
above said of him that will go to law with thee, and take thy coat from thee.
That is to say: be content to love that and as much more to it, rather then
thou would aduenge thy self. Let not the wickedness of other men pluck thee
from God. But abide by God and his blessings, and tarry his judgment.
Liberality is mercyfulnes that byndeth God to be merciful again. Covetousness
Covetousness is the root of all evil.
(the root of all evil, and father of all false Prophets, and the
scholemaster that teaches the messe^gers of Satan to disguise them selves
like to the messengers of Christ) is mercyles that Iaco. ij.
shall have judgment without mercy: And therefore exhorts Christ all his so
diligently, and above all thing, to be liberal and to beware of covetousness.

Ye have heard, how it is said, thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine
enemy. But I say unto you, love your enemies. Bless the^ that curse you, do
good to them that hate you. Pray for them which do you wrong and persecute you.
That ye may be the children of your heavenly father. For he makes his sun to
arise over the evil, and over the good, and sends rain upon the righteous
and unrighteous. For if ye love them that love you, what reward shall ye have?
do not the Publicans so? and if ye be friendly to your brethren only what
singular thing do ye? do not the Publicans likewise? ye shall therefore be
perfect, as your father which is in heaven, is perfect.

This text of hating a man's enemy* st^deth not in any one place of the Bible,
but is gathered of many places, in The enemies of God, and hi^ word^, are to be
huted.
which God commands the children of Israel to destroy (...) enemies, the
Ca^s, the ^es, the Amalek^s and other(...)people, as the (...), and ^es,
which(...)out of the favor of God, and ^o destroy the name of God.(...)came
behind them, and(...)were faintie and we^y, as they came out of Egy^ Moabites
and Ammonues(...)to curse them, and begu^led them with their women, and made a
great plague among the^. These and like nations were perpetual enemies to
their land which God had given them, and also of the name of God and of their
faith. For which cause they not only might lawfully, but were also bound to
hate them, and to study their destruction again: howbeit they might not yet
hate (of the said nations) such as were converted to their faith.

Now by the reason of such textes as commanded to hate the common enemies of
their country, and of God and his law, and of their faith: the Phariseis
doctrine was, that a man might Leui. 19.
lawfully hate all his private enemies without exception, nor was bound to do
them good. And yet Moses says, Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart.
And again thou shall not aduenge thy self, nor bear hate in thy mind
against the children of thy people. And if thine enemies Ass sink under his
burden, help to lift him up again. And if his Ox or Ass go astray bring
the^ home again. Which all no doubt, the Phariseis did interpret for good
counsel, but for no precepts, wherefore Christ salteth their doctrine, and
proves that a man is bound both to love and to do good to his enemy. And as a
natural son, though his brethren be never so evil, yet to love them, and
show them kyndnesse, for his fathers sake, and to study to amend the^. What
have thou to rejoice of, if thy Religion be no better then the Religion of
theenes? For Publicans what they were.
thieves love among them selves: and so do the covetous of the world, as the
usurers and publicans, which bought in great the Emperors tribute, and to make
their most advantage, did over set ye people. Nay, it is not enough for thee
to love thy benefactours only, as Monks and Friars do, and them of thine own
coat, and order, or the brethren of thine own Abbay only (for among some
their love stretches no further, and that shall he that is removed out of an
other cloysture thither, will find: yea and in some places charity reaches
not to all the celles of the same cloisture, and to all ye monks that were
professed in the same place. As our heavenly father bestows his benefits
upon good and bad so ought we to love both friend and so.
But lift up thine eyes unto thy heavenly father, and as thy father does, so
do thou love all thy fathers children. He ministers sun, and rain to good
and bad, by which two, understand all his benefits. For of the heat and
dries of the sun and cold and moist of the rain, spryng all things that
are necessary to the life of man. Even so provoke thou and draw thine evil
brethren to goodness, with patience, with love in word and deed, and pray for
them to him that is able to make them better and to convert them. And so thou
shall be thy fathers natural son, and perfect, as he is perfect. The text
says not, ye shall be as perfect as God: But To be perfect what it means.
perfect after his example. To be perfect. in the Scripture is not to be a
Monk or a Friar, or never to sin. For Christ teaches not here Monks or
Friars, but his disciples and every Christen man and woman. And to be in this
life all together without sin, is impossible. But to be perfect, is to have
pure doctrine without false opinions, and that thine heart be to follow that
learning.

An exposition of the sixth Chapter.
TAke heed to your almose, that ye do it not before men, to be seen of the^,
or else ye get no reward of your father which is in heaven. Therefore when thou
geuest almose, make not a trompet to be blown before thee, as the hypocrites
do in the Synagoges and in the streets, to be praised of me^. Verily I say
unto you, they have their reward. But thou when thou geuest almose, let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand does, that thine almose may be in secret.
And then thy father which seethin secret, shall reward thee openly.

AS he rebuked their doctrine above, eue^ so here he rebukes their works:
for out of deuilish doctrine ca^ Almose.
spryng no godly works. But what works rebukes he? verily such as as God in
the Scripture commands, Deeds commanded by the scripture, done to any other
end then they ought are ^o good deeds.
and without which no man can be a Christen man: even prayer, fasting and
almose deed. For as the Scripture corrupt with gloses, is no more Gods word,
even so the deeds commanded in the Scripture (when the intent of them is
perverted) are no more godly deeds. What said the Scribes and Phariseis of him
(think ye) when he rebuked such manner of works? No doubt as they said (when
he rebuked their false gloses) how he destroyed the law and the Prophets,
interpretyng the Scripture after the litteral sense, which kills, and after
his own brain, clean contrary to the common faith of holy Church, and minds
of great Clerks and autenticke expositions of old holy Doctors. Even so here
what other could they say, then, behold the heretic, and did not we tell you
before whereto he would come, and that he kept some mischief behynd, and spued
not out all his venom at once: see to what all his godly new doctrine that
sounded so sweetly, is come? he preached all of love, and would have the people
saved by faith, so long till that now at the last, he preached clean against
all deeds of mercy, as prayer, fasting and almose deed, and destroys all
good works. His disciples fast no more then dogs, they despise their divine
service, and come not to Church, yea and if the holiest of all S. Fraunces
order ask themalmes, they bid him labor with his hands, and get his
living, and say that he that labors not is not worthy to eat, and that God
^ad that no such strong lubbers should loyter, and go a begging, and be
chargeable to the congregation, and eat up that other poor men get with the*
sweat of their booyes: yea and at the last ye shall see, if we resist hun not
betymes, that he shall move the people to insurrection, as Cayphas said, and
the Romans shall come and take our land from us. As ye see in ye text, Luke
xxiij. How (when they could not drive the people from him with those
periwasions) they accused him to Pilate saying: we have found this fellow
perverting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, and saying that
he is Christ a king. Wherefore thou can not be Cesars friend, if thou (...).
xvi.
let him escape. But after all these blasphemies, yet must y^ holy ghost rebuke
the world of their righteousness, yea of their false righteousness and false
holiness, which are neither righteousness nor holiness, but color of hipocrisy.

Christ here destroys not prayer, fasting and alms deed: But preaches
against the false purpose and intent of It is the purpose and intent of our
deeds that make, or marr^.
such works, and perverting the true use: that is to say, their seking of
glory, and that they esteemed themselves righteous thereby, and better then
other men, and so despised and condemned their brethren. With our almose
(which is as much to say as deeds of mercy) or compassion, we ought to seek
our fathers glory only, even the wealth of our brethren, and to win them to
the knowledge of our father, and keeping of his law. He that seeks the glory
of his good works, seeks the glory that belongs to God, and makes himself
God. Is it not a blind thing of ye world, that either they will do no good
works at all, or will be God for their good works, and have the glory
themselves.

Concerning blowing of trumpets, Trumpets To blow trumpetes what.
and ringing of belies, or making a cry, to call men to ^et alms (though ye
right way be, that we should know in every parish, all ourpoore, and have a
common coser for them, and that strangers should bring a letter of
recommendation with them of their necessity, and that we had a commonplace to
receive them into, for the time, and though also we ought to flee all occasions
of vain glory) yet while ye world is out of order, it is not dampnable to do
it. So that the very meaning, both that we blow no trumpets, and that the left
hand know not what the right hand does, is that we do as secretly as we can,
and in no wise seek glory, or to receive it, if it were proffered: But to do
our deeds in singlenes of conscience to God, because it is his commandment,
Left hand.
and even of pure compassion and love to our brethren: and not y^ our good
deeds thorough standing in our own co^ceite, should cause us to despise them.
If thou be tempted Vain glory: A good remedy against it.
to vain glory for thy good deees, the^ look on thine evil thereto, and put
the one in the one balaunce, and the other in the other. And then if thou
understand the law of God any thing at all, tell me whether wayeth he^er.

If that y^ thou do, do tempt thee, then consider what thou do not. If it
move thee to set up thy comb, when thou geuest thy brother a farthyng, or an
halfepenny: ponder in thine heart, how far thou art of from loving him as well
as thy self, and caring for him as much as for thy self. And be sure how much
y^ lackest of that, so much thou art in sin, and that in dampnable sin, if
God for Christ's sake did not pardon thee, because thine heart mourns
therefore, and thou fightest with thy self to come to such persectio^. If a
Pecocke did look well on his feet, and mark the euilfauoured shriking of his
voice, he would not be so proud of the beauty of his fail.

Finally that many dispute, because Works justify not from sin, neither
deserve the reward promised.
God has promised to reward our deeds in heaven, that our deeds deserve
heaven: and because he promises to show mercy to ye merciful, that with our
deeds we deserve mercy, and because he promises forgeuenes of sins to the^ yt
forgive, y^ our deeds deserve forgeuenes of sin, and so justify us. I
answer: first there is enough spoken thereof in other places, so that to them
that have read that, it is superstuous to rehearse the matter again.
Furthermore the argument is naught and holds by no rule. See ye not yt the
father and mother have more right to the child and to all it can do, than to
an Ox or a Cow. It is their flesh and blood, nourished up with their labor
and cost. The life of it, and the maintenance, and continuance thereof is
their benefit, so that it is not able to recompense that it owes to father
and mother by a thousand parts.

And though it be not able to do his duty, nor for blindness to know his
duty, yet the father and mother promise more gifts still without ceasing, and
that such as they think should most make it to see love, and to provoke it to
be willing to do part of his duty. And when it has done amiss, though it
have no power to do satisfaction, nor lust or courage to come to ye right way
again, yet their love and mercy abides still so great to it, that upon
appointment of mending, they not only forgive that is past, and fulfill their
promise nevertheless, but promise greater gifts then ever before, and to be
better father and mother to it the^ ever they were. Now when it cannot do y^
thousand part of his duty, how could it deserve such promises of the father
and mother, as a labourer does his hyre? the reward therefore comes of the
love, mercy, and truth of the father and mother, as well when the child
keeps the appointment, as when they fulfill their promise, when it has
broken the appointment: and not of the deserving of the child.

Even so, if we were not thus drowned Our reward comes not of our deserts
but the the love that God bears (...) thorough faith in Jesus Christ.
in blindness, we should easily see, that we cannot do the thousand part of
our duty to God: no though there were no life to come. If there were no life
to come, it were not right that I should touch any creature of God, otherwise
then he has appointed. Though there were no life to come, it had nevertheless
been right, that Ada^ had abstayned from the forbidden apple tree, and from all
other to, if they had been forbid. Yea and though there were no life to come,
it were not the less right that I loved my brother and forgave him to day,
seeing I shall sin against him to morrow. Because a father cannot give his
children heaven, has he no power to charge them to love one another, and to
forgive, and not aduenge one an other? And has he not right to beat them if
they smite each other, because he cannot give them heaven? A bondsman that has a
master more cruel then a reasonable man would be to a dog: if there were no
heaven, might this bond servant accuse God of unrighteousness, because he has
not made him a master? Now then when we cannot do our duty by a thousand
parts, though there were no such promises: and that the thing commanded is no
less our duty, though no such promise were, it is easy to perceive that the
reward promised comes of the goodness, mercy, and truth of the promiser, to
make us the gladder to do our duty, and not of the deserving of the receauer.
When we have done all we can, we ought to say in our heart, that it was our
duty, and that we ought to do a thousand times more, and that God (if he had
not promised us mercy, of his goodness in Christ) he might yet of right damn
us, for that we have left undone.

And as touching forgiveness of sin: though forgiveness of sin be We may
not challenge the pro^ by our merits, but by Christ's blood.
promised unto thee, yet challenge it not by thy merits, but by the merits of
Christ's blood, and hear what Paul says Phil. iij. Concerning the
righteousness of the law, I was faultlesse, or such as no man could rebuke. But
the things that were to vauntage, I thought damage for Christ's sake, ye, I
think all thing to be damage or loss, for the excellent knowledges sake of
Christ Jesus my Lord: for whose sake I let all go to loss, and count the^ as
chafe or refuse (that is to say, as things which are purged out, and refused
when a thing is tried and made perfect) that I might win Christ, and might be
found in him: not having my righteousness yt comes of yt law. But y^ which
comes of faith in Christ Jesus, which righteousness comes of God through
faith, and is to know him, and the power of his resurrection (how he is Lord
over all sin, and the only thing that slays and vanquisheth sin) and to
know also the fellowship of his passions that I might be made like unto his
death.

So that when righteousness, and true merits be tried, we must be content
that ours be the chafe and Christ's the pure corn: ours the scome and refuse,
Cross.
and Christ's the pure gold. And we must fashion our selves like unto Christ
and take every man his cross and slay and mortify the sin in the flesh: or
else we cannot be partakers of his passion. The sin we do before our
conversion is forgeuen clearly, thorough faith, if we repent, and submit our
selves to a new life. And the sin we do against our wills (I mean the will
of the spirit, for after our conversion Works.
we have two wills fightyng one against the other) that sin is also What
they ^o^.
forgeuen us through faith, if we repent and submit our selves to amend. And
our diligence in workyng keeps us from sinnyng again, and minisheth the sin
that remains in the flesh and makes us pure and less apt and disposed to
sin: and it makes us merry in adversities and strong in temptations and bold
to go into God with a strong and fervent says in our prayers, and sure that we
shall be heard when we Negligence (...) doing ^ed, bryn^th us to desperation
cry for help at need, either for our selves or our brethren. Now they that be
negligent, and sin, are brought in temptation unto the point of desperation,
and feel the very pains of hell, so that they stand in doubt whether God has
cast them away or no. And in adversity they be sorrowful and discouraged, and
think that God is angry, and punishes them for their sins. Two apt
similitudes (...) well and ^l doings
When a child takes pain to do his father his pleasure, and is sure that he
shall have thank, and a reward for his labor: he is merry and reioyseth in
work and pain that he suffers: and so is the adversity of them that keep
them selves from sinnyng. But a child when he is beaten for his fault, or when
he thinks his father is angry and loves him not, is anon desperate and
discouraged: so is the adversity of them that are weak and sin often. A child
that never displeases his father, is bold in his fathers presence to speak
for him self or his friend. But he that often offe^deth and is correct or chidde,
though the peace be made again, yet the remembrance of his offenses makes
him fearful, and to mistrust, and to think his father would not hear him:
so is the faith of the weak that Promise.
sin often. But as for them that profess He that professes not a new life,
has no promise of mercy in Christ.
not a new living how ever so much they dream of faith, they have no faith at
all: for they have no promise, except they be converted to a new life. And
therefore in adversities, temptation and death, they utterly despair of all
mercy and perish.

And when thou prayest, thou shall not be like the hipocrites. For they love to
stand and pray in the Sinagoges, and in corners of the streates, that they
might be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. Thou
therefore when thou prayest, go into thy chamber, and shut thy door, and pray
to thy father which is in secret. And thy father which sees in secret, shall
reward the openly.

After almose follows prayer. For Prayer.
as it is a Christen man's part, to help his neighbor and to bear with him
when he is over charged, and suffer with him, and ^o stand one by an other, as
long as we live here on this earth. Even so because we be ever in such peril
and combraunce, that we cannot rydde our selves out: we must daily and hourly
cry to God for aid and succor, as well for our neighbors as for our selves.

To give almose, to pray, to fast or Works must be seasoned with Gods word,
if they shall please God
to do any thing at all, whether between thee and God, or between thee and thy
neighbor, can thou never do to please God therewith, except thou have the
true knowledge of Gods word to season thy deeds with all. For God has put a
rule in the Scripture without which thou caust not move an here of thine head,
but that it is damnable in the sight of God. As it is of y^ Jews, though (as
Paul bears them record) they have a fervent zeal to God, yea and have the
Scripture thereto: yet because they have not the true understanding, all is
damnable that they do. Hypocrites with scrappes of almose get an hundred fold.
And with prayer they get praise (as thou see here) and pray thereto and rob
widows houses, as thou read Math. xxiij. And with fasting they get fat
belyes, full dishes and ever more then enough. And yet there is none almose,
praying or fasting among them in the sight of God. With their prayers they
exclude all true prayers, and make it impossible that there should be any among
them. For prayer is, either a longyng for the honor of Prayer.
the name of God that all men should fear him, and keep his precepts, and
What it is, and how many ways it may be named prayer.
believe in him. And contrary to that, they seek their own honor, that men
should fear them and keep their ordinances, and believe in their sweet
blessings, prayers, pardons, and what soever they promise. If they bid fast
thou must do it or be damned and be an heretic and rebellious to holy
Church. If they dispe^ce and give thee clean remission for to eat flesh on
good friday (though thou be never so lusty) thou must obey, or else thou art
damned and an heretic, because thou do not believe in holy Church. Either
prayer is, to give God thanks for the benefits received. Contrary to which,
they will first have thanks of the world for their prayers, and rob not
only widows houses: But also Lord, Prince, Emperor and all the world, of
house and land, yea and of their wits to. And then they bind God to thank
them, and to give them. (Beside the thanks which they have gotten in the
world) not only heaven and an higher place but that he give heaven to no other
man, save thorough their merits.

Either prayer is a complaynyng and a showing of thine own misery and
necessity, or of they neighbors before God: desiring him with all the power
of thine heart, to have compassion and to succor. Coutrary to this, they have
excluded with their prayers all necessity, and misery from among them. They
be Lords over all, and do what they will through the whole world. King and
Emperor are their servants: they need but say the word, and their will is
fulfilled. And as for their neighbors, they have no compassion upon them, to
bring their complaints before God. But with their prayers rob them of that
little they have, and so make them more miserable.

Of enteryng into the chamber and Chamber.
shuttyng the door to, I say as above To shut thy chamber door, what it
means.
of that the lift hand should not know what the right hand does: the meaning
is, that we should avoid all worldly praise and profit, and pray with a
single eye and true intent according to Gods word: and is not forbidden thereby,
to pray openly. For we must have a place to come together to pray in general,
to thank and to cry to God for the common necessities, as well as to preach
the word of God in. Where the Priest ought to pray in the mother tongue, that
the name of God may be hallowed and his word faithfully taught and truly
understood, and faith and godly living increased: and for the king and rulers,
that God will give them his spirit, to love the common wealth: and for peace,
that God will defend us from all enemies: for wederyng and fruits, that God
will keep away pestilence and all plagues. And the Priest should be an example
to the people how they should pray. There be of such things as the Priests and
other babble (and not pray) many good Collectes that should much edify the
people if they were spoken in the mother tongue. And then while the Priests
sing Psalms, let every man pray privately and give God thanks for such
benefits as his heart knows he has received of God, and commend to God his
private necessities, and the private necessities of his neighbors which he
knows, and is privy to. Neither is there in all such any ieopardie of vain
glory. But and if God have given any man the spirit of praying, as all men
have not like gifts, that he pray often and when other do not: the^ to have a
secret place to pray in, both for the auoydyng of vain glory, and speech of
people, and that thou may be free, to use thy words as thou lustest, and
what soever gestures and behauiours do move the most to devotion, is necessary
and good.

And finally what soever necessity Prayer.
thou have, though thou feel thy self a great sinner, yet if thine heart be to
amend, Gods commandment and promise should mo^^ us to pray.
let not that discourage thee. But go boldly to thy father, seeing thou have his
commandment, ever to pray, and promise that he will hear thee: not for thy
goodness, but of his goodness, and for his truth.

Moreover when ye pray, babble not much as the heathen do. For they think that
they shall be heard, for their much bablinges sake. Be not therefore like unto
them. For your Father knows of what things ye have need, before ye ask
him. Of this manner therefore pray ye.

O our father which art in heaven, honored be thy name, thy The Pater noster.
kingdom come. Thy will be fulfilled, even in earth, as it is in heaven. Give
us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive our
trespassers. And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. For
thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory for ever. Amen.

As before he rebuked their false intent in praying, that they sought praise
and profit of that work which ought to be direct to God alone, either to give
him thanks, that is to say, to be a known and to confess in the heart, that
al we have, comes of him: or to call upon him for aid and succor in
temptations and all necessity. Even so here he rebukes a false kind of
praying, That prayer is vain wherein yt heart is not joined with the tongue.
wherein the tongue, and lips labor, and all the body is payned, but y^ heart
talks not with God, nor feels any sweetness at all, nor has any confidence
in the promises of God: But trusts in the multitude of words, and in the
pain and tediousnes of the length of the prayer, as a coniurar does in his
circles, Characters, and superstitious words of his coniuration. As ye see now
to be among our Friars, Monks, Chanons and Nuns, and even thoroughout all the
spirituality. Which (as I have proved above) have with their false intent of
praying, excluded all occasions, and the whole matter of true prayer, and have
turned it into a bodily labor, to vex the tongue, lips, eyes, and throat
with roaring, and to weary all the members: so that they say (and may truly
swear it) that there is no False prayer is painful.
greater labor in the world, then prayer: for no labor whatsoever it be, when
the body is compelled and the heart unwilling, can be other then grievous and
painful. But true prayer True prayer to pleasant.
(if they complained and sought help either for themselves or for their
neighbors, and trusted in the promise of God) would so comfort the soul and
courage y^ heart, that the body (though it were half dead and more) would
revive and be lusty again, and the labor would be short and easy (as for an
ensample, if thou we^e so oppresied that thou were wea^y of thy life, and
we^ttest to the king for help, and had sped, thy spirits would so rejoice,
that thy body would receive her strength again, and be as lusty as ever it
was) eue^ so the promises of God work joy above all measure, where they
believed in the heart.

But our hierlinges have no Gods word, but trust in the multitude of words,
length of bablyng, and pain of body, as bond servants. Neither know they any
other virtue to be in prayer: as ye may see by the ordinances of all
foundations. King Henry the fifth built Syon, and the Charterhouse of Shene on
the other side of the Sion Shen^
water, of such a manner that lip labor may never cease. For when the Friars
of Sion ryng out, the Nu^nes begin. And when the Nuns ring out of service,
the Monks on the other side begin. And when they ring out, the Friars
begin again, and vex themselves night and day, and take pain for Gods
sake: for which God must give them heaven. Yea and I have known of some yer
this, that for very pain and tediousnes, have bidden the Devil take their
founders. They call Lent the holiest time of the year: but wherein is that
holiness, verily in multitude of words and tedious length of the service. For
let the^ begin at six, and it will be twelve or they can end. In which time
they be so wearied that by the time they have dined, they have lust to nothing
save to sleep. And in the end of all they think no farther then that God
must reward their pain. And if you ask how they know it. They will answer:
he must reward it or be unrighteous. Now god looks not on the pain of the
prayer, Not the multitude of thy ^ordes, but thy faith (...) praying, God does
respect.
but on thy faith in his promise and goodness: neither yet on the multitude of
thy words, or long habling. For he knows thy matter better then thou thy
self. And though the Jews and the heathen were so foolish thorough their
unbelief, to babble many words, yet were they never so mad, as to m^mble and
buze out words that they understood not. Thou will say: what matter makes
it, if I speak words which I understand not, or if I pray not at all, seeing
God knows my matter all ready: I answer, he will have thee to open thine
heart to him, to inform and edify thine own self. That thou might know
how all goodness is of him, to put thy trust and confidence in him, and to fly
to him in time of need, and to be thankful, and to love him and obey his
commandments, and turn and be converted unto thy Lord God, and not to run
wild, as the ungodly do, which know not the benefits of God, and therefore be
unthankful to obey his commandments.

And that thou may know how and what to pray, he gives thee a short
instruction and ensample saying: after this manner pray.

O our father which art in heaven. The Dater noster is expounded.


First thou must go to him as a merciful father, which of his own goodness
and fatherly love that he bears to thee, is ready to do more for thee then
thou can desire, though thou have no merits. But because he is thy father,
only if thou will turn, and henceforth submit thy self to learn to do his
will.

Honored be thy name. To honor Gods name, what it is.


Honored and praised be thy name or honored and praised be thou: for to
honor God and to honor yt name of God is all one. And to honor the name of
God is, to dread him, to love him, and to keep his commandments. For when a
child obeys his father, he honors and prayseth his father: and when he is
rebellions and disobedient, he dishonors his father. This is then the
understanding and meaning of it. O father, seeing thou art father over all,
power out thy spirit upon all flesh, and make all men to fear and dread and
love thee as their father, and in keeping thy commandments, to honor thee
and thy holy name.

Thy kingdom come. Kings must command nothing, nor forbid to do any thing
contrary to Gods word.


That is, seeing thou art king over all, make all to know thee, and make the
kings and rulers which are but thy substitutes, to command nothing but
according to thy word, and to them make all subjects obey.

Thy will be fulfilled in earth, as it is in heaven.

This is all one with that goes before. For as much then as thou art father
and king over all, and all we thy children and brethren among our selves, make
us all as obedient to seek, and to do thy will as the Aungelles do in heaven.
Make that no man seek his own will but all thine. But and if thou withdraw
thine hand to tempt thy children, that the rulers command ought contrary to
thy will, then make the subjects to stand fast by thy word, and to offer
themselves to suffer all extremity, rather then to obey. Finally when we pray
to thee in our temptations When we request any thing at Gods hand, we must pray
that his will be done, and not ours.
and adversities, desiring thee of whatsoever thing it be, and mean truly:
yet if thou which know all, see a better way to thy glory and our profit,
then thy will be, and not ours. As thy son Jesus gave us an ensample, when he
desired (if it had been possible) that that cup of bitter death might have
departed from him, saying: yet not as I will, but as thou will.

Give us our daily bread.

By bread is understood all manner Daily bread, whereby is understood all
that pertains unto the necessity of this life.
of sustinaunce in the Ebrue speech, yea and here is understand thereby, all
that pertayneth unto the necessity of this life. If we have bread, there is
dearth of nothing yt can pinch, namely in that land, Give us our daily bread.
Give us all that the necessity of this life daily requires. Give it us day by
day, as we need it. We desire not to have store for many years, to exclude all
necessity of praying to thee, and to be as it were out of thy danger, and to
forget thee. But minister it day by day, that we may daily feel thy benefits
and never forget thee. Or if thou give us abundance above that we desire,
then give us an heart to use it, and to bestow it for that purpose thou gave
it, and to deal with our neighbors, and not to love it inordinatly. But to
think that it is thine, and that thou may take it away every hour, and that
we be content that thou so do ac thy pleasure: and so ever to have it but for
daily bread.

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive our trespassers.

Because he knows that our nature is so weak that we cannot but sin daily:
therefore he teaches us daily to repent and to reconcile our selves together,
and daily to ask God forgiveness. Seeing he commands us to ask, we may
behold so to do, and to believe that he will forgive us. No man therefore needs
to despair that can repent and ask forgiveness, how ever so deep he has
sinned. And me thinks, if we looked somewhat nerer to this text, we neded not
to make the Pope so great a God for his pardons. For Christ (which is a man to
be believed) shows us here a more sure A surer way then pardons.
way, yea and that a sensible way, by which we may feel that we be pardoned
and our sins forgeuen. We can have no experience of the popes things whether
they be so, or no. He can with all his pardons deliver no man of any Purgatory
that God puts us unto in this world. He ca^ not bless, or heal any man so
much as of a poor agew, or totheach, which diseases yet (by his own
confession) God puts on us to purge us from sin. But where we cannot see,
feel, or have any experience at all, that it so is, there is he mighty. If I
were come whom out of a land where never man was before, and were sure never
man should come, I might tell as many wonders as Master More does of Vtopia, and
no man could rebuke me.

But here, Christ makes thee sure of How thou may be sure of pardon for thy
sins.
pardon: for if thou can forgive thy brother, God has bound him self to
forgive thee. What if no man have sinned against me? That were hard in this
life: nevertheless yet, if that profession be in thine heart, that you know
that it is thy duty to forgive thy brother for thy fathers sake, and art
obedient to thy fathers ordinance, and would forgive, if any of thy
brethren had offended thee and did ask thee forgiveness. Then have thou that
same spirit which God desires to be in the. Mark what Christ says above in
the beginning of the fifth chap. Blessed be the merciful: for they shall have
mercy. Do thou pity thy brethen that sin, and do thy best to amend
the^, that thy fathers name may be honored? The^ have thou that, whereby thou
art sure of mercy, as soon as thou desire it. And again: Blessed be the
peace makers for they shall be Gods children. Lo, if there be any variaunce
among thy brethren, that one have offended the other, do thy best to set the^
at one, and thou have the same thing that God desires of thee, and for which
he has bound himself forgive thee.

Lead us not into temptation.

That is, let us not slip out of thy lease, but hold us fast: give us not up
nor cease to govern us, nor take thy spirit from us. For as an hounde can not
but follow his game when he sees We cannot of our selves but ^all into (...).
it before him, if he be lowse, so can we not but fall into sin when occasion
is given us, if thou withdraw thine hand from us. Lead us not into temptation.
Let no temptation fall upon us, greater then thine help in us: But be thou
stronger in us then the temptation thou sendest or let come upon us. Lead
us not into temptations: Father though we be negligent, yea and unthankful,
and disobedient to thy true Prophets: yet let not the devil lowse upon us, to
deceive us, with his false Prophets, and to harden us in the way, in which we
gladly walk, as thou did Pharao with the false miracles of his sorcerers,
as thine Apostle Paul threateneth us. ij. These. ij. A little threde holds a
strong man where he gladly is. A little pullyng draws a man whether he gladly
goes. A little wind dryneth Small occasions dr^ us to(...)(...) we are (...)ly
prone.
a great ship with the stream. A light persuasion is enough to make a
lecherous man believe that fornication is no sin. And an angry man that it is
lawful to adue^ge him self, and so forth by all the corrupt nature of man. A
little miracle is able to consirme and harden a man in that opinion, and says
which his blind reason believes all ready. A few false miracles were suffici^t
to persuade the covetousness of Pharao, and his gredynesse (to hold the
children of Israel in bondage for their service) that thy true miracles showed
by Moses for their deliuerau^ce, were not of thee: But of the same kind, and
done by the same craft, as were the miracles of his sorcerers, and so to harden
his heart.

Even so father if thou give us over for our unkindness (seeing the blind
nature of man deliteth in evil, and is ready to believe lies) a little thing is
enough to make them that love thee all ready not to walk in thy truth, and
therefore never able to understand thy sons doctrine. John. vij: But for to
believe yt fayninges of our most holy father, all is superstitions Popery and
invisible blessings, and to harde^ them there in. As a stone cast up into y^
air, can neither go any higher neither ye there abide, when the power of the
hurler cease to drive it: Even so father, seeing our corrupt nature can but go
downward only, and the devil and the world drives thereto y^ same way, how
can we proceed further in virtue or stand there in, if thy power cease in us.
Lead us not therefore O mercyful father into temptation nor cease at any time
to govern us. Now seeing the God of al mercy which knows thine infirmity,
commands thee to pray in all temptation and adversity, and has promised to
help, if thou trust in him: what excuse is it to say, when thou have sinned, I
could not stand of my self, when his power was ready to help thee, if thou
had asked.

But deliver us from evil.

First (as above) let us not fall into temptation. Secondarely, if we be
fallen, as who lives and falls never? for never to fall were enough to make
Who should think him self to be without sin were as evil as Lucifer.
a man as evil as Lucifer, and to believe that he stood by his own power. If
therefore we be fallen even to the bottom, how so ever deep it be, put in
thine arm after, for it is long and strong enough, and pluck us out again.
Thirdly, deliver us from evil, and pluck us out of the flesh, and the world,
and the power of the devil, and place us in thy kingdom, where we be past all
ieopardy, and where we can not sin any more.

For the kingdom, and the power and the glory is thine for ever. Amen.

Because that thou only art y^ king, and all other but substitutes. And
because all power is thine, and all other men's power but borrowed of thee:
therefore ought all honor: and obedience to be thine of right, as chief Lord:
and none to be given other men, but only for the office they hold of thee.
Neither ought any creature to seek any more in this world, then to be a
brother, till thou have put him in office: the^ (if brotherlynesse will not
help, which he ought first to prove) let him execute thy power. Neither may
any man take authority of him self, till God have chose^ him: that is to
were, til he be chosen by the ordinance that God has set in y^ world, to rule
it. Finally no King, Lord, Master or what ruler it be, has absolute power in
this world, and is the very thing which he is called: For then they ceased to
be brethren still, neither could they sin what soever they commanded. But
now their authority is but a limered power. Which when they transgress, they
sin against their brethren, and ought to reconcile them selves to their
brethren and to ask forgiveness, and they are bound to forgive.

Finally let kings, rulers and officers Kings (...) subjects are all one
before God.
remember that God is the very king, and refer the honor that is given to
them for their offices sake, to him, and humble them selves to him and
knowledge and confess in their hearts, that they be but brethren and even no
better before God, then the worst of their subjects. Amen.

For if ye forgive men their fautes, your heavenly father shall forgive you
also. But and if ye do not forgive men their fautes, no more shall your father
forgive your fautes.

This is Gods covenant with us, A covenant where with, God is bound to
forgive us, and we to forgive each other.
and a confirmation of the petition above rehearsed in the Pater noster:
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive our trespassers. If thou will enter
into the covenant of thy Lord God, and forgive thy brother: then what soever
thou have committed against God, if thou repent and ask him forgiveness, thou
art sure that thou art so absolved by these words, that none in heaven nor
earth can bind thee: No though our most holy father curse thee as black as
coals, seven foot under the earth and seven, foot above, and cast all his
lightenyng upon thee, to burn thee to powder Keep the covenant of yt Lord
thy God therefore, and fear no bugges. But and if thon wilt not Gods covenant
is a sure absolution to all that keep.
come within the covenant of God, or if when thou have professed it and
received the sign thereof, thou cast the yoke of the Lord from of thy neck: be
thou sure, thou art bound by these words so fast that none in heaven or in
earth can lowse thee. No, though our earthyshe God whisper all his absolutions
over thee, and claw thee, and stroke thine head with all his sweet blessings.

Furthermore though forgiveness of thy sins be annexed to thy work and
forgeuyng thy brother: yet do not (as I said) thy works justify thee before
God. But the faith in Christ's blood, and in the promises made to us for his
sake, does bring righteousness in to the heart. And the righteousness of the
heart by faith, is felt and known by the work. As Peter in the first of his
second Epistle commands to do good works, for to make our vocation and
election sure: that we might feel our faith, and be certified that it is
right. For except a man be proved and tried, it cannot be known, neither to
him self or other men, that he is righteous and in the true faith. Take an
example least thou be beguiled with sophistry: Christ says Math. xiij. the
kingdom of heaven is like leven which a woman takes and hides in three peckes
of meal till all be leuenned or sour^. Leven is Leaven how many wayed it is
taken.
sometime taken in an evil sense, for the doctrine of the Phariseis, which
corrupted the sweetness of the word of God with the leue^ of their gloses: and
sometime in a good sense, for the kingdom of heaven, that is to say the
Gospel and glad tydinges of Christ. For as leven alters the nature of dowe
and makes it through sour: even so the Gospel turns a man into a new life
and alters him a little and a little: first the heart, and then the members.

Faith in Christ first certifieth the conscience Faith, what power it is of,
and the fruits that spring thereof.
of the forgiveness of sins and delivers us from the fear of everlasting
damnation: and then brings the love of God and of his law into the heart,
which love is the righteousness of y^ heart. Love brings good works into the
members, which works are y^ outward righteousness and the righteousness of
the members. To hate the will of God is the unrighteousness of the heart, and
causes evil works which are the unrighteousness of the members. As when I
hated my brother, my tongue spoke evil, my hands smote and Love is
righteousness.
so forth. To love is the righteousness of the heart, and causes good works
which are the righteousness of the members. As if I love my brother, and he
have need of me and be in poverty, love will make me put mine hand into my
purse or almory and to give him some what to refresh him etc. That the love of
God and of his commandments is the righteousness of the heart, does no man
doubt save he that is hartlesse. And that love spryngeth of faith thou may
evidently see. i. Ioh. ij. he y^ loves Faith brings love.
his brother dwells in yt light. But he that hate: h his brother, is in
darkness, and walks in darckenesse, and wotteth not whether he goes, for
darckenesse has blinded his eyes. Why is he that hates, in darcknesse (verily
because he sees not the love of God in Christ. For if he saw that, he could
not but love his brother for so kind a fathers sake. If any man hate his
brother, be thou sure that the same man is in darcknesse, and has not ye light
of true faith, nor sees what Christ has done. If a man so love that he ca^
forgive his brother, assure thy self that he is in the light of the true
faith, and sees what mercy is showed him in Christ.

This is then the sum of altogetheri works are the outward righteousness
Works.
before y^ world, and may be called the righteousness of ye members, and spring
Love.
of inward love. Love is the righteousness of the heart, and springs of faith.
Faith.
Faith is the trust in Christ's blood, and is the gift of God. Ephesians. ij.
whereunto a man is drawn of the goodness of God, and driven through true
knowledge of the law, and of beholding his decdes in the lust and desire of
the members unto the request of the law, and with seeing his own dampnation in
the glass of the law. For if a man saw his own dampnation in yt law, he
should immediately hate God and his works, and utterly despair, except God
offered him Christ, and forgave all that were past, and made him his son, and
took the dampnatio^ of the law away, and promised that if he would submit
himself to learn and to do his best, that he should be accept as well as an
Angel in heaven, and thereto if he fell of frailty, and not of malice and
stubbornness, it should be forgeuen upon amendment, and that God would ever
take him for his son, and only chastise him at home when he did amiss,
after the most fatherlyest manner, and as easily as his disease would suffer,
but never bring him forth to be judged after the rigorousnes of yt law. As
Leaven can not be seen in a ^oafe without smell or taste, so cannot says in us
without good works, and y^ intent of the same be seen or appear.
And as thou could not see Leaven though thou brakest up a loaf, except
thou smelledst or tastedst the sourenes, eue^ so could thou never see true
faith or love, except thou saw works: and also saw the intent and
meaning of ye worker, least hypocrisy deceive thee.

Our deeds are the effect of righteousness, and thereto an outward testimony
and certifiyng of the inward righteousness, as sourenes is of Leaven. And when
I say faith justifies, the understanding is, that faith receaueth the
iustifiyng. God promises to forgive us our sins, and to impute us for full
righteous. And God justifies That faith justifies, what i^ means.
us actiuely: that is to say, forgeueth us and reckons us for full righteous.
And Christ's blood deserves it, and faith in the promise receaueth it, and
certifieth the conscience thereof. Faith chale^geth it for Christ's sake, which
has deserved all that is promised, and cleaves ever to the promise, and truth
of the promiser, and pretends not the goodness of her work, but knowledgeth
that our works deserve it not, but are crowned and rewarded with the
deseruinges of Christ. Take an ensample of young children, when the father
promises them a good thing for yt doing of some trifle, and when they come for
their reward, delayeth with them saying: What, that thou have done is not
worth half so much: should I give thee so great a thing for so little a trif^*
They will answer: ye did promise me: ye said I should have it: why did ye
promise, and why then did ye say so? And let him say what he will to drive them
of, they will ever say again: ye did promise me, so ye did: ye said I should
have it, so ye did. But hirelinges will pretend their work and say: I have
deserved it: I have done so much, and so much, and my labor is worth it.

Now at the first covenant making with God, and as often as we be reconciled,
after we have sinned, the righteousness comes of God altogether. But after the
atonement is Faith.
made and we reconciled, then we be partly righteous in our selves and
unrighteous: righteous as far as we love, and unrighteous as far as the
love is imperfect. And faith in ye promise of God yt he does recke^ us for full
righteous does ever supply yt unrighteousness and imperfectnes* as it is our
whole righteousness at the beginning.

Finally, our works which God commands, and unto which he annexed his
promises that he will reward Works are sacraments.
them, are as it were very sacraments and visible and sensible signs, tokens,
earnest obligations, witnesses, testimonies, and a sure certifiyng of our
souls, that God has and will do according to his promise, to strength our
weak faith, and to keep the promise in mind. But they justify us not, no
more then the visible works of the sacraments do. As for an example, the
work of baptime, that out ward washing, which is the visible facrame^t or
sign, justifies us not. But God only justifies us actiuely, as cause
efficient or workman. God promises to justify whosoever is baptized to
believe in Christ, and to keep the law of God, that is to say, to forgive
Baptim.
them their foresinnes, and to impute righteousness unto them, to take them
for his sons, and to love them as well as though they were full righteous.
Christ has deserved us y^ promise, Christ.
and that righteousness. And faith does receive it, and God does give it and
Faith.
impure it to faith, and not to y^ washing. And the washing does testify it,
and certify us of it, as the Popes letters do certify the beleuers of the
Popes pardons. Now the letters help not or hinder, but that the pardons were
as good without them, save only to stablishe weak souls that could not
believe except they read the letters, looked on the seal, and saw the print of
Saint Peter's keys.

O a merciful God and a most loving father, how cares he for us: first above
all and beside all his other benefits, to give us his own son Jesus, and
with him to give us himself and all: and not content therewith, but to give us
so many sacraments, or visible signs to provoke us and to help our weak
faith, and to keep his mercy in mind: as baptime, the sacrament of his body
and blood, and as many other sacraments as they will have, if they put
significations to them (for we destroy none, but they destroy which have put
out the significations or feigned some without) as wedlock to signify that
Christ is the husband and we his wife and partakers with him, as the wife with
her husband of all his riches. etc. And beyond all those visible sacraments,
to give us yet more sensible and surer sacraments and suraunces of his
goodness, even in our own selves: as if we love and give almose to our
neighbor, if we have compassion and pray for him, if we be merciful and
forgive him, if we deny ourselves, and fast, and withdraw all pleasures from
the flesh for love of the life to come: and to keep the commandments of
God. For when such things being before impossible, and now are easy and
natural, we feel, and are sure that we be altered and of a new creature
shapen in righteousness after the image of Christ and God our father, seeing
his laws of righteousness are written in our hearts.

When ye fast, be not sad as the hipocrites are. For they fashion them a new
countenance, that it might appear unto men how they fast. Verily I say unto
you, they Fast.
have their reward. Thou therefore when thou fastest, annointe thine head, and
wash thy face, that it appear not unto men how thou fastest. But unto thy
father which is in secret. And thy father which sees in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

As above of almose and prayer: ene^ so here Christ rebukes the false intent
and hypocrisy of fasting. That they sought praise of that work that was
ordained for to tame the flesh, and used If fasting be used to any other and
then to tame the flesh, that thereby we may be the more prone to serve God, it
is abused.
such fashions, that all the world might know that they fasted, to praise
them, and to say: O what holy me^ are these, how pale and pitiful look they,
even like death, hanging down their heads, and beholding the earth, as me^
clean out of the world? If these come not to heaven, what shall become of us
poor wretches of the world? If these be not great in the favor of god, and
their prayers be heard whatsoever they ask, in what case are we lay people?
Happy is he that may be a brother among them, and partaker of their prayers and
fastinges, and other holy living. In an unhappy, in an happy (I would say)
hour was he borne that builds them a cell or a cloysture, or gives them a
portion of his land to comfort them good men, in this painful living and
strait penance which they have taken upon them. Blessed were he that might
kiss the edge of the coat of one of the^. Oh, he that might have his body
wrapped in one of their old coats at the hour of death, it were as good to
him as his Christendom. etc. It appears also by that they asked Christ why
his disciples fasted not as well as the phariseyes, that they often fasted when
the common people fasted not, and all to appear holy. As ours fast Aduent, and
begin before Lent at Septuagesima, when Laus tibi domine commethin.

And concerning the anointing of To anoint the head, what it means.
thy head. etc. is meant, as before of turning the other cheek, and of that the
left hand should not know what the right did: that is, that they should avoid
all vain glory, and fast to god, and for the intent that God ordained it for,
and that with a merry heart and cheerful countenance, thereby to feel the
working of God, and to be sure of his favor. Such is the meaning, and not to
bind the^ that will fast to annointe their head and wash their faces. And the
manner or phrase of speaking comes of an usage, that was among the Jews, to
anoint themselves with sweet and odoriferous annointmentes whe^they were
disposed to be merry and to make good cheer, as ye see how Mary of Bethanie
powered a box of precious ointement upon Christ's head at supper.

As concerning fasting, it were good, Fasting.
that kings and rulers did set an order of sobernes among their subjects, to
avoid dearth, innumerable diseases, and ye great heap of vices that spring of
intemperancy, and that they forbio not only riote and excess: but also all
manner wanton, delicious, and customable eating and drinking of such things as
corrupt the people, and make the men more effeminate then the women, so that
there remains no more tokens of a man in them save their beardes. Our
fashions of eating make The heap of inconveniences that spring by ^rate and
superfluous (...), and drinking.
us slothful and unlusty to labor and study: unstable, inconstant, and light
manered: full of wits, after witted (as we call it) incircumspect
inconsiderate, heady, rash, and hasty to begin unadvisedly, and without castyng
of perils, the end not considered what may follow, nor ye means well looked
upon, how and by what way the matter might be brought to pass, triflers,
mockers, rude, unsavory iesture without all manner of salt, and even very apes
and marinesettes, and full of wanton and ribaldish communication and lewd
gestures. It corrupts the wit with fal^e judgment, and infecteth the body
with lust, and makes the whole man so unquiet in him self, that the body
cannot sit still and rest in one place and continue in his work, nor the mind
persevere and endure in one purpose.

Let them provide that there be diligent fishyng in the Sea, and command the
Sea cost and towns whether fish may easily come, to fast Friday, Saturday
Fasting days, or days of abstmence are to be ordained for commonweals sake.
and Wensday to if need be, and on the friday to eat no white meat. And let
the countries which have none abou^dance of fish, yet have white meat enough,
fast Friday and Saturday from flesh only. And let those countries where
scarsetie of both is, fast Friday from flesh only, and eat flesh Wensday and
Saturday. But abstain from supper or from dinner, or eat soberly those days.
And let them so moderate their fastes that the people may bear it, a provision
made for the old, the sieke and fable etc. Which fast shall be a temporal thing,
for a temporal common wealth only, and not a service to God.

Then let the Priests preach first the law truly and teach the people to see
their sins, and so bring them to repentannce: And secondearely the faith of
Christ and the forgiveness of sin through faith: And thyrdly almose, prayer,
and fasting, which are the whole life of a Christian man, and without which
there is no Christen man a live. And let them preach the true use of their
almose, Almose.
which is to help thy neighbor with counsel, with body and goods and all
that is in thy power: and the true use of prayer which is to bring Prayer.
his necessity and thine own before God with a strong faith in his promises:
and the true use of fasting, which Fasting.
is to tame yt flesh unto y^ spirit, that the soul may attend to the word of
God and pray through faith.

By these three we keep the spirit of Almose, prayer, and fasting, how
necessary.
God, and both continue and also grow in righteousness and wax perfecter and
perfecter in soul and body. And if these fail or that we understand not the
right intent, we loose the spirit again, and the righteousness of faith, and
the true understanding of the Scripture, and all our learning shall be but pure
darckenesse. And then what a blyndenesse is that, whe^the darcknesse of hell is
called the light of heaven.

As it is of almose and prayer, so it is Almose, prayer, and fasting, are
inseparable
of fasting: judge like of all three. Where any one of them is, there are they
all three: and where any one is away, there is none at all. We must have the
profession of all three ever written in our hearts. I must ever love my
neighbor and be ready to help, and when occasion is offered, then do it. I
ought to consider and know that all comes of God, and to knowledge that same
to him in mine heart. And what so ever we need, we ought to know, that we must
receive that of God, and therefore to call ever to him with a strong faith. Even
so I must ever fight against my flesh, and therefore ever withdraw from it all
that moves it to rebel against the spirit.

So now fasting stands not in eating Fasting is not in eating and drinking
only.
and drinkyng only, and much less in flesh alone. But in abstinence of all
that moves the flesh against the spirit, as long sleepyng, idleness, and
filthy communication and all worldly talkyng, as of covetousness and promotion
and such like, and wanton company, soft clothes, and soft beds and so forth.
Which are that right hand and right eye that must be cut of and plucked out,
that the whole man perish not. And as ye can put no general rule of almose or
prayer, no more can ye of fasting. But I must be all way ready to cut of what
soever I perceive to strength the flesh against the spirit. And I must have a
diligent eye to the flesh and his complexion, and if ought escape me in word or
deed, seek whence the occasion came, and at once cut of that right hand, and
pluck out that eye.

If this fast be truly preached, then is fasting good, and not before, for
making Works make hipocrites, (...) y^ true intent be away.
of hypocrites: as Christ would not let his Disciples fast before they were
learned, lest they should thereby have been no better then the Phariseis. And
then the outward fasting ordained by the temporal rulers helps much, for the
weakes sake. Yea and though the land were so plenteous that it neded not to
command such fast for to avoid dearth, yet they ought to set such up.
Because of them that cannot rule them selves, Rulers be ordained for the^ that
cannot rule themselves.
for whose sakes they ought to forbid excesses of tauernes and alehouses and
riotyng out of season. For if the people could rule them selves, what ned
rulers. Moreover if any man privately show the Priest his infirmities, and the
Priest see any manner of abstinence or chastising apt for the person, that let
him council him to do for the subdueyng of the flesh, and not command as a
tyrant under pain of damnation and to make satisfaction. Thus wise let him
say: brother or sister: ye be bound under pain of deadly sin to tame your
flesh by some manner of way that ye sin not against God: and I know no better
then this: my council and my desire therefore is, that ye use this till either
ye have no more need, or till god show you some better etc. And let the elders
consider diligently the course of their youth, and with wisdom, counsel and
discrete governance, help the younger to avoid the perils and ieopardies
which they have learned by their own experience to be in that dangerous
journey.

Moreover when the people be fallen from their profession and from the law:
Preacher: The office of a true preacher.
as it shall be impossible for the preacher, to keep the great multitude
together, if the temporal sword be slack and negligent in punishing open
offenses (as Note this well, ye temporal magistrates.
they ever have and will be, save in those points only wherein lies the pith
of their own profit and advantage, and the weight of their honor and main
tenaunce of their dignities) and when God also (as his promise is) has brought
upon them the curses of the law: hunger, dearth, battle, pestilence and all
manner of plagues with all misfortune and evil luck. Then let the true
preachers be importune, and show the people the causes of their misery and
wretched adversity, and expound the law to them and bring them to knowledge
of their sins, and so bind their consciences and draw them to repentance
and to the appointement and covenant of the Lord again. As many Prophets,
Priests, yea and Kings of the old Testament zealous Preachers.
holy Prophets, Priests and Kings in the old Testament did call the people
back and brought them again in time of adversity, unto the appoyntement of
the Lord. And the Priest, Prophet or King in Gods stead smote hands with
them, and took an oath of them, to be the Lords people and to turn again to
the Lords covenant, for to keep his law and to believe in his promises. And
God immediately withdrew his hand and ryd them out of all captivity and
danger, and became as merciful as ever before.

But we Christian have been very seldom or neue called again to the covenant
of the Lord, the law of God Papists have often been called to the Popes
covenant, but seldom to the Lords.
and faith of Christ: But to the covenant of the Pope often. As he now
clocketh a pase for his chekyns and will both prove all his old policies, and
seek and imagine new practices. And if the people come again let the Priest or
Bishop after the ensample of the Prophets and high Priests of the Israelites
take an oath in Gods stead of the King and Lords. And let the King and Lords
receive an oath of the people, and follow the example of the Ninevites in
fasting and praying.

Some man will say: seeing fasting Objection.
is to withdraw all pleasures from the body and to punish the flesh, then God
deliteth in our pain taking etc. I answer: God deliteth in true obedience
Solution.
and in all that we do at his commandment and for the intent that he
commanndeth it for. If thou love and pity thy neighbor and help him, thy
almose is acceptable. If thou do it of vain glory to have the praise that
belongs to God, or for a greater profit only, or to make satisfaction for
thy sins past and to dishonor Christ's blood, which has made it all ready:
then is thine almose abominable. If thy prayer be thanks in heart or calling
to God for help with trust in him according Pain.
to his promise: the^ thy prayer pleases. If thou believe in Christ's How God
delueth in our pain taking.
blood for the remission of sins, and henceforth hate sin, that thou
punishest thy body to fle thy lusts and to keep them under that thou sin not
again, then it pleases God excedingly. But and if thou think that God delyteh
in the work for the work it self, the true intent away, and in thy pain for
thy pame it self, y^ art as far out of the way as from heaven to the earth.
If y^ would kill thy body or when it is tame enough* pain him further that
thou were not able to serve God and thy neighbor, according to the rowme and
estate thou art in, thy sacrifice were clean without salt, and all together
unsavory in the taste of God, and thou mad and out of thy wit. But and if thou
trust in thy work, then art thou abominable.

Now let us look on the Popes Fast.
fast. First the intent should be to ^ame thy lusts, not lechery only, but
pr^ The intent of fasting what ^s.
chiefly, wrath, malice, hate, (...), and covetousness, and to keep the law of
God, and therefore stands not in meat and drink only, but how they keep
Gods law, compare it to their deeds and thou shall see. Secondarily Fast.
the fast of the old law was, to put How the Jews did fast.
on mourning clothes, as heir or sack, and neither to eat nor drink v^ll
night, and all the while to pray and to do almose deeds and show mercy. And
at even they eat flesh and what God give, soberly as little as would
sustain the body. etc. The Popes fast Fast. The popes fast.
is commonly, only to eat no flesh. I say not look how leave they be, but
consider what a taming of the flesh it is, to eat ten or twenty manner of
fishes dressed after the costliest manner, and to sit a cople of hours, and
to pour in of the best wine and Ale that may be gotten. And at night to
banquet with A feas^yng fast.
dew (as they say) of all manner of fruits and confections, marmelad, Succad,
Grenegynger, comffettes, sugerplate, with malmesay and romney burnt with sugar,
Synamond and cloves, with bastard, Muscadell and Ipocrasie. etc. Think ye not
that such dewes with drinking a piece of saltfishe or a Pickrell, does not tame
yt body excedingly?

Furthermore that the true intent is Faslyng.
away both of their fasting and prayers, it is evident: first by the
multiplying The true intent is away from the Popes fasting.
of them, for when the Jews had lost the understanding of their sacrifices,
and did believe in the work, then they were mad upon them, that well was he
that could rob him self to offer most: in so much that the Prophets cried
out against them, that their offeringes stanke in the nose of God. And ours had
so multiplied their fasting that they could no longer bear them. At the
beginning they were tolerable for the vauntage: quia leuis est labor cu^
l^^ro. But when they had purchased enough and enough again, they became
intolerable. And therefore all our Monks whose profession was never to eat
flesh, set up the Pope, and took dispensations, both for that fast, and also
for their strait rules, and made their strait rules as wide as ye hoodes of
their cowles. And as for the hypocrisy Monks made the Pope a ^od for his
dispensations.
of the fratrie where they eat but invisible flesh, or that is interpret to be
no flesh is spoken of in other places. An other prooffe is, that they so long
a time have given pardons of the merits of their fasting, as though they had
done more then enough for themselves, and of that marchaundise have gotten all
they have, and have brought the knowledge of Christ's blood clean into
darcknesse. And last of all, what shall I say of the open idolatry of
innumerable fastes: of saint Brandons fast, Saint Patrickes fast, of 4. holy
Fridayes, of Saint Antonies between Saint Mary's days, of our Lady fast,
either vij. year the same day that her day falls on in March, and then
begin, or one year with bread and water, and all for what purposes, ye know
well enough, and of such like, I trow ten thousand in the world. And who has
rebuked them?

See that ye gather not treasure upon the earth, where rust and mothes
corrupt, and where thieves break up and steal, But gather you treasure in
heaven, where neither rust nor mothes corrupt, and where thieves neither break
up not steal. For where your treasure is, there will be your hearts also.

Note the goodly order of Christ's preaching. First he restored the true
understanding of the law, then ye true intent of the works. And here
consequently Covetousness (...) at a(...)(...) is.
he rebukes the mortal foe and sworn enemy, both of true doctrine and true
living, which is covetousness the root of all evil says Paul. 1. Tim. 6.
Covetousness is Image service. Col. 3. It makes men to err from the faith. 1.
Tim. 6. It has no part in the kingdom of Christ and God. Ephe. 5. Covetousness
hardened the heart of Pharad that the faith of the miracles of God could not
sink into it. Covetousness did make Balam which knew all ye truth of God to
hate it, and to give the most pestilent and poysonfull counsel against it,
that heart could imagine, even for to destroy it if it had been possible.
Covetousness taught the false prophets in the old testament to interpret the
law of God falsely, and to pervert the meaning and intent of all the sacrifices
and ceremonies, and to slay ye true preachers that rebuked the^.

And with their false persuasions they did lead all the kings of Israel out
of the right way, and the most part of the kings of Judah also. And Peter in
the second chapter of his second Epistle 2. Pet (...).
prophesies that there should be false teachers among us, that should follow
the way of Bala^ (that is to say, for covetousness persecute the truth) and
through covetousness with fained words to make marchaundise of the people, and
to bring in dampnable sects to. And here ye have an infallible rule
Covetousness cannot but err.
that where covetousness is, there is no truth: no though they call themselves
the church, and say thereto that they cannot err. Covetousness kept Judas still
in unbelief though he saw and did also many miracles in the name of Christ,
and compelled him to sell him to the Scribes and Phariseis: for covetousness is
a thing merciles. Covetousness made the Phariseis to lie on Christ, to persecute
him, and falsely to accuse him. And it made Pilat though he found him an
innocent, yet to slay him. It caused Herod to persecute Christ yet in his
cradell. Covetousness makes hipocrites to persecute ye truth against their own
consciences, and to lie to Princes, that the true preachers move sedition and
make their subjects to rise against them, and the said covetousness makes the
Princes to believe their wicked persuasions, and to le^de their swords to shed
innocent blood.

Finally covetousness makes many (whom the truth pleases at the beginning) to
cast it up again and to be afterward the most cruel enemies thereof, after the
ensample of Simon Magus. Act. 8. Yea and after the ensample of Sir Thomas More
K. which knew the truth, and for covetousness More.
forsook it again, and conspired first with the Cardinal to deceive ye king,
and to lead him in darcknes. And afterward when the light was sprung upon
them, and had driven the^ clean out of the scripture, and had delivered it out
of their tyranny, and had expelled the darcke stinking miste of their deuelish
gloses: and had wiped away the cobwebbes which those poisoned spiders had
spread upon the face of the clear text, so that the spirituality (as they call
themselves) were ashamed of their part, as shameless as they be: yet for all
that, covetousness blinded the eyes of that glering Fox, more and Covetousness
blinded the eyes, and hardened ye heart of Sir Thomas More.
more, and hardened his heart against ye truth, with the confidence of his
painted Poetry, babbling eloquence, and iuggeling arguments of subtle
sophistry, grounded on his unwritten verities, as true and as autentike as his
story of Vtopia. Paul therefore bids Timothy to charge the rich to believe
in the living god, and not in their uncertain riches, for it is impossible for
a covetous Idolater or Image seruer, that trusts in the dead God of his
riches, to put his trust in the living God.

One misery is, that they which here gather and lay up, cannot tell for whom.
The commodities that follow covetous and worldly rich men.
An other is, rust, canker, mothes, and a thousand misfortunes, beside, thieves,
extortioners, oppressors, and mighty tirants, to ye which ye rich be ever a
pray. And though they prosper to ye end outwardly, yet fear ever guaweth their
hearts inwardly. And at the hour of death they know and feel that they have
gathered naught, and then sorrow they, and are like one that dreameth of
riches, and in the morning when he finds naught, is heavy and sorry for the
remembrance of the pleasant dream. And finally when they be most loath to die
and hope to live long, the^ they perish suddenly, after the ensample of ye
rich man which intended to make him larger barnes and store houses. Happy
therefore is he that lays up treasure ^uke. xij.
in heaven, and is rich in faith and good works: for the reward thereto
promised shall God keep sure for him: no man can take it away. Here is not
forbidden to have riches. But to love it, to trust in it, and to be careful
for it. For God has promised to care for us, and to give us enough, and to
keep that which is gotten, if we will care to keep his commandments.
Whatsoever office or degree thou art in, in this world, do the duty of thine
office diligently, and trust in God, and let him care. If thou be an husband
man, ear and sow, and husband thy ground, and let God alone for the rest, he
will care to make it grow plenteously, and to send seasonable weather to have
it in, and will provide thee a good market to sell* etc.

In like manner, if thou be a king, do the office of a king, and receive the
duties of the king, and let God care to keep thee in thy kingdom. His savor
shall do more for thee the^ a thousand millions of gold, and so of all other.
He that has but a little and is sure that God shall keep both him and it, is
richer then he which has thousands, and has none other hope the^ that he and
it must be kept with his own care and policy.

And finally mark one point in Luke. 14. None of them that re^useth Luke.
xiiij.
not all that he possesses ca^ be my disciple, that is, he that casts not
away y^ love of all worldly things, can be no scholar of Christ's to learn
his doctrine. The^ he adds that salt is good, but if the salt be unsavory or
has lost his ve^e, what can be seasoned therewith? verily nothing. Now by salt
is understand the doctrine, and the meaning Covetousness makes the salt of
Gods word unsavory.
is, if ye be covetous and love worldly things, it will corrupt ye salt of
your doctrine, so that whatsoever you powder therewith it shall be more unsavory
then before.

Where your treasure is, there are your hearts. If your treasure be in ye
world, so is the love of your hearts. And if ye love the world and the things
of the world, the love of God is not in you, and the love of God is the love of
his commandments: and he that Covetousness makes a false Prophet.
loves not Gods commandments shall never preach them truly, because he
loves them not. But shall corrupt them with gloses that they may stand with
that which his heart loves, and until they have an other sense then ever God
gave them. Ergo no covetous person can be a true Prophet. It is not for naught
then that Christ to often and so diligently warns his disciples to beware of
covetousness, as of that thing which he wist well had ever corrupt the word of
God, and ever should.

The light of thy body is thine eye, wherefore if thine eye be single, all thy
body shall be full of light. But and if thine eye be wicked, tha^ shall thy
whole body be darcke. If therefore the light that is in thee be darcknesse, how
great is that darkness.

Note the conclusion with a proper similitude. The eye is the light of the
body, and by the light of the eye all other Darckenesse.
members see and are governed. As long as the eye sees, hand and foot do
their duties, neither is there any fear that a man should sinnible or fall
into fire or water. But if the eye be blind, all the body is blind, and that
so blind that there is no remedy at al: set a candle before him, he sees not,
give him a lantern in his hand, and yet he goes not straighte. Bring him out
into the sun and point him unto yt which thou would have him see, yt
boteth not. Even so, if covetousness Covetousness causes darcknesse.
have blinded the spiritual eye, and perverted the right intent of the law of
God, and of the works commanded by God, and of the sacrif^ce, ceremonies, and
sacraments, and of all other ordinances of God (which intent is the
spiritual eye) then is all the doctrine darcke and very blyndnes: yea and then
how dark is the darcknes, when that which is pure blindness is believed to be
light? how darcke is the doctrine of them that teach that a man may compel God
with the works of free will to give them his favor and grace, or make God
unrighteous? How darcke is the doctrine of them which (to ye rebuke of Christ's
blood) teach that works do justify before God, and make satifaction for
sins? How blind are they which think prayer to be the pattering of many
words, and will therefore not only be praised and paid of the world, but
also by the title thereof challenge heaven and not by ye merits of Christ's
blood? How darcke is the doctrine of them whose faith is only and all together
in appointmentes which they themselves have feigned between them and God, unto
which yet God never subscribed: In which also they assign what work and how
much they will do, and what reward, and how great God must give them, or choose
whether he will be unrighteous.

How darcke is the doctrine of them Darckenesse.
that say stiffly that the work of the Sacraments in it self (not referring
it to stir up the faith of the promises annexed to the^) does justify: and
affirm that bodily pain for the pain it self (not referryng it either to
the love of ye law of god or of their neighbor) does please God? How darcke,
damnable and deuelish is the doctrine of them which not only think lucre to
be the service of God, but also are so far past all shame that they affirm
they be the holy Church and cannot err, and all that The da^^nes of the Popes
doctrine here plainly appears.
they decree, must be an article of our faith, and that it is damnable once to
doubt or search the Scripture whether their doctrine will thereto agree or no:
But say their decrees must be believed as they sound, how contrary so ever the
Scripture be: and the Scripture must be expounded and made agree to them. They
need not to regard the Scripture, but to do and say as their holy Ghost
moves them: and if the Scripture be contrary, then make it a nose of wax and
wrest it this way and that way till it agree.

Faith of works was the darcknesse of the false Prophets, out of the which
Faith in works is darcknesse.
the true could not draw them. Faith of works was the blyndnesse of the
phariseis, out of the which neither John Baptist nor Christ could bring them.
And though John Baptist pyped to them with reasons of the Scripture in
uincible, and Christ thereto added miracles, yet the Phariseis would not dance.
For John Baptist (as they thought) was to mad to live so strayte a life, and to
refuse to be justified thereby. And as for Christ and his Disciples, the
Phariseis were much holyer them selves, fasted oftener, and prayed thicker, yea
and uttered many mo words in their prayer then they. Faith of works is that
belefe of the Turks and Jews which drives them ever away from Christ. Faith
of works has been that light of darcknes in which a great part of us Christen
have walked ever sense Pelagius and Faustus, well about xij. C. years, and
ever mo and mo: and in which all our religious have walked all and more to this
four or five hundred year: and in which the Priests also have walked a long
season, the Lord bring them out again.

Finally how darcke is the darcknesse Darcknes.
when a Pharisey and a very Pelagian stands up, and preaches against the
Phariseis and the Pelagians and is allowed of al ye audience? And in conclusion
when the world ever sense it began has and does of natural blindness believe
in their own works, the^ if the Scripture be perverted to confirm that
error, how sore are their hearts hardened and how deep is that darckenesse.

No man can serve two masters, for he shall either hate the one, and love the
other, or cleave to the one, and despise the other. Ye can not serve God and
Mammon.

Mammon is riches or abundance Mammon what it is.
of goods. And Christ concludes with a plain similitude, that as it is
impossible to serve two contrary masters, and as it is impossible to be
retained unto two diverse Lords, which are enemies one to the other, so is it
impossible to serve God and Mammon. Two masters of one mind, and one will,
might a man serve: for if one will, one mind, and one accord be in twenty then
are they all but one master. And two masters where one is under the other and a
substitute, may a man serve. For the service of the inferior is the
commandment of the superior. As to serve and obey Father, Mother, Husband,
Master and Lord is Gods commandment. But and if the inferior be of a
contrary will to the superior, and commau^de any contrary thing, then may
thou not obey. For now they be two contrary masters. So God and Mammon Mammon
is a God.
are two contrary masters: yea two contrary Gods, and of contrary
commandments.

God says, I thy Lord God am but one, and me shall you serve alone: that is, you
shall love me with all thine heart, or with thine whole heart, with all thy soul
and with all thy might. Thou shall neither serve, obey or love any thing save
me and that I bid thee: and that as far and no further then I bid thee.

And Mammon says the same. For Mammon will be a God also and served and loved
alone.

God says, see thou love thy neighbor, that thou labor with thine hands to
get thy living and somewhat above to help him.

Ma^mon says, he is called thy neighbor, because he is nigh thee. Now who is
so nigh thee as thy self. Ergo proximus esto tibi: that is love thy self, and
make lewd and vile wretches to labor diligently to get thee as much as thou
may, and some scrappes above for them selves. Or will thou be perfect? Then
disguist thy self and put on Mammon makes me^ disguise the^ selves.
a gray coat, a black or a pyed and give thy self to devotion, despise the
world and take a covetous, (I would say a contemplative life) upon thee. Tell
the people how hoate Purgatory is, and what pains there must be suffered for
small fantes. And then give mercyfully a thousand fold for one, spiritual for
temporal: give heaven, and take but house and land, and foolish temporal
things.

God says, judge truly between thy brethren, and therefore take no gifts.
Mammon says, it is good manner and apoynt of courtesy to take that is offered.
And he that gives thee loves thee better then such a chur^e that gives thee
naught, yea and thou ar^ more bound to favor his cause?

God says, fell and give almose.

Mammon says lay up to have enough to mainteyne thine estate and to defend
thee from thine enemies and to serve thee in thine age. etc.

For as much then as God and Mammon The servants of Mammon are not o^
Chri^^es Church.
be two so contrary masters, that whosoever will serve God, must give up
Mammon, and all that will serve Mammo^ must forsake God: it follows that they
which are the sworn seruau^ts of Mammon, and have his holy spirit, and are
his faithful Church, are not the true servant of God, nor have his spirit
of truth in them, or can be his true Church.

Moreover seeing that God and Mammon be so contrary that Gods word The servant
of Mammon to no true preacher.
is death in Mammons ear, and his doctrine poison in Mammons mouth: it
follows that if the ministers of Gods word: do favor Mammon, they will so
fashion their speech and so sound their words that they may be pleasant in
the ears of Mammon.

Finally alonely to have richesse is To be Mammo^s servant what it is.
not to be the servant of Mammon, but to love it and clea^e to it in thine
heart. For if thou have goods only to maint^ine the office which God has put
thee in, and of the rest to help thy neighbors need, so art thou Lord over
thy Mammon and not his servant. Of the^ that be rich, how shall thou know
Mammo^s servant how he is known.
the master of Mammon from the servant? verily first by the gettyng,
secondarely when his poor neighbor complains, if he be Mammons servant,
Mammon will shut up his heart and make him without compassion. Thirdly the cross
of Christ will try them the one from the other. For when persecution arises
for the word: then will the true servant of Christ bid Mammon ^dew. And the
faithful servant of Mammon will utter his hypocrisy, and not only renounce
the doctrine of Christ, but also be a cruel and a sharp persecuter thereof, to
put away all surmise, and that his fidelity which he has in his master
Mammon, map openly appear.

Therefore I say unto you, care not for your lives what ye shall eat, or what
ye shall drink, neither for your bodies what ye shall put on. Is not the life
more then meat, and the body more then the raiment?

He that bundeth a costely house eue^ to the tylyng, will not leave there and
lose so great cost for so small a trifle more. No more will he that gave thee
so precious a soul and so bewtifull a body, The goodness of god toward mankind.
let either of them perish again before ye day, for so small a thnig as food
or raiment. God never made mouth but he made meat for it, nor body but he made
raiment also. Howbeit Ma^mon blinds our eyes, so that we can neither see nor
judge a right.

Behold the fowls of the air, how they sow not, neither reap nor gather into
storehouses, and yet your heavenly father fedeth them. And are not ye far
better then they? Which of you with taking thought, is able to put one cubite
unto his stature?

He that cares for y^ least of his creatures will much more care for yt
greatest. Birds and beasts teach us to put away care.
The birds of the air and beasts preach all to us that we should leave caring
and put our trust in our father. But Mammon has made us so dull and so clean
without capacity that none example or argument be it never so vehement, ca^
enter the wits of us, to make us see or judge a right. Finally what a madness
it is to take so great thought for fode or raiment, when the wealth, health,
life of thy body and all together is out of thy power. If all the world were
thine thou could not make thy self one inche le^ger, nor that thy stomach
shall disgeste the meat that thou put into it: No thou art not sure that
that which thou put into thy mouth shall go through thee or whether it
shall choke thee. Thou can not make when thou lie or sit down that thou
shall arise again, or when thou slepest that thou shall awake again, or that
thou should live one hour longer. So that he which cared for thee when thou
could not care, must care for thee still or else thou should perish. And
he will not care for thee to thy souls profit, if thou mistrust him and care
for thy self.

And for raiment why take ye thought? Behold the lylies of the field, how they
grow, they labor not, neither spynne. And yet I say to you that even Solomon
in all his glory was not apparelled like one of them. Wherefore if the grass
which is to day in the fields and to morrow shall be cast into the furnace, God
so clothe, how much more shall he do the same unto you, O ye of little faith?

Not only foul and beast, but also Care.
tree herb, and all the flowers of the earth do cry unto us, to trust God and
to cast away all care that is coupled with covetousness of more then
sufficient to bear the charges which we have in our hands, by the reason of
the state we be in the world: and all care that is annexed with mistrust, that
God should not minister enough to bear all our charges: if we endeuer our
selves to keep his commandments and to do every man his craft or office he
is in truly, and (when God to prove us, suffers us to have need of our
neighbors) we first complain to God, and desire him to prepare the hearts of
our neighbors against we come to desire their help.

But Ma^mon pypeth an other song, saying: if thou should make no other
Mammon.
manner of labor for a benefice, then as if thou careddest not whether thou had
dest it or had it not, it would be long ere thou gattest one, all would be
take out of thine hand? I answer: as thy labor was to get it, such shall be
thy be hauiour in it: as thou flatteredest to have it, so shall thou it it. And
as thou boughtest and souldest to get it, so shall thou sell in it to bye
^auour and to be set by in the world. If thy principal in tent that thou
seek a benefice for, be lucre, then take heed to the example of thy
forefather Simon Magus. Let thy Acts. (...).
care therefore be to do the office that God puts thee in truly, and the
blessyng that he coupleth thereto that take with thanks, and neither care nor
covet further.

Take no thought therefore saying: What shall we eat or what shall we drink,
or what shall we put on? all these things the heathen seek. Yea and your
heavenly father knows that ye need all these things. But seek first the
kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be
ministered unto you.

Be not like the heathen which have no trust in God nor his word, nor believe
any life to come. Let them vex them selves and each be a devil to an other sor
worldly things. But comfort Conenau^t. keep covenant with God and he shall
keep promise with thee.
thou thy self with y^ hope of a better life in another world, ever assured
that y^ shall have here sufficient, only if thou keep covenant with the Lord
thy God, and seek his kingdom and the righteousness thereof above all things.
The kingdom of God, is the Gospel and doctrine of Christ. And the
righteousness Kingdom of heaven, what.
thereof, is to believe in Christ's blood for the remission of sins. Out of
which righteousness springs love to God, and thy neighbor for his sake,
which is also righteousness as I have said before, so far as it is perfect,
and that which lacks is supplied by faith in Gods word, in that he has
promised to accept that, til more come. Then Righteousness of the kingdom of
heaven, what it is.
follows the outward righteousness of works by the which, and diligent
recording of Gods word together, we grow and wax perfect and keep our selves
from going back and losyng the spirit again.

And these have our spirituality with their corrupt doctrine myngled together:
that is to say, the righteousness of the kingdom of God, which is faith in
Christ's blood: and the outward righteousness of the members that we ascribe to
the one that pertains to the other.

Seek the kingdom of heaven therefore and the righteousness of the same, and
be sure thou shall ever have sufficient, and these things shall be ministered
unto the, that is to say: shall come of their own accord by the promise of
God: yea Christ promises thee an hu^dredfolde even in this life, of all that
thou leauest for his sake. If that were true would some say, who would not
rather serve him then Mammon? yet is it true. For first if thou be servant of
Mammo^, thou must keep thy God, and thy God not thee. And every man that is
stronger then thou, will take thy God from thee. Moreover God will take either
thee from thy Mammon, or thy Mammon from thee, ere thou would, to aduenge*
him self of thy blind unkindness, that when he has made thee and given thee
all, thou forsakest him and seruest his mortal enemy. But if thou follow
Christ, all the world (and let them take all the devils I^ thou follow Christ,
thou can not(...)sufficient living.
in hell to them) shall not be able to disappointe thee of a sufficient living.
And though they persecute thee from house to house a thousand times, yet shall
God provide thee of an other with all things sufficient to live by. Now compare
ye surety of his, with y^ incertaintie of the other: and then the blessed end
of this (that heaven is promised thee also) with the miserable departing from
the other so sore against thy will, and then the desperation that thy heart
^eeleth that thou art all ready in hell. And the^ may not this be well called a
thousand fold more then the other.

Care not then for the day following, but let the day following care for it
self. For the day that is present, has ever enough of his own trouble.

If thou look well on the conenau^t Care.
that is between thee and thy Lord God, on the one side, and the temptations of
the world, the flesh and Satan on the other: thou shall soon perceive that
the day present has ever enough to be cared for, and for which thou must ^ry
instantly to God for help also, though thou do thy best. Now the^ seeing yt day
present is ouercharged with her own care, what madness is it to lade upon her
also the care of the day following, yea the care of a year, ye of xx. year, or
as though thou never entendest to die, and to torment and vex the soul through
mistrust and unbelief, and to make thy life sour and bitter, and as unquiet*
as the life of the deuilles in hell?

Therefore care day by day, and hour What we ought ch^^^^est to care for.
by hour earnestly to keep the covenant of the Lord thy God, and to record
therein day and night, and to do thy part unto the uttermost of thy power. And
as for Gods part, let him care for it himself, and believe thou his words
steadfastly: and be sure that heaven and earth shall sooner perish then one jot
bide behind of that he has promised. And for thine own part also, care not
of that manner, as though thou should do all alone. Nay: God has first
promised to help thee: Secondarily to accept thine heart, and that little y^
thou art able to do, be it never so imperfect: Thirdly though wind, weather
and the stream carry thee clean contrary to thy purpose, yet because thou
bidest still in thy profession, ready to turn the right course as soon as y^
tempest is a little over blown, God promises to forgive that, and not yt
less to fulfill his promises of one jot.

Does Christ so defend his, that they Tempte. Why God lets his children be
tempted with adversity.
never come in danger of trouble? yes they come into such straites often, that
no wit nor reason can see any way out, save faith only is sure that God has
and will make a way through. But that temptation is but for an hour to teach
them, and to make them feel the goodness of their father, and ye passions of
their brethren and of their master Christ also. It is but as a loving mother,
to make her child to perceive and feel her kindness (to love her aagaine and
be thankful) lets it hunger in a morning. And when it calls for his
breakfast, makes as she heard not, til for pain and impaciencie it begins
to cry a good. And then she stilleth it and gives it all that it asks and
more to, to please it. And when it is peaced and begins to eat, and
rejoices and is glad and feign, she asks who gave thee that, thy mother? and
it says ye: Then says she: Am not I a good mother that give thee all things?
and it answers, ye. And she asks, will thou love thy mother. etc. And it
says ye, and so comes it to the knowledge of his mothers kindness, and is
thankful. Such is the temptation of Christ's elect, and other wise not.

Here is not forbiddin all manner of What care is forbidden.
care, but that worldly and deuillishe care that springs of an inordinate
love to worldly things, and of mystrust in God. As for an ensample: I covet
inordinatly more then sufficient, or but eue^ that I have need of. And it
(because I mistrust God and have no hope in him, and therefore pray not to him)
comes not: Then I mourn, sorrow and pine away, and am whole unquiet in
mynehart. Or whether I have to much or but sufficient, and love it inordinatly:
then I care for the keeking. And because I mistrust God, and have no hope in
him, that he will help me, therefore when I have locked doors, chambers and
cofers, I am never the nerer at rest, but care still and cast a thousand
perilles, of which the most part were not in my might to avoid though I never
slept. And where this care is, there can the word of God have no resting place,
but is choked up as soon as it is sown.

There is an other care that springs out of the love of God (for every love
has her care) and is a care to keep Care: wh^ care every man ought to have.
Gods commandments. This care must every man have. For a man lives not by
bread only, but much more by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God. The keeping of Gods commandment is the life of a man, as well in this
world as in the world Gods commandment is man's life.
to come. As child obey father and mother, that thou may long live on the
earth. And by father and mother is understand al rulers. which if thou obey,
thy blessing shall be long life: and contrary if thou disobey, short life: and
shall either perish by the sword, or by some other plague, and that shortly.
And even so shall the ruler, if he rule not as God has commanded. Oppress
thou a widow and fatherless children (says God) and they shall cry to me, and
I will hear their voice, and Exodus xx.
then will my wrath wax hot: so I will sinite you with sword, and your wives
shall be widows, and your children fatherles.

Some will say, I see none more prosper or longer continue then those Why God
suffers tirauntes to prosper.
that be most cruel tyrauntes. What then? yet say I that God abides ever
true. For where he sets up a tyrau^t and continues him in prosperity, it
is to be a scourge to wicked subjects that have forsaken the covenant of the
Lord their God. And unto them his good promises pertayne not, save his cursses
only. But if ye subjects would turn and repent, and follow the ways of God,
he would shortly deliver the^. How be it, yet where the superior corrupts,
the inferior which else is disposed enough to goodness, God will not let them
long continue.

An exposition of the seventh Chapter.
IVdge not, that ye be not judged. For as ye judge, so shall ye be judged. And
with what measure ye mete with the same shall it be measured to you again. Why
look thou on the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and markest not the beam
that is in thine own eye? Or how can thou say to thy brother. Let me pluck
out the mote out of thine eye, and behold, there is a beam in thine own eye?
Thou hipocrite, pluck first the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou
shall see clearly to pluck the mote out of thy brothers eye.

This is not meant of the temporal Iudgyng.
judgments: for Christ forbad not that, but often did stablishe it, as do Peter
and Paul in their Epistles also. Nor here is not forbidden to judge those
deeds which are manifest against the law of God: for those ought every
Christian man to persecute, yet must they do it after the order that Christ has
set. But when he says: hipocrite, cast out first the What iudgyng is to be
rebuked
beam that is in thine own eye: it is easy to understand of what manner of
judging he means.

The hipocrites will have fastings, prayinges, kneling, crouching, ducking, and
a thousand ceremonies of their own invention. And whosoever do not as they
do, him they count a dampened soul by and by. To Christ they say, why fast
not thy disciples, as the Phariseyes do? Why pluck they the ears of corn and
rub them in their hands (though they did it compelled with pure hunger) and
do that is not lawful on the Sabbath day? Why break ye the traditions of our
Elders, and wash not when ye sit down to meat? yea and why do thou thy
self heal the people upon the holy day? Why did thou, not only heal him
that was bedred 38. years, All days are indifferent to do good deeds to y^
praise of God. and the profit of our neighbore.
but also baddest him bear his bed away upon the Saboth day? Be there not
workyng day sufficient to do good deed to the praise of God, and profit of
thy neigybour, but that thou must break thy Saboth day? He cannot be but a
damned person that breaks the holy day, and despises the ordinance of the
holy Church.

He eats Butter a Frydayes withour a dispensation of our holy father the
Pope, yea and cakebread made with milk and eggs to, and white meat in the
Lent, he takes no holy water when he comes to the Church, he hears no
Mass from Sunday to So^day. And either, he has no beads at al, or else y^
shall not hear a stone clink in the hand of him, nor yet his lips wagge all
the Mass and Mattens while. and. O hipocrite, cast out first the The beam.
beam that is in thine own eye, and then thou shall see better. Thou
understand all Gods laws falsely, and therefore thou kepest none of the^
truly: his laws require mercy and no^ sacrifice. Moreover thou have a false
intent in all the works that y^ do, and therefore are they all dampnable in
the sight of God. Hipocrite cast out the beam that is in thine own eye,
learn to understand the law of God truly, and to do thy works aright, and
for the intent that God ordained them. And then thou shall see whether thy
brother have a mote in his eye or not, and if he have, how to pluck it out,
and else not.

For he that knows the intent of Ceremonies, he that breaks unity for
zeal of ceremonies under slandeth not Gods law.
the law and of works, though he observe a thousand ceremonies for his own
exercise, he shall never conde^pne his brother or break unity with him, in
those things which Christ never commanded, but left indifferent. Or if he see
a mo^e in his brothers eye, that he observes not with his brethren some
certain ordinance made for a good purpose, because he knows not Ceremonies.
the intent: he will pluck it out fair and softly, and instruct him lovingly,
and make him well content. Which thing if our spiritualty would do, men would
not so abhor to obey their tyranny. But they be hipocrites and do and
command all their works for a false purpose, and therefore judge, slay and
shed their brethrens blood mercilesly. God is y^ father of all mercy, and
therefore gave not hipocrites such absolute power to compel their brethren to
obey what they list, or to slay them without pity, showing either no cause of
their commandments at all, but so will we have it, or else assigning an
intent dampnable and contrary to all scripture. Paul Romans 14. says to them
that observed ceremonies, that they should not judge them that did not: for he
that observes and knows not the intent judges at once, and to the^ that
observed not that they should not despise them that observed, he that observes
not, ought not to despise the weakness or ignorance of his brother, till he
perceive that he is obstinate and will not learn.

Moreover such measure as thou geuest, Measure*
thou shall receive again: that is, if thou judge thy neighbor, God shall
judge thee, for if thou judge thy neighbor in such things, thou know not
the law of God, nor the intent of works, and art therefore condemned of God.
etc.

Give not that holy thing unto dogs, neither cast your pearls be fore the
swyne, lest they tread the^ under their feet, and the other turn again and
all to tear you.

The dogs are those obstinate and indurate, which for the blind zeal of
Dogs, who they be, and what is signified thereby.
their leven, wherewith they have sowred both y^ doctrine and also the works,
maliciously resist the truth, and persecute the ministers thereof: and are
those wolves among which Christ sends his sheep, warnyng them, not only to
be single and pure in their doctrine, but also wise and circumspect and to
beware of me^. For they should bring them before judges and kings and slay
them, thinkyng to do God service therein: that is as Paul to the Romans
testifies of the Jews, for blind zeal to their own false and feigned
righteousness, persecute the righteousness of God.

The swyne are they which for all they have received the pure Gospel of Swyne
truly described.
Christ, will yet continue still in sin, and roll them selves in the podell
and myer of their old filthy conversation, and both before the ignorant and
also the weak, use the uttermost of their liberty, interpretyng it after the
largest fashion, and most favor of the flesh, as it were the Popes pardon, and
therewith make yt truth evil spoken of, that thousands which else might have been easily won, will now not once here thereof: and stir up cruel
persecution, which else would be much easyer, yea and sometime none at all. And
yet will those swyne, when it comes to the point abide no persecution at all:
But offer them selves wyllyng even at the first chope for to deny ere they be
scarsly apposed of their doctrine. Therefore lay first the law of God before
them, and call them to repentance. And if thou see no hope of mendyng in them,
sease there and go no further: for they be swyne.

But alas, it ever was and shall be y^ the greater number receive the words
for a newness and curiosity (as they say) and to seem to be somewhat and that
they have not gone to schole in vain, they will forthwith yer they have felt
any change of living in them selves, be scholemasters and begin at liberty,
and practice openly before their Disciples. And when the Phariseis see their
traditions broken, they rage and persecute immediately. And then our new
scholemasters be neither grounded in the doctrine to defend their doings, nor
rooted in the profession of a new life to suffer with Christ. etc.

Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find. Knock and it shall be
opened unto you. For all that ask receive, and he that seeks finds. And to
him that knocks, it shall be opened. For what man is it among you, if his son
asked him bread, that would proferre him a stone? Or if he asked him fish,
would he offer him a Serpent? If ye then which are evil know to give good
gifts to your children, how much more shall your father which is in heaven,
give good things to them that ask him.

First note of these words, that to pray is Gods commandment, as it Pra^er
is a commandment.
is to believe in God, to love God or to love thy neighbor: and so are almose
and fasting also. Neither is it possible to Belefe.
believe in God, to love him or to love thy neighbor, But that prayer will To
believe in God, what.
spryng out there hence immediately. For to believe in God, is to be sure that
all thou have is of him, and all thou nedest must come of him. Which if thou
do thou can not but continually thank him for his benefits which thou
continually without ceasyng* receauest of his hand, and thereto ever cry for
help, for thou art ever in need, and can no whence else be helped. And thy
neighbor is in such necessity also: Wherefore if thou love him, it will
compel thee to pity him, and to cry to God for him continually, and to thank
as well for him as thy self.

Secondarely, this heapyng of so many words together, ask, seek and knock,
signify that the prayer must be continual, and so does the parable of the
widow that sued to the wicked Luke. 18.
judge: and y^ cause is, that we are ever in continual necessity (as I say)
and all our life, but even a war fare and a perpetual battle. In which we
prevail Prayer. By prayer we win the victory only, and therefore is it of
all thynges^ most necessary.
as long as we pray, and be overcome as soon as we cease praying: as Israel
overcame the Amalechites. Exodus xvij. as long as Moses held up his hands in
prayer, and as soon as he had let down his hands for werynesse, the
Amalechites prevailed and had the better. Christ warned his Disciples at his
last supper to have peace in him, affirming that they should have none in y^
world. The false Prophets False Prophets what their wickedness (...).
shall ever impugn the faith in Christ's blood, and enforce to quench the true
understanding of the law, and the right meaning and intent of all the works
commanded by God, which fight is a fight above all fightes. First they shall be
in such number that Christ's true disciples shall be but a small flock in
respect of them. They shall have works like Christ's, so that fasting, prayer,
poverty obedience and chastity shall be the names of their profession. For as
Paul says to the Corinthians, the angels or messengers of Satan shall
change them selves into angels or messengers of light and truth. They shall
come in Christ's name, and that Mark. xiij.
with signs and miracles, and have the upper hand also, even to deceive the
very elect if it were possible. Yea and beyond Math. 24.
all this, if thou get the victory of the false Prophets, and pluck a
multitude out of their hands, there shall immediately rise of the same, and
set up a new false sect against thee. And against Thy heart must be joy ned with
thy prayer.
all these Amalechites, the only remedy is to lift up the hands of thy heart
to God in continual prayer. Which hands, if thou for werynes once let fall,
thou go to the worsse immediately. Then beside the fight and conflict of the
subtle sophistry, false miracles, disguised and hypocritish works of these
false Prophets, comes the Dogs and Wolves of their Disciples with the
servants of Mammon, and the swyne of thine own scholars: against which all
thou have no other shilde or defense but prayer. Then the sin and lusts of
thine own flesh, Satan, and a thousand temptations unto evil in the world,
will either drive thee to the castle and refuge of prayer or take the prisoner
undoubtedly.

Last of all thy neighbors necessity and thine own will compel thee to The
rich must pray for daily bread.
cry, father which art in heaven give us our daily bread, though thou were as
rich as king Solomon. For Christ commands the rich as well as the poor, to
cry to God continually for their daily bread. And if they have no such need,
then is Christ a deceauer and a mocker. What need I to pray thee to give or
lend me, that is in mine own possession all ready? Is not the first
commandment, that there is but one God, and that thou put thy whole trust in
him? Which if it were written in thine heart thou should easily perceive, and
though thou had as many thousands as David left behynd him, and Salomo^
heaped mo to them, that thou had no more then the poor beggar that goes
from door to door: yea and that the beggar (if that commandment be written
in his heart) is sure, that he is as rich as thou. For first thou must knowledge
that thou have received y^ great treasure of y^ hand of God. Whersore when thou
fettest an halfepeny thereof, thou ought to give God thanks in thine heart
for the gift thereof.

Thou must confess also that God To think our selves saved, or preserved, by
any other means then by Gods* is Idolatry.
only has kept it and thee that same night, and ever before, or else be an
idolater and put thy trust in some other thing then God. And thou must confess
that God only must keep it and thee, the day and night following, and so
continually after, and not thine own wit or power, or the wit or power of
any other creature or creatures. For if God kept it not for thee, it would be
thine own destruction and they that help thee to keep it, would cut thy
throat for it. There is no king in Christendom so well beloved, but he has
^ow of his own evil subjects (if God kept them not down with fear) that
would at one hour rise upon him and slay him, to make havoc of all he has.
Who is so well beloved through out all England but that there be ^ow in the same
parish or nie about that would, for his good wish him to hell if they could,
and would with their hands destroy him, if God kept him not and did cast
fear on the other.

Now then if God must ever keep it for thee, and thou must daily receive it of
his hand (as a poor man does receive his almose of an other man) thou art in
no more suertie of thy daily bread: no though thou were a Cardinal, then the
poorest is. Wherefore howsoever rich thou be, yet must thou ever cry to God for
thy daily bread. So now it is a commandment to pray and that continually,
short, thick, and often, as the Psalms be, and all the prayers of the Bible.

Finally the third is that we be commanded Faith must be joined to our prayer.
to pray with faith and trust, and that we believe in the Lord our God, and
doubt not in his promises, unto which Christ enduceth us with an apt
similitude, saying: If ye being evil can yet give good things unto your
children, how much more shall God fulfill his promises of mercy unto his
children if they cry unto him? he is better and more merciful then all men.
Wherefore seeing God commands thee to pray, and for as much as thou have so
great necessity so to do, and because he is merciful and has promised and is
true and cannot deny his own words: Therefore pray, and when thou prayest,
look not on thine unworthiness, but on his commandment, mercy, and goodness,
and on his truth and faithfulness, and believe stedsastly in him. Moreover
whatsoever thou have done, yet if thou repent and wilt amend, he promises
that he will not think on Though God differ thy request yet must thou not
saint.
thy sins. And though he differ thee, think it not long, nor faint not in
thy faith, or be slack in thy prayer. For he will surely come and give thee
more then thou desire, though he differ for thy profit, or change thy
request into a better thing.

All things therefore whatsoever ye would men should do to you, so do ye to
them. This is verily the law and the Prophets.

This is a short sermon, that no man need to complain that he cannot for the
length bear it away. It is so nigh Doubts.
thee, that thou need not to send over sea for it. It is with thee, that
thou How to ^oyle doubts.
need not to be importune upon master Doctor: saying, sir I pray you, what
say ye to this case and to that, and is not this lawful, and may I not so do,
and so, well enough? Ask thine own conscience what thou may or ought to
do. Would thou me^ did so with thee, then do it. Would thou not be so
dealt with, then do it not. Thou would not that men should do to thee wrong
and oppress thee: Thou would not that men should do thee shame and rebuke,
lie on thee, kill thee, hyre thine house from thee, or tice thy servant away,
or take against thy will ought that is thine. Thou would not that men
should sell thee false ware when thou put them in trust to make it ready
or lay it Note.
out for thee, nor thou would not that men should deceive thee with great
oaths, swearing that to be good which in deed is very naught: Thou would
not also that men should sell thee ware that is naught and to dear, to undo
thee: do no such things then to thy neighbor. But as loath as thou would be
to buy false ware or to dear, for undoing thy self, so loath be thou to sell
false ware or to dear, for undoing thy neighbor. And in all thy needs, how
glad thou would be to be helped, so glad be to help thy neighbor. And so
in all cases examine thy conscience and ask her what is to be done in all
doubts between thy neigh bour and thee, and she will teach thee, except thou
be more filthy the^ a swine and all together beastly.

He says here: this is the law and the Prophets. And Math. xxij. he Note.
says: Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thine heart, with all thy soul
Law, what the fulfillyng thereof is.
and all thy mind, and as Mark adds, with all thy might, and thy neighbor
as thy self. In these two commandments, hangs the whole law and the
Prophets. And Paul Romans xiij. and Gal. v. says that love is the fulfilling
of the law. And it is written that Christ is the fulfilling or end of the
law, To make all these agree, this thou must understand: that to love God
purely is the final and uttermost end of all the law and the Prophets. To
love thy neighbor is the end of all laws that is between The end of all y^
laws between m^ and man, is to love thy neighbor as thy self.
man and man: as are: kill not, steal not, bear no false witness, commit
none adultery, covet not thy neighbors wife, his house, Ox, Ass, maid
manseruaunt: nor ought that is his. etc Christ is the fulfilling of the law
for us, where we be imperfect. And when we break and repent, his fulfilling is
imputed unto us. And this text, this is the law and the Prophets, may thou
understand, as when Paul says, love is the fulfilling of the law. That is, to
do as y^ would be done to, is all the law that is between thee and thy
neighbor, and that according to the true understanding and interpretyng of all
true Prophets.

Enter in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many they be, that go in thereat. But strait is
the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few they be that
find it.

The strait gate is the true knowledge and understanding of the law, Strayte
gate.
and of yt true intent of works. Which whosoever understands, the same
shall be driven to Christ to fetch of his fullness, and to take him for his
righteousness and fulfilling of the law, all together at the beginning, and as
often as we fall afterward, and for more the^ the thousand part of our fulfilling
of the law and righteousness of our best works all our life long. For except
the righteousness of Christ be knit to the best deed we do, it will be to
short to reach to heaven. The narrow way.


And the narrow way is to live after this knowledge. He that will enter in at
this gate, must be made a new: his head will else be to great, he must be
untaught all that he has learned, to be made less for to enter in: and
disused in all things to which he has been accustomed, to be made less to
walk through y^ narrow way. Where he shall find such an heap of tempeations
and so continual, that it shall be impossible to endure or to stand, but by
prayer of strong faith. Few find the narrow wa^, and wh^.


And note an other, that few find y^ way. Why? for their own wisdom, their
own power and the reasons of their own sophistry blind them utterly. That is
to say: the light of their own doctrine which is in them: is so extreme
darcknesse that they cannot see. Should God let his Church err (say they)
Should our elders have gone out of the way? Should God have let y^ devil do
these miracles and so forth? And when Christ says, few shall find the gate:
yea say they: in respect of the Turks and Sarasens which are the greater
multitude. Yea but yet hear a little: the Scribes and Phariseis, which had all
the authority over the people, and taught out of the Scripture, and the
Saduces, with all other false Prophets that were when Christ came, were no
Turks nor Sarasens: neither had God any other Church then Peter.
was among them. And S. Peter prophesies that it shall be so among us, and
that we shall be drawn with false sects of covetousness, to deny Christ, as
we now do, and believe no more in him. Paul* Christ.
And Paul and Christ confirm the same, that the elect should be deceived, if
it were possible. Moreover if it were enough to say, I will believe and do as
mine elders have done, as though they could not err: then was Christ to blame
for to say, that except thou forsake father mother and thine elders, thou
could not be his disciple. Christ must be thy master, and thou must be
taught of God: and therefore ought thou to examine the doctrine of thine
elders by the word of God. For the great multitude that Christ means are the
false Prophets and them that follow them: as it shall better appear hereafter.

Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheep clothyng. But are with
in rauenyng Wolves. By their fruits ye shall know them, do me^ gather grapes of
thorns? either figs of briers? even so every good tree brings forth good
fruit. But a corrupt tree, brings forth evil fruit. A good tree can not
bring forth evil fruit, nor a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every
tree that brings not forth good fruit is to be hewn down and to be cast
into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

Here Christ warns thee, and describes unto thee, those capitaines that The
false prophets, who.
should so blind the great multitude (that they should not find the strayte
gate) and lead them the broad way to perdition. Note first that though they be
false, yet he calls them Prophets, which word in the new Testament is taken
for an expounder and an interpreter of Scripture. And he says they shall come
to you my Disciples, then they must be our Preachers and our doctors. Ye
verily they must be those our false preachers which Peter prophesied should be
among us, and bring in damnable sects, for to fulfull and satisfy their
covetousness, and follow the way and steps of their father Baalam. And they
shall come thereto in shepes clothyng: Ergo, they be neither the Turks nor yet
Sarase^s. For they come clothed in iron and stele, and will thereto suffer us to
keep our faith, if we will submit our selves to them, as the Grckes do. And as
for ye Jews they be an hundred times fewer then we, and are every where in
bondage, yea and for the great part capitues unto us. They also be not clothed
in shepes skins, but maintain openly their faith clean contrary to ours.

But what are these shepes clothinges, truly the very name of Christ. Sheep
clothing, what it means*
For says Christ Mat. xxiiij. There shall come many in my name and deceive
many. And besides that, they shall do miracles in Christ's name: as it follows
in the text, that they shall call Christ Master, Master, and begin their
sermon saying: Our master Christ says in such a chapter, whatsoever ye bind
upon earth shall be bound in heaven: see friends these be not our words, but
our master Christ's. And they shall do myracies in Christ's name thereto, to
confirm the false doctrine which they preach in his name. O fearful and
terrible judgment of almighty God, and sentence of extreme rigorousnes upon
all that love not the truth (when it is preached them) that God to aduenge
himself of their unkindness, shall send them so strong delusions, that
doctrine should be preached unto them in the name of Christ, and made seem to
follow out of his words and be confirmed with myracies done in calling upon
the name of Christ, to harde^ their hearts in the faith of lies, according to
the prophecy of Paul to the Thessalonians in the second (...). These. 2.
Epistle.

An other of their sheep coats is, Sheep clothing.
that they shall in every sermon preach mightily against the Scribes and
Phariseyes, against Faustus and Pelagian with such like heretics: which yet
never preached other doctrine then they themselves do. And more of their
clothing is, they shall preach that Christ preached: almost, prayer, and
fasting: and profess obedience, poverty, and chastity: works that our
Savior Christ both preached and did. Finally they be holy church and cannot
err.

But they be within ravening wolnes. Ravening wolves.
They preach to other, steal not: yet they themselves rob God of his honor,
and take from him the praise and profit of all their doctrine and of all their
works. They rob yt law of God of her mighty power wherewith she drives all
men to Christ, and make her so weak, that the feeble free will of man is not
able to wrestle with her, without calling to Christ for help.

They have robbed Christ of all his merits and clothed themselves therewith.
They have robbed the soul of man of the bread of her life, the faith and trust
in Christ's blood: and have fed her with the shales and coddes of the hope in
their merits, and confidence in their good works.

They have robbed the works commanded by God of the intent and purpose that
they were ordained for. And with their obedience they have drawn themselves
from under the obedience of all Princes and temporal laws. with their
poverty, they have robbed all nations and kingdoms, and so with their wilful
poverty have enriched themselves, and have made the commons poor, with their
chastity they have filled all the world full of whores and sodomites,
thinking to The obedience. poverty, and wilful chastity of our spirituality.
please God more highly with keeping of an whore then an honest chaste wife. If
they say it is not truth, then all the world knows they lie, for if a priest
mary an honest wife, they punish him immediately, and say, he is an heinous
heretic, as though matrimony were abominable. But if he keep a whore, then
is he a good chaste child of their holy father the Pope, whose ensample they
follow, and I warrant him sing Mass on the next day after, as well as he did
before, without either persecution or excommunication, such are the laws of
their unchaste, I would say their own chaste father.

If thou profess obedience, why ru^nest thou from father, mother, master and
ruler (which God bids thee to obey) to be a Friar? If thou obey, why obeyest
thou not the king and his law, by whom God defends thee both in life and
goods, and all thy great possessions?

If thou profess poverty, what do thou with the lands of Gentlemen,
Poverty.
Squyres, Knights, Barons, Earls, and Dukes? What should a Lords brother be
a beggars servant? or what should a beggar ride with three or four score
horses waiting on him. Is it meet that a man of noble birth, and y^ right
heir of the lands which thou possessest should be thine horsekeeper, thou
being a beggar.

If ye profess chastity: why desire ye Chastity.
above all other men the company of women? What do ye with whores openly in
many countries, and with secret dispensations to keep Concubines? Why
corrupt ye so much other men's wives? and why be there so many sodomites among
you?

Your charity is merciless to the Charity.
rest of the world to whom ye may give naught again, and only liberal to
your selves (as is ye charity of thieves) thirty or forty of you together in
one den: among which yet are not many that love three of his neighbors
heartily.

Your fasting makes you as full and Fasting.
as fat as your hydes can hold, beside that ye have a dispensation of your
holy father for your fasting.

Your prayer is but pattering without all affection, your singing is but Prayer.
roaring to stretch out your mawes (as do your othee gestures and rising at
midnight) to make the meat sink to the bottom of the stomach, that he may
have perfect digestion, and be ready to devour a fresh against the next
refection.

Ye shall know them by their fruits. Thorns bear no Figs.
First thorns bear no grapes, nor briars figs. Also if thou see goodly
blossoms in them, and think there to have figs, grapes, or any fruit for
the sustenaunce or comfort of man: go to the^ in time of need, and thou shall
find naught at all. Thou shall find: forsouth I have no goods, nor any thing
proper, or that is mine own. It is the couentes. I were a thief if The
answer of cloysterers to such as shall desire ^elefe at the^ hands.
I gave it my father whatsoever need he had. It is Saint Edmundes patrimony,
Saint Albons patrimony, S. Edwardes patrimony the goods of holy church, it may
not be minished, nor occupied upon lay and profane uses. The king of the
realm for all that he defends them above al other, yet gets he naught
what need so ever he have, save then only, when he must spend on their causes
a^ that they give, with all that he can get beside of his poor commons. If the
king will attempt to take ought from them by the authority of his office, for
the defense of the realm. Or if any man will entreat them other wise then they
lust themselves, by what law or right it be: they turn to thorns and briars,
and wax atonce rougher then a hedgehogge, and will sprinkle them with the holy
water of their malidictions as thick as hayle: and breath out the lightening
of excommunication upon them, and so consume them to powder.

Moreover a corrupt tree can bear A corrupt tree bears no good ^^ute.
no good fruit. That is, where they have fruit that seems to be good, go to
and prove it, and thou shall find it rotten, or the karnell eaten out, and
that it is but as a hollow ^^t^. For faith in Christ (that we and all our Faith
is the kernel of all our good fruits.
works done within the compass of the law of God, be accepted to God for his
sake) is the kernel, the sweetness and the pleasant beutie of al our works
in the sight of God. As it is written Ioh. vi. this is the work of God, that
ye believe in him whom he has sent. This faith is a work which God not only
works in us, but also has therein pleasure and delectatio^, and in all other
for that faithes sake.

Faith is the life of man, as it is written, Iustus ex fide viuit, out of which
life the pleasantness of all his works spring. As for an ensample thou art a
shoumaker which is a work within the laws of God, and say in thine Faith
makes the ^oorke ^o^d and acceptable,
heart, lo God here I make a shoe as truly as I would for my self, to do my
neighbor service, and so get my living in truth with ye labor of mine hands,
as thou commaundest, and thank thee that thou have given me this craft, and
make it lucky that I get my living therewith, and am surely persuaded that
both I and my work please thee, O father, for thy son Jesus sake: lo now
this faith has made this simple work pleasant in the sight of God.

An other ensample, thou take a An example how thy work^ or deed may be
pleasant and acceptable before God*
wife and say: O father, thou not only permittest this, but also
commaundest all that burn and have their minds unquieted, to marry for fear
of formcation and so forth. And father I promise thee to love this woman
truly, and to care for her, and govern her after thy laws, and to be true to
her, and to stand by her in all adversities, and to take in worth as well the
evil as the good, and to bring up the fruit that thou shall give me of her,
in thy fear, and teach it to know thee.

Moreover as concerning the act of matrimony, as when thou will eat, thou
blessest God and receauest thy daily fode of his hand according to y^ fourth
peticion of thy Pater noster, and knowledgest that it is his gift, and thankest
him, believing his word, that he has created it for thee to receive it with
thanks, by the which word and prayer of thanks, thy meat and drnicke is
sanctified. i. Tim. iiij. Even so thou say, father this I do, not only at
thy permission which is enough to please thee wythall, but also at thy
commandment, and have bound my self hereunto, to keep my soul from sinning
against thee, and to help my neighbor that he some not also. and promise thee
to keep this profession truly, and to nourishe the fruit that thou shall
give me, in the fear of thee, and in the faith of thy son Jesus, and so
thankest the Lord for his gifts. Now is thy work through this says and
thanks pleasant and acceptable in y^ sight of God. And so was the ge^dring of
Jacob in faith, and of Samuel, and many other. And y^ giving suck was a good
work, and so was the dressing of them by the fire. And when our Lady conceived
Christ through faith, was not that a good work? What if God when she doubted
and asked (by what manner she should conceive him) had commanded her to
conceive him of Joseph or of some other man, had not that work done in
obedience and faith, been as good a work?

The will that Abraham had to s^ay Isaac, and all that he did till he came at
y^ very point to slay him, were good works, and so had been the slaying also.
And Abraham was sure that he pleased God highly, and as well as in any other
work, and had as depely sinned if he had been disobedient therein, as though
he had done any other cruel deed forbidden by God. Yea but shomakyng is not
commanded by God. Yes and has the promise of God annexed thereto. For God has
commanded me for the avoiding of sin to do Handy crafts are the
commandment of God.
my brethren service, and to live thereby, and to chose one estate or other (for
if thou would receive only of thy brethren and do naught again thou were a
these and an extorcioner and a tyrant.) And I chose shomaking, or receive it
at y^ obedience of mine elders. Now have I Gods commau^deme^t to work therein
truly, and his promise annexed thereto, that he will bless mine occupation and
make it lucky and fruitful to bring me an honest living. Work I not now at
Gods commandment and have his promise that it pleases him?

Note this also: first my craft is Gods commandment. Secondarely I believe and
am sure that my work pleases God for Christ's sake. Thirdly my work is
profitable unto my neighbor, and helps his necessity. Fourthly I receive my
reward of the hand of God with thanks, and work, surely certified that I
please God in my work thorough Christ, and that God will give me my daily
bread thereby.

But if thou examine their doctrine, thou shall find that this faith is away
in all their fruits, and therefore are they worm eaten and shales with out
kernelles.

Note again, the Turks and Jews The Jews and Turks ge^r alms as we do,
yet for lack of faith, it is abominable.
give almose as well as we, and as much, and yet abominable for lack of faith
and knowledge of the true intent. What says the text: he y^ receaueth a
prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have the reward of a Prophet. That is,
because thou aydest him in preaching of of Christ's word, thou shall be
partader with him and have the same reward. And he that receaueth a Disciple in
the name of a disciple, shall have etc. And he that gives one of these little
once but a cup of cold water for my names sake, shall have his reward. If a
king minister his kingdom in the faith of this name, because his subjects be
his brethren and the price of Christ's blood, he pleases God highly: and if
this faith be not there, it pleases him not. And if I sow a shue truly in the
faith of his name, to do my brother service, because he is the price of
Christ's blood: it pleases God. Thus is faith the goodness of all works.

Finally when God gives, end I God is as well pleased when we thankefully
receive his benefits, as when we do give for his sake.
receive with thanks, is not God as well pleased, as when I give for his sake
and he receaueth? A true friend is as glad to do his fre^d a good turn, as to
receive a good turn. When the father gives his son a new coat and says:
am not I a good father, and wilt not thou love me again and do what I bid
thee. And the boy receaueth it with thanks and says, yea, and is glad and
proud thereof: does not the father rejoice as much now in the lad, as an other
time when the ladde does what soever it be at his fathers commandment? But
the false Prophets do well to paynce God after the likeness of their own
visenomy: glad when he receaueth, ye when they receive in his name: But sour,
grudging, and evil content when he gives again. But thou please God, when
thou ask in faith, and when thou receauest with thanks, and when thou
reioysest in his gifts and love him again, to keep his commandments and
the appointment and covenant made between him and thee.

And for a conclusion besides, that Hipocrites ex^oll their own works, to
destroy the works of God.
they expel faith which is the goodness of all works: they set up works of
their own making to destroy the works of God, and to be holyer then Gods
works, to the despisyng of Gods works, and to make Gods works vile.

With their chastity they destroy the chastity that God ordained and only
requires. With their obedience, they destroy the obedience that God ordained
in this world, and desires no other. With their poverty they destroy the
poverty of the spirit which Christ taught only: which is, only not to love
worldly goods. With their fast, they destroy the fast which God commands,
that is a perpetual soberness to tame the flesh. With their patteryng
prayer, they destroy the prayer taught by God, which is either thanks or
desiryng help with faith and trust that God hears me.

Their holiness is to forbid yt God The holiness of hypocrites wherein it is.
ordained to be received with thanks giuyng: as meat and matrimony. And their
own works they maintain, and let Gods decay. Break theirs and they
persecute to the death. But break Gods, and they either look through the
fingers or else give thee a flappe with a Fox tail for a little money. There is
none order among them that is so perfect, but that they have a prison more
cruel the^ any iayle of thieves and murderers. And if one of their brethren
commit fornication or adultery in the world, he finisheth his penance therein
in three Wekes or a month, and then is sent to an other place of the same
religion. But if he attempt Ask the (...) ste^ Fri^is why they murdered one
of their fellows at London.
to put of the holy habit, he comes never out, and is so straytly dioted
thereto, that it is meruell if he live a year, beside other cruel murder that
has been found among them, and yet is this shameful dyoting of theirs,
murder cruel enough.

Be not deceived with visions, nor yet with miracles. But go to and judge their
works, for the spiritual judges all things says Paul. i. Cor. ij. Who is
that spiritual? not such as we now call men of holy Church. But all that have
the true interpretation of the law Who is y^ spiritualty.
written in their hearts. The right faith of Christ and the true intent of
works, which God byddeth us work, he is spiritual and judged all things,
and is judged of no man.

Not all that say to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
But he that fulfilleth the will of my father which is in heaven. Many will say
unto me at that day, Lord Lord did we not prophecy in thy name? and in thy
name cast out devils? and did we not in thy name many miracles? Then will I
confess unto the^, I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

This doubling of Lord has vehemence and betokens that they which shall be
excluded are such as think the^ selves better and perfitter then other men,
and to deserve heaven with holy works, not for them selves only, but also for
other. And by that they prophesied, by which thou may understand the
interpretyng of Scripture, and by that they cast out devils, and did miracles
in Christ's name (and for all that they are yet works of wickedness, and do
not the will of the father which is in heaven) it is plain that they be false
Prophets, and even the same of which Christ warned before.

And now for as much as Christ and his Apostles warn us that such shall
Ignorance (...) not if we w^^ not^c^.
come, and describe us the fashions of their visures (Christ's name, holy
Church, holy fathers and xv. hundred years, with Scripture and miracles) and
command us to turn our eyes from their visures, and consider their fruits,
and cut them up and look with in whether they be sound in the core and kernel
or no, and give us a rule to try them by: is it excuse good enough to say, God
will not let so great a multitude err, I will follow the most part and believe
as my fathers did, and as the preachers teach, and will not busy my self:
chose them, the fault is theirs and not ours, God shall not lay it to our
charge if we err.

Where such words be, there are the False prophets. how to (...) ^here they
be.
false Prophets all ready. For where no love to the truth is, there are y^
false Prophets: and where such words be, there to be no love to ye truth is
plame: Ergo, where such words be, there be the false Prophets in their full
swyng by Paul's rule. ij. Thessa. ij. An other conclusion where no love to the
truth is, there be false Prophets: The greatest of the world have least love
to the truth: Ergo, the false Prophets be the Chaplains of the greatest which
may with the sword compel the rest: As the kings of Israel compelled to
worship the golden Calves. And by false Prophets understand fal^e teachers, as
Peter calls them and wicked expounders of the Scripture.

Who soever hears these words of me and does them, I will lyken him unto a
wise man that built his house upon a rock, and there fell a rain, and the
floudes came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, but it fell not,
for it was grounded upon a rock. And all that hear of me these words, and do
them not, shall be lykened unto a foolish man that buylt his house upon the
sand, and there fell a rain, and the floudes came, and the winds bl^w, and
dashed upon that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof was great.

Christ has two sorts of hearers, of Beleuers without (...), and workers
without faith are built on (...).
which neither of them do there after. The one will be saved by faith of their
own making without works. The other with works of their own making without
faith. The first are those voluptuous which have yielded them selves up to sin
saying: tushe God is merciful, and Christ dyed for us: that must save us
only, for we cannot but sin without resista^ce. The second are the
hypocrites which will deserve all with their own imagined works only. And
of faith they have no other experience, save that it is a little meritorious
where it is paynefull to be believed: As that Christ was borne of a virgin, and
that he came not out the way that other children do, he no, that were a great
inconvenience but above under her arm and yet made no hole, though he had a
very natural body, and as other me^ have: and that there is no bread in the
Sacrament nor wine: though the five wits say all ye. And the meritorious
pain of this belefe is so heavy to them, that except they had feigned them a
thousand wise similitudes and lowsye lykenesses, and as many mad reasons to
stay them with all, and to help to captiuate their understanding, they were
like to cast all of their backs. And the only refuge of a great many to keep
in that faith, is to cast it out of their minds and not to think upon it. As
though they forgive not, yet it they put the displeasure out of their minds
and think not of it til a good occasion be given to adue^ge it, they think
they love their neighbor well enough all the while, and be in good charge.

And the faith of the best of them is, but like their faith in other worldly
The(...)(...) the^ (...) in Jesus Christ.
stories. But the faith which is trust and confidence to be saved and to have
their sins forgeuen by Christ which was so borne, have they not at all. That
faith have they in their own works only. But the true hearers understand the
law, as Christ interprets it here, and feel thereby their righteous
damnation, and run to Christ for succor, and for remission of all their
sins that are past, and for all the sin, which chance thorough
infirmities, shall compel the^ to do, and for remission of that the law is to
strong for their weak nature.

And upon that they consent to the law, love it and profess it, to fulfill it
to the uttermost of their power, and then go to and work. Faith or confidence
Faith, what it breeds,
in Christ's blood without help and before the works of the law brings all
manner of remission of sins and satisfaction. Faith is mother of love, faith
accompanies love in all her works to fulfill as much as there lacks in our
doing the law, of that perfect love, which Christ had to his father and us in
his fulfilling of the law for us. Now when we be reconciled, Love.
then is love and faith together our righteousness, our keeping the law, our
continuing, our proceeding forward in the grace which we stand in, and our
bringing to the everlasting saving and everlasting life. And the works be
esteemed of God according to the love of the heart. If the works be great and
love little and cold, then the works be regarded thereafter of God. If the
works be small, and love much and fervent, the works be taken for great of
God.

And it came to pass, that when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people
were astonished at his doctrine, for he taught them as one having power, and not
as the Scribes.

The Scribes and Phariseyes had thrust up the sword of the word of God into
a scabbarde or shethe of gloses, and therein had knit it fast, that it could
neither stick nor cut: teaching dead works without faith and love, which are
the life and the whole goodness of all works, and the only thing why they
please God. And therefore their audience abode ever carnal and fleshly minded
without faith to God and love to their neighbors.

Christ's words were spirit and life. Ioh. vi. That is to say: they ministered
spirit and life, and entered into the heart and grated on the conscience, and
through preaching the law, made the hearers perceive their duties: even what
love they ought to God, and what to man, and the right dampnation of all them
that had not the love of God and man written in their hearts: and through
preaching of faith, made all that consented to the law of God, feel the mercy
of God in Christ, and certified them of their salvation. For the word of God
is a two edged sword that pearceth and deuideth the spirit and soul of man a
sonder. Heb. (...). A The word of God, (...), (...) a man into (...) parts,
(...)yt fle^^e to hold one ^ay, and (...) spirit to draw an other.
man before the preaching of Gods word is but one man, all flesh, the soul
consenting unto the lusts of the flesh, to follow them. But the sword of the
word of God where it takes effect, divides a man in two, and serteth him at
variaunce against his own self: The flesh haling one way, and the spirit
drawing another: the flesh raging to follow lusts, and the spirit calling
back again, to follow the law and will of God. A man all the while ^e
consents to the flesh and before he be borne again in Christ, is called soul
or carnal. But when he is renewed in Christ through yt word of ly^e, and has
the love of God and of his neighbor, and the faith of Christ written in his
heart, he is called spirit or spiritual. The Lord of all mercy send us
preachers with power: that is to say, (...) expounders of the word of God, and
speakers to the heart of man: and deliver us from Scribes, Phariseyes,
hypocrites, and all false Prophets.

Amen.
An answer unto Sir Thomas Mores Dialogue, made by William Tyndall. 1530.
First he declares what the Church is, and gives a reason of certain words
which Master More rebukes in the translation of the new Testament. After that
he answers particularly unto every Chapter which seems to have any
appearaunce of truth thorough all his four books.

Awake thou that slepest and stand up from death, and Christ shall give the
light. Ephesians. 5.
THe grace of our Lord, the light of his spirit to see and to judge, true
repentance towarde^ Gods l^we, a fast faith in the merciful pr^es y^ are in
our savior Christ, serue^t love toward thy neighbor after the example of
Christ and his Saints, be with thee (O Reader) and with all that love the truth
and long for the redemption of Gods elect. Amen.

Our Savior I esus in the 16. of John John. 16.
at his last Supper when he took his leave of his Disciples, warned them
saying, the holy Ghost shall come and rebuke the world of judgment. That is,
he shall rebuke the world The holy ghost shall rebuke the world for lack of
true judgment.
for lack of true judgment and discretion to judge, and shall prove that the
taste of their mouths is corrupt, so that they judge sweet to be sour and
sour to be sweet, and the eyes to be blind, so that they think that to be the
ver^ service of God which is but a blind superstition, for zeal of which yet
they persecute the true service of God: and that they judge to be the law of
God, which is but a false imagination of a corrupt judgment, for blind
affection of which yet they persecute the true law of God and them that keep
it.

And this same it is that Paul says 1. Corinthians. (...). Cor. 2.
ij. how that the natural man that is not borne again and created a new with
the spirit of God, be he never so great a Philosopher, never so well seen in
the law, never so sore studied in the Scripture, as we have examples in the
Phariseis, yet he cannot understand the things of the spirit of God: but The
spiritual judges all things spiritually.
says he, the spiritual judges all things and his spir^e searches the deep
secrets of God, so that what soever God commands him to do, he never
leaves searchyng till he come at the bottom, the pith, the quick, the ly^e,
the s^, the m^^ow and very cause why, and judges all thing. Take an example,
in the great commandment, love God with all thine heart, yt spiritual
searches the cause Math. 22.
and looks on the benefits of God and so conceaueth love in his heart. And
when he is Romans 13.
commanded to obey the powers and rulers of the world, he looks on the
benefits which God shows the world through them and therefore does it
gladly. And when he* Math. 22.
is commanded to love his neighbor as him self, he searches that his
neighbor is created of God and bought with Christ's blood and so forth, and
therefore he loves him out The spiritual man searches (...) the cause why
(...), ought to love his neighbor*
of his heart, and if he be evil forheareth him and with all love and patience
draws him to good: as elder brethren wait on the you^ger and serve them and
suffer them, and when they will not come they speak fair, and flatter, and
give some gaye thing and promise fair and so draw them and ^te them not, but
if they may in no wise be help, refer the punishment to the father and
mother and so forth. And by these judges he all other laws of God and
understands the true use and meaning of them. And by these understands he
in the laws of man, which are right, and which tyranny.

If God should command him to drink no wine, as he commanded in the old
testament that the priests should not: when they ministered in the temple, and
forbad diverse mea^es, the spiritual (because he knows Man is Lord over all
the creatures of the (...).
that man is Lord over all other creatures, and they his servants, made to be
at his pleasure, and that it is not commanded for the wyue or meat it self
that man should be in bondage unto his own servant the inferior creature)
cease not to search the cause. And when he finds it, that it is to tame the
flesh, and that he be always sober, he obeys gladly, and yet not so
superstitiously, that the time of his disease he would not drink wine in ye
way of a medicine to recover his health, as David eat of the hallowed bread, and
as Moses for necessity left the children of Israel uncircumcised xl. years,
where of likelyhoode (...). Reg. ^1.
some dyed uncircumcised, and were Circum^o^ not trequented in (...). ^eares.
yet thought to be in no worse case then they that were circumcised, as the
children that dyed within the viij. day, were counted in as good case as they
that were circumcised, which ensamples might teach us many things, if there
were spirit in us.

And likewise of the holy day, he knows Holy days are ord^^ned for (...),
and not man for the holy days.
that the day is servant to man, and therefore when he finds that it is done
because he should not be let from hearing the word of God, he obeys gladly,
and yet not so superstitiously that he would not help his neighbor on the
holy day, and let the sermon alone for one day, or that he would not work on
the holyday, need requiring it, at such time as men be not wont to be at
church, and so throughout all laws. And even likewise in all ceremonies and
sacraments he searches The signification of things are to be sought and not
to serve the visible signs.
the significations, and will not serve ^he visible things. It is as good to
him, that the priest say Mass in his gown as in his other apparel, if they
teach him not somewhat, and that his soul be edified thereby. And as soon
will he gape while thou put sand as holy salt in his mouth, if thou show
him Ceremonies with out some good doctrine are to be rejected.
no reason thereof. He had as lefe be s^^ered with unhallowed butter as
anointed with charmed oil, if his soul be not taught to understand somewhat
thereby, and so forth.

But the world captiuateth his wit, and about the law of God, makes him
wonderful imaginations, unto which he so fast cleaves that ten John Baptistes
were not able to dispute them out of his head. He believes Turks are rather to
be lamented for their ignorance and to be won with good doctrine and example
of good life, then to be hated and murdered.
that he loves God, because he is ready to kill a Turk for his sake, that
believes better in God then he) whom God also commands us to love and to
leave nothing unsought to win him unto the knowledge of the truth, though
with the loss of our ^^ues. He supposes that he loves his neighbor as much
as he is bound, if he be not actually angry with him, whom yet he will not
help freely with an halfepenny but for a vauntage or vayneglory, or for a
worldly purpose. If any man have displeased him, he keeps his malice in and
will not chafe him self about it, till he see an occasion to aue^ge it
craftily, and thinks that well enough. And the rulers of the world he
obeys, thinks he, when he flattereth them, and blinds them with gifts,
and corrupts the We do nothing well e^^ept we do it of love from a pure heart.
officers with rewards, and ^egui^th the law with cautels and subtilties.

And because the love of God and of his neighbor, which is the spirit and the
life of all laws, and wherefore all laws are made, is not written in his heart,
therefore in all inferior ^awes and in all worldly ordinances is he betell
blind. If he be commanded to absteyne from wine, that will he observe unto
the death to, as the Charterhouse Monks had lever dye then eat flesh: and as
for Superstitious observations are rather the breakyng of the law then the
keeping of the same.
the soberness and chastising of the members will he not look for, but will
pour male and bear of the strongest without measure, and heat them with spices
and so forth. And the holyday will he keep so straight, that if he meet a
s^ee in his bed he dare not kill her, and not once regard wherefore the holyday
was ordained to seek for Gods word, and so forth in all laws. And in
ceremonies and sacraments, there he captiuateth his wit and understanding to
obey holy Church, without asking what they mean, or desiring to know, but
only cares for the keeping, and looks ever with a pair of narrow eyes, and
with all his spectacles upon them, lest ought be left out. For if the priest
should say Mass, baptize, or hear confession without a stole about his
neck, he would think all were marred, and doubt whether he had power to
consecrate, and think that the virtue of the Mass were lost, and the child
not well baptized or not baptized at all, and that his absolution were not
worth a mite. He had lever that the Bishop should wag two fingers over him,
then that an other man should say God save him, and so forth. Wherefore beloved
reader, in as much as the holy ghost rebukes the world for lack of
judgment, The world is to be rebuked for lack of judgment.
and in as much also as their ignorance is without excuse before whose faces
enough is set to judge by, if they would open their eyes to see, and not
captiuate their understanding to believe lies: and in as much as the spiritual
judges all thing, even the very bottom of Gods secrets, that is to say, the
causes of the things which God commands, how much more ought we to judge
our holy fathers secrets, and not to be as an Ox or an Ass without
understanding.

Judge therefore reader whether the Pope Judge by these things whether the Pope
have erred or no^
with his be the Church, whether their authority be above the Scripture:
whether all they teach without Scripture be equal with the Scripture: whether
they have erred, and not only whether they can. And against the mist of their
sophistry take the examples that are past in the old Testament, and authentike
stories, and the present practice which thou see before thine eyes. Judge
whether it be possible that any good should Judge what baggage is in the Popes
doctrine and of his making
come out of their domme ceremonies and Sacraments into thy soul. Judge their
penance, pilgrimages, pardons, purgatory, praying to posts, domme
blessings, domme absolutio^s, their domme pateryng and howlyng, their domme
strange holy gestures with all their domme disguisinges, their satisfactio^s
and iustifyinges. And because thou find them false in so many things, trust
them in nothing but judge the^ in all things. Mark at the last the practice
of our fleshly spirituality and their ways by which they Note the (...)
spirituality.
have walked above eight hundred years, how they stablish their lies, first
wtth falsifiyng the Scripture, then thorough corruptyng with their riches
whereof they have infinite treasure in store: and last of all with the sword.
Have they not compelled the Emperors of the earth and the great Lords and
high ^cers to be obedient unto them, to dispure for them, and to be their
torme^tours, and the Samsumims the^ selves do but imagine mischief and inspire
them.

Mark whether it were ever truer then (...) Christ.
now, the Scribes, Phariseis, Pylate, Herod, Cayphas and Anna, are gathered
together against God and Christ. But yet I trust in vain, and he that brake
the Counsel of A chitophell shall scatter theirs. Mark whether it (...) not
true in the highest degree, that Our (...) is the cause that hypo^.
for the sin of the people hypocrites shall rain over them. What shows,
what faces and contrary pretenses are made, and all to stablish them in their
theft, falsehead, and damnable lies, and to gather them together for The
practice of prelates.
to continue su^ltie to oppress the truth and to stop the light and to keep
all still in darkness. Wherefore it is time to awake and to see every man with
his own eyes and to judge, if we will not be judged of Christ when he comes
to judge. And remember that he which is warned has none excuse, if he take
n^ede. Here with fare well in ye Lord Jesus Christ whose spirit be thy guide
and doctrine and the light to judge with all. Amen.

What the Church is.
THis word Church Signification of the (...) are (...).
has diverse significations. First it signifies a place or house, whether
Christen people were wont in the old time to resort at times convenient, for
to hear the word of doctrine, the law of God and the faith of our Savior
Jesus Christ, and how and what to pray and whence to ask power and strength to
live godly. For The ministers of the (...) are (...) to preach to yt people
s^ly the wo^ of (...) and to pray in a (...)understand.
the officers thereto appointed preached the price word of God only and pray^d
in a t^^ng that all men understood. And yt people hearkened unto his prayers,
and said thereto Ame^ and prayed with him in their hearts, and of him learned
to pray at home and every where, and to instruct every man his household.

Where now we hear but voices with out signification and buzsinges, howlings
and cryinges, as it were the ha^yng^s of Foxes or baytings of Bear^s, and
wonder at disguisings and t^yes whereof we know no meaning.

By reason whereof we be fallen into such ignorauncie, that we know of the mercy
and promises which are in Christ nothing at all.

And of the law of God we think as do the Turks, and as did the old The law
cannot be fulfilled with works or they never so holy.
heathen people, how that it is a thing which every man may do of his own
power, and in doing thereof becomes good and waxes righteous and deserves
heaven: yea and are yet more mad then that. For we imagine the same of
Fantasies and vain ceremonies of our own making, neither needful unto the
tamyng of our own flesh, neither profitable unto our neighbor, neither honor
unto God.

And of prayer we think, that no A great abuse in prayer.
man can pray but at Church, and that it is nothing else but to say Pater noster
unto a post. Wherewith yet and with other obseruau^ces of our own imaginyng,
we believe, we deserve to be sped of all that our blind hearts desire.

In an other signification it is abused The church taken for the spiritualty.
and mistake^ for a multitude of shaven shorn, and oyled which we now call the
spirituality and Clergy. As when we read in the Chronicles king William was a
great tyrau^t and a wicked King William.
man unto holy Church and took much lands from them. King John King John.
was also a per^^ous man and a wicked unto holy Church, and would have had them
punished for theft, murder and what soever mischief they did, as though they
had not been people anointed, but eue^ of the vile rascal and common lay
people.

And Thomas Becket was a blessed and an holy man for he dyed for the liberties
S. Thomas of Caunterbury.
(to do all mischief unpunished) and privileges of the Church. Is he a lay man
or a man of the Church? Such is the living of holy Church. So men say Holy
Church has bornt a great swinge.
of holy church. Ye must believe in holy Church and do as they teach you. Will
ye not obey holy Church? Will ye not do the penance enjoined you by holy
Church? Will yet not forswear obedience unto holy Church? Beware least ye fall
into yt indignation of holy church, lest they curse you and so forth. In which
The Pope and his rabble taken for the church.
all we understand but ye Pope, Cardinals, Legates, Patriarckes, Archbyshops,
Bishops, Abbotes, Priours, Chauncelers, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials,
Priests, Monks, Friars, Black, Whit, Pied, Gray, and so forth, by (I trow) a
thousand names of blasphemy and of hypocrisies and as many sundry fashions of
disguisinges.

It has yet or should have an other signification, little known among the
common people now a days. That is to wit, it signifies a congregation, a
multitude or a company gathered together The church is a cong^^gation of people
of all sorts gathered together.
in one, of all degrees of people. As a man would say, the church of London,
meaning not the spirituality only (as they will be called for their diligent
serving of God in the spirit, and so sore eschuing to meddle with temporal
matters) but the whole body of the city, of all kinds, conditions and
degrees: and the church of Bristow, all that pertain unto the town generally.
And what congregation is me^t, thou shall always understand by the matter that
is entreated of, and by the circumstaunces thereof.

And in this third signification is the The church of God how it is taken in
Scripture.
church of God or Christ taken in the scripture, eue^ for the whole multitude
of all them that receive the name of Christ to believe in him, and not for the
clergy only. For Paul says Gal. i. Gal. 1.
I persecuted the church of God above measure, which was not the preachers
only, but all that believed generally, as it is to see Act. xxij. where he
says, Acts. 23.
I persecuted this way even unto the death, binding and putting in prison both
men and women. And Gal. i. I Gal. 1.
was unknown concerning my person unto the congregations of the Jews which
were in Christ. And Romans Romans 16.
xvi. I commend unto you Phebe the Deaconi^^e of the church of Cenchris. And
the churches of Asia salute you. i. 1. Cor. 16.
Corin. the last.

And if a man can not rule his own house, how shall he take the care of the
church of God. i. Tim. iij? if any faithful 1. Tim. 3.
man or woman have widows, let them find them, that the church be not
charged. i. Tim. v. And Mat. 18. 1. Tim. 5.
if thy brother hear thee not, tell the church or congregation and so forth.
The church is a multitude of all them that believe in Christ wheresoever ^hey be
gathered together.
In which places and thoroughout all the scripture, the church is taken for ye
whole multitude of them that believe in Christ in that place, in that parish,
town, city, province, land, or thoroughout all the world, and not for the
spirituality only.

Notwithstanding yet it is sometimes taken generally for all them that embrace A
double signification of this word church.
the name of Christ, though their faithes be naught, or though they have no
faith at all. And sometimes it is taken specially for the elect only, in
whose hearts God has written his law with his holy spirit, and given them a
feeling faith of the mercy that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Why Tindall used this word congregation, rather the^ church in the
translation of the new Testament.
WHerefore in as much (as the clergy, as the nature of those hard and indurat
Adama^tstones is, to draw all to them) had appropriat unto themselves the term
that of right is common The cause why Tyndall translated yt word church into
this word congregation.
unto all the whole congregation of them that believe in Christ, and with their
false and subtle wyles had beguiled and mocked the people, and brought them
into the ignorance of the word, making the^ understand by this word church,
nothing but the shaven flock, of them that shore the whole world: therefore
in the translation of the new Testament where I found this word Ecclesia, I
enterpreted it, by this word congregation. Even therefore did I it, and not of
any mischeuous mind or purpose to stabl^she heresy, as master More untruly
reports of me in his Dialoge, where he rayleth on yt translation of the new
Testament.

And when M. More says, that this word Church is known well enough. I report
me unto the consciences of all the land, whether he say truth or other wise, or
whether the lay people understand by Church the whole multitude of all that
profess Christ, or the iugglyng spirits only. And when he says that
congregation is a more general Congregation is understand by the circu^staunce.
term, if it were, it hurts not. For the circumstance does ever tell what
congregation is meant. Nevertheless yet says he not the truth. For whersoeuer
I may say a congregation, there may I say a Church also, as the Church of the
devil, the Church of Satan, the Church of wretches, yt Church of wickedmen,
the Church of liars and a Church of Turks thereto.

For M. More must grant (if he will have Ecclesia translated throughout all
the new Testament by this word Church) that Church is as common as Ecclesia.
Now is Ecclesia a Greek Ecclesia is a greek word, and signifies a
congregation.
word and was in use before the time of the Apostles and taken for a
congregation among the heathen, where was no congregation of God or of Christ.
And also Lucas him self uses Ecclesia for a Church or congregation of heathen
people thrice in one Chapter, eue^ in the xix. of the Acts, where Demetrius
the goldsmith or siluersmith had gathered Acts. 19.
a company against Paul for preaching against Images.

Howbeit M. More has so long used* his figures of Poetry, that (I suppose) M.
More was ^ful in Poetry.
when he erreth most, he now by the reason o^ a long custom, believes himself,
that he says most true. Or else (as the wise people which when they dance
naked in nets believe that no man sees them) even so M. More thinks that
his errors be so subtly couched that no man can espy them. So blind he
counts all other men in comparison of his great understanding. But charitably
I exhort him in Christ to take heed, for though Judas were wilier then his
fellows to get lucre, yet Judas.
he proved not most wise at yt last end. Neither though Balam the false Prophet
Balaa^.
had a clear sight to bring y^ curse of God upon the children of Israel for
honors sake, yet his covetousness did so blind his prophecy, that he could
not see his own end. Let therefore M. A good ad^ to M. More.
More and his company awake be times ere ever their sin be ripe, lest ye
voice of their wickedness asceno^ up and awake God out of his sleep, to look
upon them and to how his ears unto their cursed blasphemies against the open
truth, and to send his harvest men and mowares of vengeance to repe it.

But how happeth it that M. More has not contended in likewise against his
derelyng Erasmus all this long M. More did greatly favor Erasm^s.
while? Does not he change this word Ecclesia into congregation and that not
seldom in the new Testament? peradventure he owes him favor because he made
Moria in his house. Which book if it were in English, the^ should every man
see, how that he then was far otherwise minded then he now writes. But
verily I think that as Judas betrayed not Christ for any love that he had unto
the high Priests, Scribes and Phariseis, but only to come by that wherefore
he thirsted: eue^ so M. More (as there are tokens evident) M. More was a ^epe
dissembler.
wrote not these books for any affection that he bare unto the spiritualty or
unto the opinions which he so barely defe^deth, but to obtain only that which
he was an hungered for: I pray God that he eat not to hastly lest he be chokeo
at the latter end, but that he repent and resist not the spirit of God which
opens light unto the world.

Why he uses this word Elder and not Priest.
AN other thing which he rebukes, is, that I interpret this Greek word
Presbiteros by this word Senior. M. More (...) captious.
Of a truth Senior is no very good English, though Senior and Iuniot be used
in the universities: but there came no better in my mind at that time. Howbeit
I spied my fault since, long yer M. More told it me, and have ^ded it in all
the works which I sens made, and call it an Elder. And in that he makes
here^ie of it, to call M. More (...)
Presbiteros an Elder, he condemns their own old Latin text of heresy also,
which they use yet daily my^ ^ch and have used, I suppose, this, I suppose,
this run hundred years. For that text does(...)an elder likewise. In the. 1.
Pet. 5. ^s 1. Pet. 5.
stands it in ye Latin text. Se^ores qui in vobis sunt, obsecro ego con^
pascite qui in vobis est gregem Chri^(...)elders that are among you I(...)which
am an elder also, that ye sed^ flock of Christ, which is among(...)There is
Presbyteros calle^(...)And in yt he says feed Christ he means even the
Ministe^ chosen to teach the people and to(...)them in Gods word and no
^ay(...)And in the 2. Ep^st^e of John(...) (...)
text, Senior electae Dominae and (...) The elder unto the ele^t Lady(...)her
children. And in the(...)John. Senior Ga^o dilecto.(...) (...)
unto the beloved Gai^s. In these(...)pistles Presbyteros is calle^ an(...)And
in the xx. of the Acts, y^ text s^ (...)
Paul sent for maiores natu Eccle^(...)elders in birth of the congregation or
Church, and said unto them, take(...)unto your selves and unto y^ who^e (...),
over which the holy ghos^ has(...) (...)
you Episcopos ad regendum Eccle^ Dei, Bishops ouer^ca^s to(...)the Church of
God. There is ^teros called an Elder in birth(...)same immediately called
a(...)ouersear, to declare what p^ meant. Hereof ye see that I have(...)more
erred then their own text(...)they have used sense the scripture wa^ first in
the Latin ^oung, and that their own text understands by Presby^eros (...)
nothing save an Elder. And they were called Elders, because of their age,
gravity and sadness, as thou may^t see by the text: and Bishops or ouersears
by the reason of their offices. And all that were called Elders (or Priests if
they so will) were called Bishops also, though they have divided yt names now,
which thing thou may evidently see by the first Chapter of Titus. And Acts
xx. and other places mo.

And when he layth T^mothe unto my charge, how he was young, the^ he we^eth
that he has wo^^e his g^lden spu^s: But I would pray him to show me where he
reads that Paul calls him Presbyteros, Priest or Elder. I (...) not then
call him Episcopus properiy. For those ouer^ears which Bishops ought to be
byd^rs in one place.
we now call Bishops after the Greek word, we^ always bidyng in one place
to(...)the congregation there. N^w was T^the an Apostle. And Paul also writes
that he came shortly again. well, will he say, it comes yet all to one. For
if it be comes the lower Minister to be of a sad and dis^ much more it
becomes the higher. It is ^h. But ij. things are without law, God and
necessity. If Note.
God to show his power shall shed out his grace more upon youth then upon age
at a (...), who shall let him? we^e^ be no (...) v^ to rule or to preach Women.
(for both are forbidden them) yet has God en^owed them with his spirit at
sundry times and showed his power and goodness upon them and wrought
wonderful things by them, because God pours his holy spirit (...) wisdom
and(...)as well we^ me^.
he would not have them ^d. We ^^ad that women have judged all Isra^ll and have
been great propheti^ies and have done mighty deeds. Yea and if stones be true,
women have preached sense the openyng of yt new Testament.

Do not our w^men now Christen and minister the Sacrament of Baptism in time
of need? Might they not by as good reason preach also, if necessity required?
(...) a woman were driven into some Island, where Christ was never preached,
might she there not preach him, it she had the g^t thereto? Might she not also
Baptize? And why might she not, by the same reason minister the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, and teach them how to chose ^rs and ministers? O
poor women, how despite ye them? The vi^ the better welcome unto you. An whore
had ye lever the^ an honest wife. If only shaven and anointed may do these
things, then Christ did them not nor any of his Apostles, nor any man in long
time after. For they used no such ceremonies.

Notwithstanding, though God be under no law, and necessity lawless: God is
under no(...)necessity lawless.
yet be we under a law, and ought to prefer the men before the women, and
age before youth, as ^he as we ca^. For it is against the law of nature that
young men should rule the elder, and as uncomely as that women shoul^e rule the
men, but when need requires. And therefore if Paul had had other shift, and a
man of age as mete for The cause why young (...) was preferred by (...) to be a
Bishop.
the room, he would not have put Timothy in the office, he should no doubt
have been kept back until a fulier age, and have learned in the mean time in
silence. And whatsoever thou be that reade^t this, I exhort thee in our lord,
that thou read both yt epis^s of Paul to Timothy, that thou may see how
diligently (as a mother cares for her child if it be in peril) Paul writes
unto Timothy to instruct him, to teach him, to exhort, to courage him, to sh^^e
him up, to be wise, sober, diligent, circumspect, sad, humble and me^ke,
saying* these I write that thou may Paul was a fa^herly instructor to (...)
^thy.
know how to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the church or
congregation. A^oy^^ ^ustes of yo^h, beware of ungodly fables and old wives
tales, and avoid the company of men of corrupt minds, which wast their
brains about wrangling questions. Let no man despise thy^e youth. As who
should say, youth is a despised thing of it self, whereunto men give none
obedience or reverence naturally. See therefore that thy ve^^ue exceed, S.
Paul was a worthy and most ^ther and instructour.
to recompense thy lack of age, and that thou so behave thy self that no fault
be found with thee. And again, rebuke not an Elder sharply, but exhort him
as thy father, and yongmen as thy brethren, and the elder women as thy mothers,
and yt young women as thy sisters, and such like in every chapter. Adm^ none
accusation against an Elder under less then two witnesses. And Paul charge
him in the sight of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his elect Angels,
to do nothing rashely or of affection. And shortly whereunto youth is most
prove and ready to fall, thereof warns he him with all diligence, even almost
or altogether half a ^osen times of some one thing. And finally as a man
would A great difference between teaching of the people, and teaching of a
preacher.
teach a child that had ^euer before gone to schole, so te^derly and so
carefully does Paul teach him. It is an other thing to teach the people, and to
teach the preacher. Here Paul teaches the preacher, young Timothy.

And when he affirms that I say, how that the oyling and shauing is no
^^lyng, (...) sha^ing any thing or any part of priest^.
part of the Priesthode. That improne^h he not, nor can do. And therefore I say
i^ yet. And when he has insearched the ^most that he ca^, this is all that he
can say against me, that of an hundred there be not x. that have the properties
which Paul requires to be in them. Wherefore if oyling and shauyng be no part
of their Priesthode, then evermore of a thousand ix. hundred at the lest should
be no Priests at all. And quoth your friend would confirm it with an oath and
swear depely, that it would follow and yt it must needs so be. Which argument
yet, if there were no other shift I would solue after an Oxford fashion, with
concedo consequentiam and consequens. And I say moreover that their annoynting
is but a ceremony borrowed of ye Jews, though they have somewhat altered the
manner, and their shauing borrowed of the heathen Priests, and that they be no
O^ ^alt and (...) are (...)
more of their priesthood, then the oil, salt, spittell, ^aper and chrisome
cloth of the substance of baptime. Which things no doubt, because they be of
their con^uring, they would have preached of necessity unto the salvation of
the child, except necessity had driven them unto the contrary.

And seeing that the oil is not of necessity, let M. More tell me what more
virtue is in the oil of confirmation, in as much as the bishop sacreth the one
as well as the other: yea and let him tell the reason why there should be ^yle
has ^o (...) at all,(...)the (...).
more ^ertue in the oil wherewith yt Bishop annointeth his Priests. Let him
tell you from whence the oil comes, how it is made, and why he sells it to
the curates wherewyth they annointe the sick, or whether this be of less
virtue then the other.

And finally, why used not the Apostles
this greek word (...), or the interpreter this Latin word Sacerdos, but
always this word Presbyteros and Senior, by which was at that time nothing
signified but an Elder? And it The minister among the(...)were na^ (...) age.
was no doubt taken of the custom of the Hebrews, where the officers were ever
elderly men as nature requires. As it appears in the old testament and also
in the new. The Scribes, Pharisees, and the elders of the people says the text,
which were the officers and rulers, so called by the reason of their age.

Why he uses love rather then charity.
HE rebukes me also that I translate Why ^yn(...)this word(...)rather (...)
this greek word (...) into love, and not rather into charity, so holy and so
known a term. Verily charity is no known English, in that sense which
agape requires. For when we say, give your alms in the worship of God and
sweet saint charity, and when the father teaches his son to say blessing
father for saint charity, what mean they? In good faith they wot not.
Moreover when we say, God help you, I have done my charity for this day, do
we not take it for a^s? And the man is ever childing and out Charity has
(...) significations.
of charity, and I beshrew him saving my charity, there we take it for
patience. And when I say a charitable man, it is taken for merciful. And
though mercifulnes be a good love, or rather spring of a good love, yet is not
every good love mercifulnes. As when a woman loves her husband godly, or a man
his wife or his friend that is in none adversity, it is not always
mercifulness. Also we say not this man Love (...) is(...)understand.
has a great charity to god, but a great love. Wherefore I must have used this
general term love, in spite of mine heart oftentimes. And agape and charitas
were words used among the Hethe^ yer Chrst came, and signified therefore more
then a godly love. And we may say well enough and have heard it spoken that the
Turks be charitable one to an other among themselves, and some of them unto
the christen to. Besides all this agape is common unto all loves.

And when M. More says every love Every love is not charity nor every
charity is not love.
is not charity, no more is every Apostle Christ's Apostle, nor every Angel
Gods Angel, nor every hope christen hope, nor every says or belief Christ's
belief, and so by an hundred thousand words. So that if I should always use
but a word yt were no more general then the word I enterprete, I should
enterprete nothing at all. But the matter it self and the circumstaunces do
declare what love, what hope, and what faith is spoken of. And finally I say
not charity God, or charity your neighbor, but jove God and love your
neighbor, ye and though we say a man ought to love his neighbors wife and his
daughter, a Christen man does understand that he is commanded to defile his
neighbors wife or his daughter.

Why favor and not grace.
ANd with like reasons rages he Why Tyndall says favor and ^ot grace.
because I turn (...) into favor and not into grace, saying that every favor
is not grace, and that in some favor there is but little grace. I can say also
in some grace there is little goodness. And when we say, he stands well in
my Ladies grace, we understand no great godly savor. And in Universities many
ungracious graces are gotten.

Why knowledge and not confession, repentance and not penance.
ANd that I use this word knowledge Knowledge and not confession, repentance
and not penance.
and not confession, and this word repentance and not penance. In which all
he can not prove, that I give not the right English unto the Greek word. But
it is a far other thing that pay^eth them and byteth them by the breasts.
There he secret panges that pinch the very hearts of them, whereof they dare not
compain. The sickness that makes them so impacie^t is, that they have lost
their iugglyng terms. For the doctors and preachers were wont to make many
dimisio^s, distinctions and sorts of grace, gratis data, gratum faciens,
preueniens and subsequens. And with confession they The Papists may not
forbear to have their iugglyng terms.
iuggled, and so made the people, as often as they spoke of it: understand shrift
in the care. Whereof the Scripture makes no mention: no it is cle^ne against
the Scripture as they use it and preach it, and unto God an abhominatio^ and a
soul stinkyng sacrifice unto the filthy Idol Priapus. The loss of those
iugglyng terms is the matter where of all these bottes bread, that gnaw them
by the belyes and make them so unquiet.

And in like manner, by this word penance, Penance.
they make the people understand holy deeds of their enioynyng, with which
they must make satisfaction Penance was profit^ to the Papists.
unto Godward for their sins. When all the Scripture preaches that Christ
has made full satisfaction for our sins to Godward, and we must now be
tha^kfull to God again and kill the lusts of our flesh with holy works of
gods enioynyng and to take patiently all that God lays on my back. And if I
have ^rue penance what it is.
hurt my neighbor, I am bound to shr^e my self unto him and to make him
amends, if I have wherewith, or if not the^ to ask him sorgeuenesse, and he
is bound to forgive me. And as for their penance the Scripture knows not
of. The Greek has Metanoia and Metanoite, repentance and repent* or
forthinkyng and forthinke. As we say in English it forthinketh me or I
forthinke, and I repent or it repe^teth me and I am sorry that I did it. So now
the Scripture ^ayth repent or let it forthinke you and come and believe the
Gospel or glad tidings that is brought you in Christ, and so shall all be
forgeuen you, and henceforth live a new life: And it will follow if I repent in
Faith in Christ (...) get a true repentance
the heart, that I shall do no more so willingly and of purpose. And if I
believed the Gospel, what God has done for me in Christ, I should surely love
him again and of love prepare my self unto his commandments.

These things to be even so M. More knows well enough. For he understands
the Greek, and he knew them long yer I. But so blind is covetousness and
dronke^ desire of honor. Gifts blind the eyes of the seeing and pervert the
words of the righteous Deuteronomy. xvij Deuteronomy. 17.
When covetousness finds vauntage in seruyng falsehead, it rises up into an
o^mate malice against the truth and seeks all means to resist it, and to
quench it. As Balam the false Prophet, though he wiste that God loved Israel
Balam.
and had blessed them and promised them great things, and that he would fulfill
his promises, yet for covetousness and desire of honor, he fell into such
malice against the truth of God, that he sought ^ow to resist it and to curse
the people. Which when God would not let him do, he turned him self an other
way and gave pestilent counsel, to make the people sin against God, whereby
the wrath of God ^el upon them, and many thousand perished. Notwithstanding
Gods truth abode fast and was fulfiled in the rest. And Balam as he was the
cause that many perished, so escaped he not him self. No more did any that
maliciously resisted the open truth against his own conscience, sense the
world began, that ever I read. For it is sin against y^ holy ghost, which
Christ says The sin against the holy ghost.
shall neither be forgiven here nor in the world to come, which text may this
wise be understand that as that sin
shall be punished with everlasting damnation in the life to come: even so shall
it not escape vengeance here. As thou ^eest in Judas, in Pharao, in Balam and
in all other tyrauntes which against their consciences resisted the open truth
of God.

So now the cause why our Prelates thus rage, and that moves them to call M.
More to help, is not that they find just causes in the translation, but
because they have lost their iugglyng and feigned terms, wherewith Peter
prophesied 2. Pet. 1.
they should make marchaundise of the people.

Whether the Church were before the Gospel or the Gospel before the Church.
AN other doubt there is, whether the Church or congregation be before The
chuch before y^ gospel, or the Gospel before the church.
the Gospel or the Gospel before the Church. Which question is as hard to
solue, as whether the father be elder then the son or the son elder then
his father. For the whole Scripture and all believing hearts testify that we
are begotten through the word. Wherefore if the word beget the congregation, and
he that begets is before him that is begotten, then is the Gospel before
the Church. Paul also Romans ix. says, how shall they call on him whom they Romans
9.
believe not? And how shall they believe without a preacher? That is, Christ must
first be preached yer men can believe in him. And then it follows, that the
word of the preacher must be before the faith of the beleuer. And therefore The
word which is y^ Gospel was before the church.
in as much as the word is before the faith, and faith makes the congregation,
therefore is the word or Gospel before the congregation. And again as the air
is dark of it self and receaueth all her light of the son: even so are all
men's hearts of themselves dark with lies and receive all their truth of Gods
word, in that they consent thereto. And moreover as the dark air gives the
son no light, but contrariwise the light of the son in respect of the air
is of it self and lighteneth the air and purges it from darkness: eue^ so
the lying heart of man can give the word of God no truth, but contrary wise the
truth of Gods word is of her self, and lighteneth the hearts of the beleuers and
makes them true, and cleanses them from lies, as thou read John. xv. ye be
clean by reason of the Ioh. 15.
word. Which is to be understand, in that the word had purged their harces from
lies, from false opinions and from thinking evil good, and therefore from
consentyng to sin. And John. xvij. Ioh. 17.
sanctify them O father thorough thy truth. And thy word is truth. And thus
thou see that Gods truth depends not of man. It is not true because man so
says or admits it for true: But man is true because he believes it,
testifies and gives witness in his heart that it is true. And Christ also
says him self John. v. I receive no witness of man. For if the multitude of
Note w^ll this.
ma^s witness might make ought true, then were the doctrine of Mahomete truer
then Christ's.

Whether the Apostles left ought unwritten, that is of necessity to be believed.
BUt did not y^ Apostles teach ought Whether y^ Apostles taught any thing that
they did not write.
by mouth that they wrote not? I answer, because that many taught one thing,
and every man the same in diverse places and unto diverse people. and confirmed
every sermon with a sundry miracle: therefore Christ and his Apostles preached
an ^red thousand sermons, and did as many miracles, which had been superfluous
to have been all written. But the pith and substance in general of every
thing necessary unto our souls health, both of what we ought to believe, and
what we ought to do was written, and of the miracles done to confirm it, as
many as were nedeful. So that whatsoever So much to written as is necessary ^or
(...) salvation.
we ought to believe or do, that same is written expresely, or drawn out of
that which is written.

For if I were bound to do or believe under pain of the loss of my soul any
thing that were written, nor depe^ded of that which is written, what help me
the scripture that is written? And The scripture written must con^o^nde the
unwritten verities.
thereto in as much as Christ and all his Apostles warned us that false
prophets should come with false miracles, even to deceive the elect if it
were possible, wherewith should the true preacher confound the false, except
he brought true miracles to confound the false, or else autenticke scripture of
full authority already among the people.

Some man would ask, how did God continue his congregation from Adam to Noe,
and from Noe to Abraham, and so to Moses, without writing, but with teaching
from mouth to mouth. I answer, first that there was no scripture all the
while, they Writing has been from the beginning.
shall prove, when our Lady has a new son. God taught Adam greater things
then to write. And that there was writing in the world long yer Abraham yea and
yer Noe, do stories testify.

Notwithstanding, though there had been no writing, the preachers were God from
y^ beginning has (...)ten (...)y^ hearts of his (...).
ever prophets glorious in doing of miracles, wherewith they cofirmed their
preaching. And beyond that god wrote his testament unto them a^way, both what
to do and to believe, eue^ in ye sacraments. For the sacrifices which God gave
Adams sons, were no dumme popetrie or superstitious Mahometrie, but signs of
the testament of God. And in them they red ye word of God, as we do in books,
and as we should do in our sacraments, if the wicked Pope had not taken the
significations The Pope has taken fro us the significations of the Sacraments.
away from us, as he has robbed us of the true sense of all the scripture. The
testament which God made with Noe, that he would no more drown the world
with water, he wrote in the sacrament of the rainebow. And the appointment made
between him and Abraham, he wrote in the sacrament of circumcision. And
therefore said Steven Act. vij. he gave them y^ testament of circumcision. Not
Acts. 7.
that the outward circumcision was the whole testament, but the sacrament or
sign there. For circumcision preached Gods word unto the^, as I have in other
places declared.

But in the time of Moses when the congregation was increased, that they must
have many preachers and also rulers temporal, then all was received in
scripture, in so much that Christ and his Apostles might not have been believed
without scripture for all their miracles. Wherefore in as much as Christ's
congregation is spread abroad There can no more be taught us then to contained
in the scriptures.
into all the world much broader then Moses, and in as much as we have not the
old testament only but also the new, wherein all things are opened so richly
and all fulfilled that before was promised, and in as much as there is no
promise behind of ought to be showed more save the resurrection: yea and seeing
that Christ and all the Apostles with all the Angels of heaven, if they were
here, could preach no more then is preached, of necessity unto our souls: How
then should we receive a new article of the faith, with out scripture, as
profitable unto my soul, when I had believed it, as smoke for ^ore eyes. What
help it me to believe that our Ladies body is in heaven? What am I the better
for the belief Purgatory.
of Purgatory? to fear men thou will say. Christ and his Apostles thought hell
^ough. And yet (besides that the fleshly imagination may not stand with Gods
word) what great fear can there be of that terrible fire which thou may
quench almost for three half pence?

And that the Apostles should teach ought by mouth which they would not write,
I pray you for what purpose? because they should not come into the hands of
the Heathen for mocking, says M. More. I pray you what thing more to be mocked
of the Heathen could they teach, then the resurrection, and that Christ was
God and man, and dyed between two thieves, and that for his deaths sake, all
that repent and believe therein should have their sins forgeuen them, yea and
if the Apostles understood thereby as we do, what madder thing unto heathen
people could they have taught the^ yt bread is Christ's body, and wine The
Heathen thought nothing more madder the^ the doctrine of the resurrection.
his blood. And yet all these things they wrote. And again purgatory,
confession in the ear, penance and satisfaction for sin to Godward, with
holy deeds, and praying to Saints with such like, as dumme sacraments and
ceremonies, are marvelous agreeable unto the superstition of the Heathen people,
so that they needed not to abstain from writing of the^, for fear least the
Heathen should have mocked them.

Moreover what is it that the Apostles The Apostles taught nothing that they
were afraid to write.
taught by mouth, and durst not write? The sacraments? As for baptim and the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ they wrote, and it is expressed what
is signified by them. And also all the ceremonies and sacraments that were
from Adam to Christ Sacraments have significations.
had significations, and all that are made mention of in the new testament,
Wherefore in as much as the sacraments of the old testament have
significations, and in as much as the sacraments of the new testament (of
which mention is made that they were delivered unto us by the very Apostles at
Christ's commandment) have also significatio^s, and in as much as the office
of an Apostle is to edify in Christ, and in as much as a dumme eremonie
edifieth not, but hurts altogether (for if it preach not unto me, All y^
Sacraments taught either in the old testament or new, have significations.
then I can not but put confidence therein, that the deed it self justifies
me, which is ye denying of Christ's blood) and in as much as no mention is made
of the^, as well as of other, nor is known what is meant by them: therefore it
appears that the Apostles taught them not, but that they be the false
marchaundise of wily hipocrites. And thereto priesthode was in the time of the
Apostles an office which if they would do truly, it would more profit then
all the sacraments in ye world. The Popish Sacraments (...) one against an
other.
And again Gods holinesses strine not one against an other, nor defile one
another. Their sacraments defile one another. For wedlock defiles priesthode
more the^ whordome, theft, murder, or any sin against nature.

They will happily demand where it is written that women should baptize. Verily
in this commandment, Love thy neighbor as thy self, it is written, that
they may and ought to minister not only Baptim, but all other in time of
need, if they be so necessary as they preach them. Sacraments with out
significations are not to be (...).


And finally though we were sure that God himself had given us a sacrament,
whatsoever it were, yet if ye signification were once lost, we must of
necessity, either seek up the signification or put some signification of Gods
word thereto, what we ought to do or believe thereby, or else put it down. For it
is impossible to observe a sacrament without signification, but unto our
da^pnatio^. If we keep y^ faith purely and the law of love undefiled, which
are y^ significatio^s of all ceremonies there is no icopardy to alter or
change the fashion of the ceremony, or to put it down if need require.

Whether the Church can err.
THere is an other question, whether Whether y^ Church ca^^ or not.
the Church may err. Which if ye understand of the Pope and his generation, it
is verily as hard a question as to ask whether he which has both his eyes out
be blind or no, or whether it be possible for him that has one leg shorter
the^ an other, to halt. But I said that Christ's elect church What ye very
Church is and what faith saves.
is the whole multitude of all repenting sinners that believe in Christ, and put
all their trust and confidence in the mercy of God, feeling in their hearts,
that God for Christ's sake loves the^, and will be or rather is merciful unto
them, and forgeueth the^ their sins of which they repent, and that he
forgeueth them also all the motions unto sin, of which they fear least they
should thereby be drawn into sin again. And this faith they have with out
all respect of their own deseruinges, yea and for none other cause then that
the merciful truth of God the father, which can not lie, has so promised, and
so sworn.

And this faith and knowledge is everlasting By faith we are
life, and by this we be borne a new and made the sons of God, and obtain
forgeuenes of sins, and made the sons of God.
are translated from death to life, and from the wrath of God unto his love and
favor. And this faith is the mother of all truth, and brings with her ye
spirit of all truth. Which spirit purges us, as from all sin, even so from
all lies and error noisome and hurtful. And this faith is the foundation laid
of the Apostles and Prophets whereon Paul says Ephesians. ij. that we Ephe. (...)*
are built, and thereby of the household of God. And this faith is the rock
whereon Christ build his congregation. Christ asked the Apostles Math. xvj.
Math. (...)
whom they took him for. And Peter answered for them all saying I say that
thou art Christ the son of the living God yt ar^ come into this world. That
is, we believe that thou art he that was promised unto Abraham, that should come
bless us and deliver us. Howbeit Peter yet wist not by what means. But now it
is opened throroughout The offering of Christ's body and blood is ye only
satisfaction for our sins.
all the world, that through the offering of his body and blood, that offering
is a satisfaction for the sin of all that repent and a purchasyng of what
soever they can ask, to keep them in favor. And that they sin no more. And
Christ answered upon this rock I will build my congregation: that is, upon
this faith. And against the rock of this faith can no sin, no hell, no
devil, no lies nor error prevail.

For what soever any man has committed, if he repent and come to this rock,
he is safe. And that this faith is the only way by which the Church of Christ
goes unto God and unto the inheritance of all his riches, testify all the
Apostles and Prophets and all the Scripture, with signs and miracles, and all
yt blood of Martyrs. And There is no way to salvation, but by Christ's death
and passion.
who soever goes unto God and unto forgiveness of sins or salvation, by any
other way then this, the same is an heretic out of the rightway and not of
Christ's Church.

For this knowledge makes a man of ye Church. And the Church is Christ's body
Collos. i. and every person Collos. 1.
of the Church is a member of Christ. Ephesians. 5. Now it is no member of Christ
Ephesians. 5. Romans 8.
that has not Christ's spirit in it. Romans viij. as it is no part of me or
member of my body wherein my soul is not present and quickens it. And then
if a man be none of Christ's, he is not of his Church.

How a true member of Christ's Church sins not, and how he is yet a sinner.
FUrthermore, he that has this faith can not sin, and therefore can not be
deceived with damnable errors. For by this faith we be (as I said) borne of
God. Now he that is borne of God can not sin, for his seed dwell leth in him,
and he can not therefore sin, because he is borne of God. i. John. iij. which
seed is the holy ghost that keeps 1. John. 3.
a man's heart from consenting unto sin. And therefore it is a false conclusion
Faith and sin can not ^a^d together.
that M. More holds, how that a man may have a right faith joined with all
kinds of abomination and sin.

And yet every member of Christ's congregation is a sinner and synneth daily,
some more and some less. For it is written. i. John. i. if we say we have 1.
John. 1.
no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us. And again if we
say, we have not sinned, we make him a liar and his word is not in us. And Paul
Romans vij. says, that good which I would, that do I not, but that evil which I
would not, that do I. So it is not I that do it (says he) but sin that
dwells in me. Thus are we sinners and no sinners. No sinners, if thou look
unto the profession of our hearts toward the law of God, on our repentance and
sorrow that we have, both because we have sinned and also because we be yet full
of sin still, and unto the promises of mercy in our Savior Christ, and unto
our faith. Sinners are we, if thou look unto the frail All flesh death sin.
tie of our flesh, which is as the weakness of one that is newly recovered
out of a great disease, by y^ reason where of our deeds are imperfect. And by
the reason whereof also, when occasions be great, we fall into horrible deeds,
and the fruit of the sin which remains in our members breaks out.
Notwithstanding yet the spirit leaves us not, but rebukes us and brings us
home again unto our profession, so that we never cast of the yocke of God from
our necks neither yield up our selves unto sin, for to serve it, but fight a
fresh and begin a new battle.

How a Christen man can not err, and how he may yet err.
ANd as they sin not, so they err not. And on the other side as they sin,
so they err: but never unto death and damnation. For they never sin of
purpose nor hold any error maliciously, sinnyng against the holy ghost, but of
weakness and infirmity. As good obedient children, though they love their
fathers commandments, yet break them often, by the reason of their weakness.
And as they can not yield them selves bond unto sin, to We sin of frailty
and weakness.
serve it: eue^ so they can not err in any thing that should be against the
promises which are in Christ. And in other things their errors be not unto
damnation, though they be never so great, because they hold them not
maliciously. As now, if some when they read in the new Testament of Christ's
brethren, would think that they were our Ladies children after the birth of
Christ, because they know not the use of speaking of the Scripture or of the
Hebrews, how that ^ye kinsine^ be called brethren, or happily they might be
Iosephes children, by some first wife, neither can have any to teach him for
tyranny that is so great, yet could it not hurt him, though he dyed therein,
because it hurts not the redemption that is in Christ's blood. For though she
had none but Christ, I am therefore never the more saved, neither yet ye less,
though she had had. And in such like We may err, and yet be saved.
an hundred that pluck not a man's faith from Christ, they might err, and yet
be nevertheless saved no though the contrary were written in the Gospel. For
as in other sins, as soon as they be rebuked, they repent: even so here,
as soon as they were better taught, they should immediately knowledge their
error and not resist.

But they which maliciously maynteine opinions against the Scripture, or that
yt ca^ not be proved by the Scripture, or such as make no matter unto the
Scripture and salvation that is in Christ whether they be true or no, and for
the blind zeal of them make sects, breakyng yt unity of Christ's Church, for
whose sake they ought to suffer all thing, and rise against their neighbors,
whom they ought to love as Who they be that err from the way of ^ayth.
them selves, to sle^ them (such men I say are fallen from Christ and make an
Idol of their opinions. For except they put trust in such opinions and thought
them necessary unto salvation, or with a cankred conscience went about to
deceive, for some filthy purpose, they would never break the unity of faith
or yet slay their brethren. Now is this a plain conclusion, that both they yt
trust in their own works, and they also yt put confidence in their own
opinions, be fallen from Christ and err from the way of faith that is in
Christ's blood, and therefore are none of Christ's Church, because they be not
built upon the rock of faith.

Faith is ever assailed and fought with all.
Moreover this our faith which we have in Christ, is ever fought against, Faith
is ever assailed with besperation.
ever assailed and beaten at with besperation: not when we sin only, but also
in all temptations of adversity, into which God brings us, to nurtour us,
and to show us our own hearts, the hypocrisy and false thoughts that there
lie hid, our almost no faith at all, and as little love, even the^ happily when
we thought our selves most perfect of all. For when temptations come we can not
stand, when we have sinned faith is feeble, when wrong is done us we can not
forgive, in sickness, in loss of goods and in all tribulations we be
impatient: when our neighbor needs our help, that We must depart with him
of ours then love is cold.

And thus we learn and feel that there is no goodness nor yet power to do
good, but of God only. And in all All power and readiness to do good co^^eth of
God and not of our selves.
such te^ptatio^s our faith perishes not utterly, neither our love and consent
unto the law of God. But they be weak, sick, and wounded, and not clean
dead. As a good child whom the father and mother have taught nurtoure and
wisdom, loves his father A very good example.
and all his commandments, and perceaueth of yt goodness showed him, that his
father loves him, and that all his fathers precepts are unto his wealth and
profit, and that his father commands him nothing for any need that his
father has thereof, but seeks his profit only, and therefore has a good
faith unto all his fathers promises, and loves all his commandments, and
does them with good will, and with good will goes to schole. And by the way
happily he sees company play, and with the sight is taken and ravished of his
memory, and forgets himself, and stands and beholds and falls to play
also, forgetting father and mother, all their kindness, all their laws, and his
own profit thereto. Howbeit, the knowledge of his fathers kindness, the
faith of his promises, and the love that he has again unto his father, and
the obedient mind are not utterly quenched, but lie hid, as all things do
when a man sleeps or lies in a trance. And as soon as he has played out
all his lusts The faithful though they sl^^, yet they fall not
or be warned in the mean season, he comes again unto his old profession.
Never the later, many temptations go over his heart, and the law as a right
hangman tormenteth his conscience, and goes nigh to persuade him that his
father will cast him away and hang him if he ketch him, so that he is like a
great while to run a way rather then to return unto his father again. Fear
and dread of rebuke, and of loss of his fathers love and of punishment wrestle
with the trust which he has in his fathers goodness, and as it were give his
faith a fall. But it rises again as soon as the rage of the first brunte is
past and his mind more quiet. And the goodness of his father, and his old
kindness comes unto Faith in y^ good ne^ of God is our stay.
remembrance, either of his own courage or by the comfort of some other. And
he believes that his father will not cast him away or destroy him, and hops
that he will no more do so.

And upon that he gets him home, dismayed. But not altogether faythlesse.
The old kindnesses will not let him despair. Howbeit, all the world cannot
set his ha^t at rest, until the pain be past, and until he have heard the
voice of his father that all is forgeuen.

The manner and order of our election.
EVen so goes it with Gods elect. God chooses the^ first, and they not God,
as thou read John. xv. And Ioh. 15.
then he sends forth and calls them, and shows them his good will which he
bears unto them, and makes the^ see both their own damnation in the law,
and also the mercy that is laid up for them in Christ's blood, and thereto
what he will have them do. And If we consider how merciful god is unto us, we
cannot choose but submit our selves unto his laws.
then when we see his mercy, we love him again, and choose him and submit our
selves unto his laws to walk in them. For when we err not in wit, reason and
judgment of things, we can not err in will and choice of things. The choice
of a man's will does naturally and of her own accord follow the judgment of a
man's reason, whether he judge right or wrong. So that in teaching only rests
the pyth of a man's living. How be it, there be swine that receive no learning
but to defile it. And there be dogs that rent all good learning with their
teeth. And there be Pope holy, which following a righteousness of their own
faining, resist the righteousness of God in Christ. And there be that cannot
attend to harken unto the truth for rage of lusts, which when lusts abate,
come and obey well enough.

And therefore a Christen man must Christian me^ must be patient.
be patient and suffer long to win his brother to Christ, yt he which atte^deth
not to day, may receive grace and hear to morrow, we see some at their very
latter end, when cold fear of death has quenched the heat of their
appetites, learn and consent unto the truth, whereunto before they could give
none care, for the wild rages of lusts that blinded their wits.

And though Gods elect can not so fall that they rise not again, because that
the mercy of God ever wayteth Mercy waits ever on the elect.
upon them, to deliver them from evil, as the care of a kind father wayteth
upon his son, to warn him and to keep him from occasions, and to call him
back again if he be gonne to far: yet they forget themselves ofttymes, and
sink down into traunces and fall a sleep in lusts for a season. But as soon
as they be awaked they repent and come again without resistaunce. God now and
the^ withdraws his hand and leueth them unto their own strength, to make the^
feel that there is no power to do good but of God only, lest they should be
proud of that which is none of theirs. God laid so sore awaight of persecution
vpp^n David's back that David.
passed his strength to bear. So that he cried often out of his Psalms, saying
that he had lived well and followed the right way of God in vain. For the more
he kept him self from s^nne, the worse it went with him, as he thought, and
the better with his enemy Saul, the worse he was. Yet God left him not there,
but comforted him and showed him things which before he wist not The elect of
God must have patience and be long sufferers.
of, how that the Saints must be pacient and abide Gods hauest, until the
wickedness of ungodly sinners be full ripe, yt God may ripe it in dew season.

God also suffered occasions stronger then David, to fall upon him and to carry
him clean out of the way. Was he not ready for a churlysse answer to have
slain Naball and all the males of his house, so much as the child in the
cradell? howbeit God with held him and kept him back from that evil, thorough
the wisdom of Abigall. How God tries his elect by suffering them to tell
into temptation.
long slomberd he, or rather how hard in sleep was he in the adultery of Beth
sabe. And in the murder of her husband Vriah, But at both times as soon as he
was rebuked and his fault told him, he repented immediately and turned again
mekely. Now in all that long time, from the adultery of Bethsabe until the
Prophet Nathan rebuked him he had not lost his faith nor yet his love unto the
laws of God, no more then a man loses his wits when he is a sleep. He had
forgot him self only and had not maliciously cast of the yocke of Gods
commandments from of his neck. There is no man so good, but We may co^a^t
sin and yet not forget God
that there comes a time upon him, when he feels in him self no more faith
or love unto God, then a sick man ofttymes feels the taste of his meat which
he eats.

And in like manner the Apostles of Christ at his passion were astonyed and The
a^postles being amassed with temptations forgot all Christ's miracles.
amassed and in such a storm of temptations, for the soden change from so
great glory into so vile and shameful death, that they had forget all the
miracles and all the words which he had told them before, how that he should
be betrayde and delivered on the same manner unto death. Moreover they never
understood that saying of his death because their hearts were all way heavy and
over lade with earthly thoughts. For though they saw him raise up other, yet
who should raise him up, when he were dead, they could not comprehend.

Read what thou read can, and thou A great temptation laid upon y^ Apostles.
shall find no temptation like unto that from the creation of the world, or so
great as it by the hundred part. So that the wonderful soden change and the
terrible sight of his passion and of his most cruel and most vile death, and
the loss of who^ they so greatly loved, that their hearts would feign have
dyed with him, and the fear of their own death, and the impossibility that a
man should rise again of his own power, so occupied their minds and so
astonyed them and amassed them, that they could receive no comfort, either of
the Scripture or of the miracles which they had seen Christ do, nor of the
monitions and warnings wherewith he had warned the^ before, neither of the women
that brought them tidings that he was risen. The sword of temptations with
fear sorrow, mournyng and weeping, had depely pierced their hearts, and the
cruel sight had so combred their minds, that they could not believe, until
Christ him self came, death put of, and overcome, yea and when The Apostles
were very doubtful.
they first saw him, they were astonyed for wonderyng and joy together that
thoughts arose in their hearts; alas is this he or does some spirit mock us?
he was feign to let them feel him and to eat with them, to strength their
faythes.

Howbeit there was none of them that was fallen in his heart from Christ. For
as soon as the women brought word, Peter and John ran unto the sepulcher and
saw and wondered and would feign have believed that he was risen and longed for
him? But could not believe the wound of temptation being greater then that it
could be healed with the preaching of a woman without any other miracle.

Joseph of Arimathia and Nicodemus which while he yet lived durst not be a
known of him as soon as he was dead, begged his body and buried him boldly.
And the women as soon Christ his resurrection
as it was lawful to work, prepared their annoyntments with all diligence.
And the hearts of the Disciples that went to Emaus burned in their bres^es to
hear him spoken of.

And Thomas had not forsaken Christ, but could not believe until he saw him,
and yet desired and longed to see him and reioysed when he saw him and for joy
cried out, my Lord my God. There was none of them that The Disciples were not
without faith but yet the ^ame was very doubtful.
ever ^ayled on him and came so far forth, to say, he was a disceauer and
wrought with the devils craft all this while, and see where to he is come in
the end? we defy him and all his works false wretch that he was, and his
false doctrine also. And thereto must they have come at the last, when fear,
sorrow and wonderyng had been past, if they had not been prevented and help in
the mean time.

Yea and Peter a^soone as he had denied Peter's faith failed not.
Christ came to him self immediately and went out and wept bitterly for sorrow.
And thus ye see, that Peter's faith failed not, though it were oppressed for a
time: so that we need to seek no gloses for the text that Christ said to Peter
how that his faith should not fail. Yes says M. More it failed
in him self, but was reserved in our Lady.

But let us see the text and their gloss together. Christ says Luke. xxij.
Simon, Luke. 22.
Simon, Satan seeks you to sifte you as men sift where: but I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith shall not fail, wherefore when thou art come unto thy
self again strength thy brethren. Now put this wise glo^e thereto and A
foolish gloss made by M. More.
see how they agree together. Simon, Satan seeks to sift you as where, but I
have prayed for thee, that my mothers faith shall not fail, wherefore when thou
art come to thy self again, according as my prayer has obtained for thee,
that my mothers faith shall
not fail, strength thy brethren. How say ye, is not this a proper text and
well framed together? Do ye not think that there is as much wit in the head
of mad Colens, as in the draynes o^ such expositours?

Whether the Pope and his sect be Christ's Church or no.
THat the Pope and his spirit ^e not the Church may this wise be 1.
proved. He that has no faith to be saved through Christ, is not of Christ's
Pope.
Church. The Pope believes not to be saved through Christ. For he teaches The
Pope and his sect are not the Church of Christ.
to trust in holy works for the remission of sins and salvation: as in the
works of penance enjoined, in vows, in pilgrimage, in chastity, in other
men's prayers and holy living, in Friars and Friars coats, in Saints merits,
and the significatio^s put out, he teaches to believe in yt deeds of the
ceremonies and of the Sacraments ordained at the beginning to preach unto us
and to do us service, and not that we should believe in them and serve them. And
a thousand such super^^iciousnesses sets he before us instead of Christ, to
believe in, neither Christ nor Gods word, neither honorable to God nor
serviceable unto our neighbor nor profitable unto our selves for the tamyng of
the flesh, which all are the denying of Christ's blood.

An other reason is this. Whosoever believes in Christ, con^enteth that 2.
Gods law is good. The pope contenteth not that Gods law is good. For he has
forbidden lawful wedlock (...) The Pope in forbyddyng marriage to Priests,
does not co^se^t that the law of god is (...).
unto all his, over whom he reigns as a temporal tyrant with laws of his
own making and not as a brother exhortyng them to keep Christ's. And he has
granted unlawful whoredom unto as many as bring money As through Dutchland,
every Priest paying a gildren unto the Archdeacon shall freely and quietly have
his whore and put her away at his pleasure and take an other at his own lust.
As they The Pope licenceth whordome which God forbids.
do in wales, in Ireland, Scotland, France and Spain. And in England thereto
they be not few which have lyce^ces to keep whores, some of the pope and some
of their ordinaries. And when the Parishes go to law with them to put away
their whores, the Bishops officers mock them, poll them and make them spend
their ^hr^res, and the Priests keep their whores still. Howbeit in very deed
sense they were rebuked by the preaching of wickleffe, our English spirituality
have laid their snares unto men's wives, to cover their abominations, though
they bide not all way secret.

Thereto all Christen me^ if they have done amiss, repent when their faults 3.
be told them. The spirituality repent The Popish Clergy are persecutours.
not, but of very lust and consent to sin persecute both the scripture
wherewith they be rebuked, and also them that warn them to amend, and make
heretics of them, and burn them. And besides that, the Pope has made a
plain decree in which he commands saying, though ye Pope sin never An
abominable, wicked and deuilish decree.
so grievously and draw with him to hell by his ensample thousa^des innumerable,
yet let no man be so hardy to rebuke him. For he is head ouerall, and none over
him, Distinct. (...) Si Papa.

And Paul says Romans xiij. let every 4. Romans 13.
soul obey the hyer powers that are ordained to punish sin. The Pope will
not, nor let any of his.

And Paul charge 1. Cor. 5. if he 5. 1. Cor. 5.
that is a brother be an whorekeeper, a dronkard, covetous, an extortioner, or
a rayler and so forth, that we have no fellowship with him: No not so much as to
eat in his company. But the The Pope is utterly against the doctrine of Christ.
Pope with violence compels us to have such in honor, to receive the
sacraments of them, to hear their Masses, and to believe all they say, and yet
they will not let us see whether they say truth or no. And he compels. x.
parishes to pay their tithes and offeringes unto one such to go and ru^ne at
riote at their cost, and to do naught therefore. And a thousand such like does
the Pope contrary unto Christ's doctrine.

The arguments wherewith the Pope would prove himself the church, are solued.
NOtwithstanding because as they be all shaven they be all shameless to
affirm that they be the right church and can not err, though all the world
sees that not one of the^ is in the right way, and that they have with utter
defiaunce forsaken both the doctrine and living of Christ and of all his
Apostles, let us see the sophistry wherewith they would persuade it. One of
their high reasons is this. The Church say they, was before y^ heretics, and
y^ heretics Their first reason.
came ever out of the church and left it. And they were before all them which
they now call heretics and Lutherans, and the Lutherans came out of them. etc.
Wherefore they be the right church, and the other heretics in deed as they be
called. Well, I will likewise dispute. First the right church A (...) reason.
was under Moses and Aaron and so forth, in whose rowmes sat the Scribes
Phariseis and hye priests in the time of Christ. And they were before Christ.
And Christ and his Apostles One Argument confuted with an other of like nature
came out of them, and departed from the^ and left them. Wherefore the Scribes,
Phariseis, and hye priests were the right Church, and Christ and his Apostles
and disciples heretics and a dampnable sect. And so the Jews are yet in the
right way and we in error. And of truth if their blind reason be good, the^
is this argument so to. For they be like, and are both one thing.

But in as much as the kingdom of God stands not in words, as Paul The
solution.
says 1. Cor. 4. but in power, therefore look unto the marow and pith of the
things self, and let vain words pass, Under Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob was
the church great in faith, and small in number. And as it increased in number,
so it decreased in faith until y^ time of Moses. And out of those unbelievers
God stirred up Moses, and brought ^he^ unto y^ faith right again. And Moses
left a glorious Church, both in faith and cleaving unto the word of God, and
delivered them unto Iosuah, Eleazer, Phineas, and Caleb.

But as soon as the generation of the^ that saw the miracles of God were dead,
they fell to Idolatry immediately, as thou see in the Bible. And god when he
had delivered them into captivity for to chastise their wickedness, stirred
them up a Prophet evermore, to call them unto his testament again. And so he
did well me an hundred times, I suppose, yer Christ came, for The right faith
did never (...) continue in the greater number of (...) Church.
they never bode any space in the right faith. And against the coming of
Christ the Scribes, Phariseis, Caiphas, Anna, and the Elders, were crept up
into the seat of Moses, Aaron, and the holy Prophets and Patriarchs and
suceded them linially, and had the scripture of God but even in captivity to
make marchaundise of it, and to abuse it unto their own glory and profit. And
though they kept the people from outward Idolatry of worshipping of Images
with the Heathen: yet they brought them into a worse inward Idolatry of a
false faith and trust in their own deeds and in vain traditions of their
own fayning. And had put out the significatio^s of all y^ ceremonies and
sacraments of the old testament, and taught the people to believe in the
works self, and had corrupt the scripture with false gloses. As y^ may see
in the Gospel, how Christ warns his Disciples to beware of yt leaven of y^
Phariseis which was their false doctrine and gloses. And in another place he
rebuked the Scribes and the Math. 16.
Phariseis saying: woe be to the^, because they had taken away the key of
knowledge, Math. 23.
and had shut up the kingdom of heaven, and neither would enter in themselves,
nor suffer the^ that would. How had they shut it up? verily with their
traditions and false gloses which they had sowed to y^ scripture in plain
places, and in the taking away y^ meaning of the ceremonies and sacrifices, and
teaching to believe in the work.

And our hipocrites are in like manner crept up into the seat of Christ and
Hypocrites are crept up in to the seat of Christ and his Apostles. (...). Pet.
2.
of his Apostles by succession: not to do the deeds of Christ and his
Apostles, but for lucre only (as the nature of the wily Fox is, to get him an
hole made with a another beasts labor) and to make marchaundise of the people
with feigned words, as Peter warned us before, and to do according as Christ
and all his Apostles prophesied, how they should beguyle and lead out of the
right way, all the^ that had no love to follow and live after the truth.

And in like manner have they corrupt The Pope and his Clergy have corrupted
the Scriptures of God with their traditions.
the Scripture, and blinded the right way with their own constitutions, with
traditions of du^me ceremonies, with taking away the significations of the
sacraments, to make us believe in the work of the sacraments first, whereby
they might the better make us believe in works of their setting up afterward,
and with false gloses which they have patched to the Scripture in plain
places, to destroy the litterall sense for to set up a false feigned sense of
allegories, when there is none such. And thereby they have stopped up the gates
of heaven, the true knowledge of Christ, and have made their own bel^es the
door. For through their bellies must thou creep, and the^e leave all that fall
behind thee.

And such blind reasons as ours make against us, made they against John.
(...).
Christ saying: Abraham is our father, we be Moses disciples, how knows he
the understanding of the Scripture seeing he never learned of any of us? only
the cursed unlearned people that know not the scripture believe in him. Look
whether any of the rulers or Phariseis do believe in him?

Wherefore the scripture truly understood The scriptures bear witness who are
the right Church.
after the playne^ places and general articles of yt faith, which thou find
in the scripture, and the ensamples that are gone before, will always testify
who is the church. Though the Phariseis succeeded the Patriarchs and prophets,
and had the scripture of the^, yet they were heretics and fallen from the
faith of them, and from their living. And Christ and his disciples, and John
Christ. John Baptist.
the Baptist departed from the Phariseis which were heretics, unto the right
sense of y^ scripture and unto the faith and living of the Patriarchs and
Prophets, and rebuked the Phariseis. As thou see how Christ calls them
hipocrites, dissimulers, blind guides and painted sepulchers. And John called
them the generation of vipers and serpents. Of John, the angel said unto his
father Luke. i. he Luke. 1.
shall turn many of the children of Israel unto their Lord God, which yet
before John believed after a fleshly understanding in God, and thought themselves
in the right way. And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers unto the
children. That is, he shall with his preaching and true interpreting of the
scripture make such a spiritual heart in y^ children as was in their fathers
Abraham, The doctrine of John brought y^ heart of the Jews into the right way.
Isaac, and Jacob. And he shall turn the disobedient unto the obedience of the
righteous, and prepare the Lord a perfect people. That is, them that had set up
a righteousness of their own, and were therefore disobedient unto the
righteousness of faith, shall he convert from their blindness unto the wisdom of
them that believed in God to be made righteous, and with those fathers shall he
give the children Egles eyes to spy out Christ and his righteousness, and to
forsake their own, and so to become perfect.

And after the same manner, though Our Popish hypocrites have need of a John
Baptist to convert the^
our Popish hypocrites succeed Christ and his Apostles and have their
scripture, yet they be fallen from the faith and living of them and are
heretics and had need of a John Baptist to convert them. And we depart from
them unto the true Scripture and unto the faith and living thereof, and rebuke
them in like manner. And as they which depart from the faith of the true Church
are heretics, eue^ so they that depart from Those which depart from the faith
of hypocrites are the true Church.
the Church of heretics and false feigned faith of hypocrites, are the true
church, which thou shall always know by their faith examined by the Scripture
and by their profession and consent to live according unto the laws of God.

An other Argument.
AN other like blind reason they have Their second reason.
wherein is all their trust. As we come out of them and they not of us, so we
receive the Scripture of them and they not of us. How know we that it is the
Scripture of God and true, but because they teach us so? How can we believe,
except we first believe that they be the Church and can not err in any thing
that perteyneth unto our souls health. For if a man tell me of a Note here
this Popish Argument.
marvelous thing, whereof I can have no other knowledge the^ by his mouth
only, how should I give credence except I believed that the man were so honest
that he could not lie or would not lie. Wherefore we must believe that they be
the right Church that can not err, or else we can believe naught at all.

This wise reason is their shoteancre and all their hold, their refuge, to fly
unto and chief stone in their foundation, whereon they have built all their lies
and all the mischief that they have wrought this viij. hundred years. And this
reason do the Jews lay unto our charge this day, and this reason does chiefly
blind them and hold them still in obstinacy. Our spirits first falsify the
The Pope and his sect say they are the church and can not err.
Scripture to stablish their lies. And when the Scripture comes to light and
is restored unto the true understanding and their iugglyng spied, and they like
to suffer shipwreck, then they cast out this ancre, they be the Church and can
not err, their authority is greater then the Scripture, and the Scripture is
not true, but because they say so and admit it. And therefore what soever they
affirm, is of as great authority as the Scripture.

Notwithstanding, as I said, the The solution.
kingdom of heaven stands not in words of ma^s wisdom, but in power and
spirit. And therefore look unto the examples of the Scripture and so shall thou
understand. And of an hundred examples between Moses and Christ, where the
Israelites fell from John Baptist was a true expositor of the law.
God and were eue^ restored by one Prophet or other, let us take one: even John
the Baptist. John went before Christ to prepare his way, that is, to bring me^
unto the knowledge of their sins and unto repentance, through true
expoundyng of the law, which is the only way unto Christ. For except a man
knowledge his sins and repent of them, he can have no part in Christ, of John
Christ faith Math. xvij. that Math. 17.
he was Elias that should come and restore all thing. That is, he should
restore the scripture unto the right sense again, which the Phariseis had
corrupt with the leven of their false gloses and vain fleshly traditions. He
made crooked things straight, as it is written, and rough smoth. Which is al so
to be understand of the Scripture, which the Phariseis had made crooked wrestyng
them unto a false sense with wicked gloses, and so rought that no man could
walk in the way of them. For The Phariseis added false gloses to y^ Scripture
when God said, honor father and mother, meaning that we should obey them and
also help the^ at their need, the Phariseis put this gloss thereto, out of
their own leven saying: God is thy father and mother. Wherefore what soever
need thy father and mother have, if thou offer to God, thou art hold excused.
For it is better to offer to God, then to thy father and mother and so much
more meritorious, as God is greater then they: yea and God has done more for
thee then they and is more thy father and mother then they. As ours now
affirm, that it is more meritorious to offer to God and his holy dead Saints,
then unto the poor living Saints. And when God had promised the people a
Savior to come and bless them and save them from their sins, the Phariseis
taught to believe in holy works to be saved by, as if they offered and gave to
be prayed for. As ours, as often as we have a promise to be forgiven at the
repentance of the heart through Christ's blood shedding, put to, thou must
first shriue thy self to us of every s^abe, and we must lay out hands on
thine head and whistell out The Pa(...) doctrine.
thy sins and enjoin the penance to make satisfaction. And yet art thou but
loused from the sin only that thou shall not come into hell, but thou must
yet suffer for every sin seven years in Purgatory which is as whot as hell,
except thou bye it out of the Purgatory.
Pope. And it y^ ask by what means the Pope gives such pardon. They answer
out of the merits of Christ. And thus at the last they grant against
themselves, that Christ has not only deserved for us y^ remission of our
sins, but also the forgiveness of that gross and fleshly imagined
Purgatory, save thou must bye it out of the Pope. And with such traditions they
took away the keye of knowledge and stopped up the kingdom of heaven that no
man could enter in.

And as I said, they taught the people to believe in the deeds of the ceremonies
The Phariseis and papists agree in the false interpreting of y^ scriptures.
which God ordained not to justify but to be signs of promises by which they
that believed were justified. But the Phariseis put out the significations and
quenched the faith and taught to be justified by the work, as ours have
served us.

For our Sacraments were once but signs partly of what we should believe, to
stir us up unto faith, and The sacraments are signs to faith.
partly what we should do, to stir us up to do the law of God, and were not
works to justify.

Now make this reason unto John and unto many Prophets that went before him
and did as he did, yea and The Pope will by his reason make Christ and all his
Apostles heretics.
unto Christ him self and his Apostles, and thou shall find them all
heretics, and the Scribes and Phariseis good men, if that reason be good.
Therefore this wise thou may answer. No thanks unto the heads of y^ Church
that the Scripture was kept, but unto the mercy of God. For as they had
destroyed the right sense of it for their lucre sake, even so would they have
destroyed it also if they could, rather then the people should have come unto
the right understanding of it, as they slew the true interpretours and
preachers of it. And even so no thanks un to our hypocrites that the Scripture
is kept, but unto the bottomless mercy of God.

For as they have destroyed the right sense of it with their leue^, and as they
destroy daily the true preachers of it, and as they keep it from the lay
people, that they should not see how they iuggle with it, even so would they
destroy The Pope and his (...) would (if they could) destroy the scripture as
well as they destroy the preachers thereof.
it also, could they bring it about, rather the^ we should come by the true
understanding of it, were it not that God provided otherwise for us. For they
have put the stories that should in many things help us, clean out of the
way, as nigh as they could. They have corrupt the Legend and lives almost of all
Saints. They have feigned false books and put them forth, some in the name of
S. Hierome, some in y^ name of S. Augustine, in the name of S. Cypria^, S.
Dionise and other holy men. which are proved none of theirs, partly by the
style and Latin, and partly by autenticke stories. And as the Jews have set
up a book of traditions called Talmud, to destroy the sense Talmud.
of y^ Scripture, Unto which they give faith and unto the Scripture none at all
be it never so plain, but say it can not be understand, save by the Talmud:
even so have ours set up their Dunce, their Thomas and a thousand Dunc^.
like draffe, to stablish their lies, thorough falsifying the Scripture, and
say that it can not be understand without them, be it never so plain. And if a
man allege an holy Doctor against them they gloss him out as they do the
Scripture, or will not hear, or say the Church has otherwise determined.

Now therefore when they ask us Question answer.
how we know that it is the Scripture of God, ask them how John Baptist knew
and other Prophets, which God A good answer to be made to the Papists.
styrred up in all such times as the scripture was in like captivity under
hypocrites? Did John believe that the Scribes, Phariseis and high Priests were
the true Church of God, and had his spirit and could not err? who taught the
Egles to spy out their pray? even so the children of God spy out their father
and Christ's elect spy out their Lord, and trace out the paths of his feet
and follow, yea though he go upon the plain and liquide water which will
receive no stepe: and yet there they find out his foot, his elect know him,
but the world knows him not John John. 1^.
1. If the world know him not, and thou call the world pride, wrath, envy,
covetousness, sloth, glottony and lechery, then our spirituality know him
not. Christ's sheep hear y^ voice of Christ John. x. where the world of
hypocrites Ioh. 1^.
as they know him not, even so the wolves hear not his voice, but compel the
Scripture to hear them and to speak what they lust. And therefore except the
Lord of Sabbath had lest us seed, we had been all as Sodom and Gomor said
Esaias. 1. And even so said Esa. 1.
Paul in his time. And even so say we in our time, that the Lord of the hosts
Romans 9.
has saved him seed and has gathered him a flock to whom he has given
cares to hear, that the hypocritish Wol^es can not hear, and eyes to see,
that the blind leaders of the blind can not see, and an heart to understand,
that the generation of poisoned Vipers ca^ neither understand nor know.

If they allege S. Augustine which Augustine.
says, I had not believed the Bospell, except the authority of the church had
moved me. I answer, as they abuse The true meaning of the words of S.
Augustine.
that saying of the holy man, even so they allege all the Scripture, and all
that they bring for them, even in a false sense. S. Augustine before he was
converted was an heathen man and a Philosopher, full of worldly wisdom, unto
whom the preaching of Christ is but folishnesse, says Paul. i. Corin. i.
(...). Cor. 1.
And he disputed with blind reasons of worldly wisdom against the Christen.
Nevertheless the earnest living of the Christen according unto their doctrine
and the constant suffering of persecution and adversity for their doctrines
sake, moved him and stirred him to believe that it was no vain doctrine, but
that it must needs be of god, in that it had such power with it. For it
happens that they which will not hear the word at the beginning, are
afterward moved by the holy conversation of them that believe. As Peter warns
Christian wines that had heathen (...). Pet. 3.
husbands that would not hear the truth preached, to live so godly that they
might win their heathen husbands with holy conversation. And Paul says,
how know thou Christen (...). Cor. 7.
wife, whether thou shall win thine heathen husband, with holy conversation
me^t he. For many are wo^ne with godly living, which at the first either will
not hear or can not belene. And that is the authority that S. Augustine
mean. But if we shall not believe, till the living of the spirituality convert
us, we be like to bide long enough in unbelief.

And when they ask whether we received the scripture of them? I answer, that
they which come after receive the scripture of them that go before. And when
they ask whether we believe not that it is Gods word by the reason that they
tell us so. I answer, that there are two manuer faythes, There are two manner
of faithes.
an historical faith, and a feelyng faith. The historical faith hangs of
the truth and honesty of the teller, or of the common fame and consent of
many. An historical faith.
As if one told me that the turk had won a city, and I believed it, moved
with the honesty of the man. Now if there come an other that seems more
honest or that has better persuasions that it is not so, I think immediately
that he lied and lose my faith again. And a feeling faith is, as if a man were
there present when it was won, and there were wounded and had there lost all
that he had, and were taken prisoner there also. That man should so believe that
all ye world could not turn him from his faith. Even likewise if my mother
had blown on her finger and told me that the fire would burn me, I should
have believed her with an historical faith, as we believe the stories of the
world, because I thought she would not have mocked me. And so I should have
done, if she had told me that the fire had been cold and would not have
burned, but as soon as I had put my finger in the fire, I should have believed,
A feeling faith.
not by reason of her, but with a feeling faith, so that she could not have
persuaded me afterward the contrary. So now with an historical faith I may
believe that y^ scripture is gods by the teaching of them, and so I should have
done though they had told me that Roben Hode had been the scripture of God.
Which faith is but an opinion, and therefore abides ever frutlesse and falls
away, if a more glorious reason be made unto me, or if the preacher live
contrary.

But of a feeling faith it is written. John. 6.
John vi. They shall be all taught of God. That is, God shall write it in their
hearts with his holy spirit. And Paul also testifies Romans 8. the spirit Romans
8.
bears record unto our spirit that we be the sons of God. And this faith is
none opinion, but a sure feling, and The true and sure feeling faith.
therefore ever fruitful. Neither hangs it of the honesty of the preacher,
but of the power of God and of the spirit, and therefore if all the preachers
of the world would go about to persuade the contrary, it would not prevail,
no more the^ though they would make me believe the tire were cold, after that I
had put my finger therein.

Of this ye have an ensample Ioh. 4. Ioh. 4.
of the Samaritanish wife, which left her pitcher and went into the city and
said, come and see a man that has told me all that ever I did, is not he
Christ. And many of the Samaritanes believed because of the saying of the woman,
how that he had told her all that ever she did, and went out unto him and
desired him to come in, which faith was but an opinion and no faith that could
have lasted or have brought out fruit, but when they had heard Christ, the
spirit wrought and made them feel. Whereupon they came unto the woman and
said: we believe not now because of thy saying, but because we have heard our
selves, and know that he is Christ the savior of the world. For The feling
faith does far excel the historical faith.
Christ's preaching was with power and spirit that makes a man feel and know
and work to, and not as the Scribes and Pharisees preached, and as ours make a
man ready to cast his gorge to hear them rave and rage as mad men. And
therefore says y^ scripture, cursed is he that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his arm, that is to say, his strength. And even so, cursed Cursed is he
that trusts in man
is he that has none other belief but because men so say. Cursed were he y^
had none other why to believe the^ that I so say. And even so cursed is he that
believes only because y^ Pope so says, and so forth thoroughout all the men in
the world.

The faith that depends of an other man's mouth is weak.
IF I have none other feeling in my faith then because a man so says, then is
my faith faithles and fruitles. For if I have none other seeling that lechery
is sin then that the Pope so Lechery.
preaches, whom I see before my face set up in Rome a stews of xx. or xxx.
thousand whores, taking of every piece tribute yearly, and his Bishops with all
other his disciples following the ensample mightily, and the Pope therewith not
content, but to set up thereto The abomination of y^ Romish Church.
a stews of young boys against nature, the committers of which sin be burnt
at a stake among the Turks, as Moses also commands in his law. And the
Pope also to forbid all the spirituality, a multitude of xl or l. Marriage
forbidden and whoredom moved.
hundred thousand to mary, and to give them license to keep every man his
whore who so will: If I say, I have none other feeling in my faith that lechery
is sin the^ this ma^s preaching, I think my faith should be to weak to
bear much fruit. How could I believe a man that would say he loved me, if all
his deeds were contrary? I could not believe God himself that he loved me, if
in all my tribulations I had of him none other comfort then those bare words.

And in like manner if I had none other feeling in my faith that covetousness
Covetousness.
were sin, then that the spirituality so says, my faith could be but weak
and faintie, when I see how y^ Pope with wiles has thrust down the Emperor,
and how the Bishops and Prelates be cropped up an hye in all regions above their
kings, and have made them a several kingdom, and have gotten into their
hands almost the one half of every realm, which they divide among
themselves, geuyng no lay man any part with them, and heaping up Byshopprike
upon Byshopprike, promotion upon promotion, benefice upon benefice, with unions
and Unions (...) quottes.
tot quottes, robbing in every parish the souls of their ^oode, and the poor
of their due sustenaunce, yea and some preaching that it were less sin (...)
have two wives then two benifices, but while they be yet young and ho^^, and
therefore think covetousness greater sin the^ lechery: which same, when they
be waxed elder, and their co^pl^^tion somewhat altered, think that covetousness
is as small a sin as lechery, and therefore take all that comes. And if any
man cast their preaching in The P^.
their tethes, they answer that they be better learned, and have seue further.
If I say, I have no other felyng that covetousness is sin, then ye preaching
of these holy fathers, my faith were built but upon a weak rock, or rather on
the soft ^and. And therefore our defenders do right well to some out their own
shame, and to utter the secret thoughts of their har^es. For as they write,
so they believe. Other felyng of (...) with the(...)so the (...).
the laws of God and faith of Christ have they none, then that their God the
Pope so says. And therefore as the Pope preaches with his mo^th only, eue^ so
believe they with their mouth only whatsoever he preaches, without more a do,
be it never so abominable, and in their hearts consent unto all their fathers
wickedness, and follow him in their deeds as fast as they can run.

The Turks being in number five (...).
times more then we are, knowledge one God, and believe many things of God,
moved only by the authority of their elders, and presume that God will not
let so great a multitude err so long time.

And yet they have erred and been faithless these eight hundred years. And
the Jews believe this day, as much as the carnal sort of them ever Jews.
believed, moved also by the authority The Turks and Jews believe that they
ca^ not err because they believe as their Elders did.
of their elders only, and think that it is impossible for them to err,
being Abraham's seed, and the children of them to whom the promises of all that
we believe were made. And yet they have erred and been faythlesse this xv.
hundred years. And we of like blindness believe only by the authority of our
elders and of like pride think that we can not err, being such a multitude.
And yet we see how God in the old Testament did let the great multitude err,
reseruyng always a little flock to God reserved a little flock.
call the other back again and to testify unto them the right way.

How this word Church has a double interpretation.
THis is therefore a sure conclusion, as Romans 9.
Paul says. Romans ix. that not all they that are of Israel are Israelites,
neither because they be Abraha^s sede, are they all Abraham's children: but they
only that follow the faith of Abraham. Even so now none of them that believe
with their mouths moved with the authority of their elders only, that is,
none of the^ that believe with M. Mores faith, the Popes faith and the devils
faith which may stand (as M. More confesses)
with all manner abhominatio^s, have the right faith of Christ or are of Who
they be that are of ^o^^ true Church.
his Church. But they only that repent and feel that the law is good, And
have the law of God written in their hearts and the faith of our Savior Jesus,
even with the spirit of God. There is a carnali Israel and a spiritual.
There is Isaac and Ismaell, Jacob, and Esau. And Ismaell persecuted Isaac and
Esau The fleshly persecute the spiritual.
Jacob and the fleshly the spiritual. Where of Paul complained in his time
persecuted of his carnal brethren, as we do in our time and as the elect ever
did and shall do till the worlds end. What a multitude came out of Egypt under
Moses of which the Scripture testifyeth that they believed, moved by y^ miracles
of Moses, as Simon magus believed A^.
by the reason of Philippes miracles Acts. viij. Nevertheless the Scripture
testifies that vj. hundred thousand of those beleuers perished thorough
unbelief and left their carcasses in the wilderness and never entered into the
land that was promised them. And even so shall the children of M. Mores
faythlesse faith made by the persuation The children of this world are the
Papists.
of man, leap short of the test which our Savior Jesus is rise^ unto. And
therefore let them embrace this present world as they do, whose children they
are though they hate so to be called.

And hereby ye see that it is a plain and an evident conclusion as bright as
the sun shynyng that the truth of Gods word depends not of the truth of the
congregation. And therefore when thou Questions
art asked, why thou beleuest that thou shall be saved thorough Christ and of
such like principles of our faith, answer Au^sweres.
thou wottest and felest that it is true. And when he asks how thou know
that it is true, answer because it is written in thine heart. And if he ask
who wrote it, answer the spirit of God. And if he ask how thou came first
by it, tell him, whether by Au^sweres to be made to captions Papists.
readyng in books or hearing it preached, as by an outward instrument, but
that inwardly thou wast taught by y^ spirit of God. And if he ask whether
thou beleuest it not because it is written in books or because the Priests so
preach, answer no, not now, but only because it is written in thine heart and
because the spirit of God so preaches and so testifies unto thy soul. And
say, though at the beginning thou wast moved by readyng or preaching, as the
Samaritans were by y^ words John. 4.
of the woman, yet now thou beleuest it not therefore any le^ger, but only
because thou have heard it of the spirit of God, and read it written in thine
heart.

And concerning outward teaching we allege for us Scripture elder the^ any
Church that was this. xiiij. hundred years, and old antenticke stories which
they had brought a sleep where with we confound their lies. Remember ye not
how in our own time, of Teachers of Gra^mer understood not the Latin tongue.
all that taught Grammar in England not one understood the Latin tongue? how
came we the^ by the Latin tongue again? not by them, though we learned certain
rules and principles of them by which we were moved and had an occasion to seek
further, but out of the old authors. Even so we seek up old antiquities out of
which we learn and not of our Church, though we received many principles of
our Church, at the beginning, but more falsehead then truth,

It has pleased God of his exceeding love wherewith he loved us in Christ (as,
Paul says) before the world was made, and when we were dead in sin and his
enemies, in that we did consent to sin and to live evil, to write with his
spirit ij. conclusions in our hearts, The faith (...) Christ, and love of our
neighbors to all that is required of a Christian man.
by which we understand all thing: that is to were, the faith of Christ and the
love of our neighbors. For whosoever feleth the just damnation of sin, and
the forgeuenes and mercy that is in Christ's blood for all that repent and
forsake it, and come and believe in that mercy, the same only knows how God
is to be honored and worshipped, and can judge between true serving of God in
the spirit, and false Image serving of God with works* And ye same knows
that sacraments, signs, ceremonies and bodily things The use of signs and
ce^nyes
can be no service to God in his person but memorials unto men, and a
remembrance of the testament wherewyth God is served in the spirit. And he
that feels not that, is blind in his soul, and of our holy fathers
generation, and makes God an Image, and a creature, and worshippeth him with
bodily service. And on the other side, he that loves his neighbor as
himself, understands all laws, and ca^ judge between good and evil, right
and wrong, godly and ungodly, in all conversation, deeds, laws, bargains,
couenaunces, ordinances and decrees of men, and knows the office of every
degree, and the due honor of every person. And he that has not that written in
his heart is popish, and of y^ spirituality which understands nothing save
his own honor, his own profit and what is good for himself only: and when he
is as he would be, thinks y^ all the world is as it should be.

Of worshipping and what is to be understand by the word.
COncerning worshipping or honoring (which two terms are both one) M. More
Worship^ and(...)are ^^th one.
brings forth a difference, a distinction or division of Greek words, feigned
of our scholemen, which of late neither understood greek, latin or hebrew,
called doulia, hyperdoulia and La^ria. But the difference declares he not, nor
the properties of the words, but with confused terms leads you blindfolde
in his maze. As for hyperdoulia I would feign we^e where he reads of it in
all the scripture, and whether the worship done to his Lord the Cardinals hat
were doulia, hyperdoulia, or idololatria. And as for doulia and latria we find
the^ both referred unto God in a thousand places.

Therefore that thou be not beguiled with falshod of sophistical words,
understand that the words which the scripture uses in the worshipping or
honoring of God are these: love god, The true words that express the God.
cleave to God, dread, serve, bow, pray and call on God, believe and trust in
God and such like. Which words all we use in the worshipping of man also, how
be it diversely, and the difference thereof does all the scripture teach.

God has created us and made us unto his own likeness, and our savior Christ
has bought us with his blood. And therefore are we Gods possession of duty and
right, and Christ's servants only, to wa^e on his will What it is to honor
God.
and pleasure, and ought therefore to move neither hand nor fo^e, nor any other
member, either heart or mind, otherwise then he has appointed. God is honored
in his own person, when we receive al things both good and bad The true honor
of God.
at his hand, and love his law with all our hearts, and believe, hope, and long
for all that he promises.

THe officers that rule the world in What it is to honor rulers.
Gods stead, as father, mother, master, husband, Lord and Prince are honored,
when the law which almighty God has committed unto them to rule with, is
obeyed. Thy neighbor that is out of office, is honored, when What it is to
honor (...) ma^s neighbor.
thou (as God has commanded thee) love him as thy self, countest him as
good as thy self, think him as worthy of any thing as thy self, and
come lovingly to help him at all his need, as thou would be help thy
self, because God has made him like unto his own image as well as thee, and
Christ has bought him as well as thee.

If I hate the law, so I break it in What it is to dishonor God and
dishonor our neighbor.
mine heart, and both hate and dishonor God the maker thereof. If I break it
outwardly, then I dishonor god before the world, and the officer that
ministers it. If I hurt my neighbor, then I dishonor my neighbor and him
that made him, and him also that bought him with his blood. And eue^ so, if I
hate my neighbor in mine heart, then I hate him that commands me to love him
and him that has deserved that I should at the lest way for his sake love him.
If I be not ready to help my neighbor at his need, To deny to help my
neighbor is to dishonor him.
so I take his due honor from him, and dishonor him, and him that made him,
and him also that bought him with his blood, whose servant he is. If I love
such things as God has lent me and committed unto mine administration, so
that I can not find in mine heart to bestow them on the uses which God has
appointed me, then I dishonor God and abuse his creature in that I give more
honor unto it the^ I should do, And then I make an idol of it in that I love
it more then God and his commandment and then I dishonor my neighbor from
whose need I withdraw it.

In like manner if the officer abusyng his power, compel the subject to do that
To do that God forbids is to dishonor God.
which God forbids or to leave undone that which God commands, so he
dishonors God, in withdrawyng his servant from him, and makes an Idol of
his own lusts, in that he honors them above God, and he dishonors his
brother in that he abuses him contrary unto the right use which God has
created him for and Christ has bought him for, which is to wait on Gods
commandments. For if the officer be otherwise minded I true officer in the
sight of God.
then this, the worst of these subjects is made by the hands of him that made
me, and bought with the blood of him that bought me, and therefore my brother,
and I but his servant only, to defend him and to keep him in the honor that
God and Christ has set him, that no man dishonor him: he dishonors both
God and man. And thereto if any subject think any otherwise of yt officer
(though he be an Emperor) then that he is but a servant only, to minister
the office indifferently, he dishonors the office and God that ordemed it.
So that all men, what soever degree they be of are every man in his rowme,
servants to other, as the hand serves the foot and every member one an
other. And the angels of heaven are also our brethren and very servants for
Christ's sake, to defend us from the power of the devils.

And finally all other creatures that All creatures are o^ed to ^ue (...).
are neither angels nor man, are in honor less then man, and man is Lord
over them, and they created to serve him, as Scripture testifies, and he not
to serve them, but only, his Lord God and his Savior Christ.

Of worshippyng of Sacraments, ceremonies, images, relics and so forth.
NOw let us come to the worshippyng or honoring of Sacraments ceremonies
images and relics. First images be not God, and Images.
therefore no confidence is to be put in the^. They be not made after the image
of God nor are the price of Christ's blood, but the woorkemanshyp of the
crafts man and the price of money and therefore inferiors to man.

Wherefore of all right man is Lord over them and the honor of the^ is to
Images are servants to man, and not man to images.
do man service and man's dishonor it is to do them honorable service, as unto
his better. Images then and relics ye and as Christ says, the holy day to,
are servants unto man. And therefore it follows that we can not, but unto
our damnation put on a coat worth an hundred coats, upon a posts
back, and let the image of God and the price of Christ's blood go up and
down thereby naked. For if we care more to cloth the dead image made by man and
the price of silver then the lively image of God and price of Christ's blood,
then we dishonor the Image of God and him that made him and the price of
Christ's blood and him that bought him.

Wherefore the right use, office and honor The use of creatures inferiors to
man.
of all creatures inferiors unto man, is to do man service, whether they be
images, relics, ornaments signs or Sacraments, holidays, ceremonies or
sacrifices. And that may be on this manner and no doubt it so once was. If (for
an example) I take a piece of The worshipping of the cross.
the cross of Christ and make a little cross thereof and bear it about me, to
look thereon with a repentyng heart, at times when I am moved thereto, to put me
in remembrance that the body of Christ was broken and his blood shed thereon,
for my sins, and believe steadfastly How a man may use Images well.
that the merciful truth of God shall forgive the sins of all that repent
for his death sake and never think on the^ more: then it serves me and I not
it, and does me ye same service as if I read the Testament in a book, or as if
the preacher preached it unto me. And in like manner if I make a cross in my
forehead, in a remembrance that God has promised assistaunce unto all that
believe in him, for his sake that dyed on the cross, then does the cross serve
me and I not if. And in like manner if I bear on me or look upon a cross of
what soever matter it be, or make a cross upon me, in remembrance that who
soever will be Christ's Disciple must suffer a cross of adversity tribulations
and persecution, so does the cross serve me and I not it. And this was the use
of the cross once, and for this cause it was at the beginning set up in the
Churches.

And so if I make an image of Christ The worshyppyng of images.
or of any thing that Christ has done for me, in a memory, it is good and not
evil until it be abused.

And even so, if I take the true life of a Saint and cause it to be painted or
carved, to put me in remembrance of the Saints life, to follow the Saint as
the Saint did Christ, and to put me in remembrance of the great faith of the
Saint to God and how true God was to help him out of all tribulation, and to
see the Saints love toward his neighbor, in that he so patiently suffered
so paynefull a death and so cruel Martyrdom to testify the truth for to save
other, and all to strength my soul with all and my faith to God and love to my
neighbor, then does the image serve me and I not it. And this was the use of
images at the beginning and of relics also.

And to knele before the cross unto Images and relics at the first were well
used, but now shame fully abused.
the word of God which the cross preaches is not evil. Neither to knele
down before an image in a man's meditations to call the living of the saint to
mind for to desire God of like grace to follow the example, is not evil. But
the abuse of the thing is evil, and False worshypping. (...)
to have a false faith: as to bear a piece of the cross about a man, thinking
that so long as that is about him, spirits shall not come at him, his enemies
shall do him no bodily harm, all causes The abuse of Images
shall go on his side even for bearing it about him, and to think that if it
were not about him it would not be so, and to think, if any misfortune
chance, that it came for leaving it of, or because this or that ceremony was
left undone, and not rather because we have broken Gods co^maundeme^ts, or that
God te^pteth us to prove our patience. This is plain idolatry, and here a man
is captive, bond and servant unto a false faith and a false imagination, that
is neither God nor his word. Now am I Gods only and ought to serve nothing
but God and his word. My body must serve yt rulers of this world My body must
serve the Prince o my neighbor, but my soul must serve God only
and my neighbor (as God has appointed it) and so must all my goods: but my
soul must serve God only, to love his law and to trust in his promises of
mercy in all my deeds. And in like manner it is that thousands, while the
Priest pattereth S. John's S. John's Gospel.
Gospel in Latin over their heads, cross themselves with, I trow a legion
of crosses, behind and before, and with reverence on the very arses, and (as
Jack of napes when he claweth himself) pluck up their legs and cross so
much as their heels and the very soles of their fete, and believe that if it be
done in the time that he reads the gospel (and else not) that there shall no
mischaunce happen them that day, because only of those crosses. And This is ye
true crossing that we should use.
where he should cross himself, to be armed and to make himself strong to
bear the cross with Christ, be crosses himself to drive the cross from
him, and blesses himself with a cross from the cross And if he leave it
undone, he thinks it no small sin, and that god is highly displeased with
him, and it any misfortune chance, thinks it is therefore, which is also
Idolatry and not Gods word. And such is the confidence in the place or image
or whatsoever bodily obseruaunce it be: such is S Agathes letter written in the
Gospel time. And such are ye crosses on palmesonday made in the passion time.
And A great number of superstitious baggages.
such is the bearing of holy wax about a man. And such is that some hang a
piece of S. John's Gospel about their necks. And such is to bear ye names of
god with crosses between each name about them. Such is the saying of gospels
unto women in childbed. Such is the limeteriers saying of in principio erat
verbum from house to house. Such is the saying of Gospels to the corn in the
field in the procession week that it should the better grow. And such is holy
bread, holy water, and serving of all ceremonies and sacraments in general
without signification. And I pray you how is it possible that ye people can
worship images, relics, ceremonies and sacraments, save superstitiously, so
long as they know not the true meaning, neither will ye Prelates suffer any man
to tell them: yea and the very meaning of some and right use no man can tell?

And as for the riches that is bestowed on images and relics, they can not
prove but that it is abominable, Riches bestowed on images or relics.
as long as the poor are despised and vncared for and not first served, for
whose sakes and to find preachers, offeringes, tithes, lands, rentes, and all
that they have, was given the spiritualitie. They will say we may do both.
Objection.
May or not may, I see that the one Solution.
most necessary of both, is not done: but the poor are bereued of the
spirituality of all that was in time passed offered unto the^. Moreover though
both were done, they shall never prove that the sight of gold and silver and
of precious stones should move a ma^s heart to despise such things after the
doctrine of Christ. Neither can the rich coat help to move thy mind, to
follow the ensample of the Saint, but rather if he were purtrayde as he
suffered, in the most ungoodly wise. Which thing taken away, that such things
with all other service, as sticking up candels, move not thy mind to follow
the ensample of the Saint, nor To worship Images is Idolatry.
teach thy soul any godly learning: the^ the image serves not thee, but thou
yt Image, and so art thou an Idolater, that is to say in English, a serve
Image. And thus it appears that your ungodly and belly doctrine wherewith ye
so magnify the deeds of your ceremonies, and of your pilgrimages, and
offering for the deed it self, to please God and to obtain the favor of
dead Saints (and not to move you and to put you in remembrance of the law of
God and of the promises which are in his son, and to follow the ensample of
the Saint) is but an exhorting to serve Images, and so are ye Image seruers,
that is, Idolaters. And finally the more devotion men have unto such deeds,
the less they have unto Gods commandment, in so much that they which be most
wont to offer to Images and to show them, be so cold in offering to the poor,
that they will scarce give them the scrappes which must else be given dogs, or
their old shone, if they may have new bromes for them.

Pilgrimages.
TO speak of pilgrimages, I say, that a Christian man, so that he True
Pilgrimage is to walk from place to place the better to serve God and to help
my neighbor.
leave nothing undone at home that he is bound to do, is free to go whether
he will, only after the doctrine of the Lord, whose servant he is and not
his own. If he go and visit the poor, the sick and the prisoner, it is well
done and a work that God commands. If he go to this or that place, to
hear a Sermon or because his mind is not quiet at home or if because his
heart is to much occupied on his worldly businesses by the reasons of
occasions at home, he get him into a more quiet and still place, where his
mind is more abstract and pulled from worldly thoughts, it is well done. And
in all these places, if whatsoever it be, whether lively preaching, ceremony,
relic, or Image, stir up his heart to God and preach the word of God and
the ensample of our Savior Jesus more in one place then in an other, that he
thither go, I am content. And yet he bideth a Lord, and the things serve him
and he not them. Now whether his intent be so or no, his deeds will testify,
as his virtuous governing of his house, and loving demeanor toward his
neighbors: yea and Gods word will be always in his heart, and in his mouth, and
he every day perfecter the^ other.

For there can nothing edify man's soul save that which preaches him Gods
word. Only the word of god works the health of the soul. And whatsomeuer
preaches him that, can not but make him perfecter.

But to believe that God will be sought more in one place then in an other, or
that God will hear thee more
in one place then in an other, or more where the Image is, then where it is
not, is a false faith, and Idolatry, or Image service. For first God dwells
God dwells not in Temples made with men's hands.
not in temples made with hands. Act. xvij. Item Steven dyed for the contrary,
and proved it by the prophets. Act. vij. And Solomon in the viij. of the third
of the kings, when he had built his temple testified the same, and that he had
not built it for god to dwell in, yea and that God dwells not in the earth,
but that he should out of heaven hear the prayers of the^ that prayed there.
And the Prophets did often testify unto the people that had such a false
faith that God dwelt in the temple, that he dwelt not there. Moreover God in
his Testament byndeth him self unto no place nor yet the: But speaks
generally (concerning where and when) saying Psalm. xlix. in the Psalm. 49.
day of the tribulation thou shall call on me and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me. He sets neither place nor time. But wheresoever and when
soever: so that the prayer of Job upon the donghill was as good as Paul's in
the temple. And when our Savior says John. xvj. What soever John. 16.
ye ask my father in my name, I will give it you, he says not in this or that
place, or this or that day: but wheresoever and when soever, as well in the
fields as in the town and on the Mo^day as on the Sunday. God is a spirit and
will be worshypped in the spirit. John. iiij. That is, though he be present
every where, yet he dwells lively and John. 4.
gloriously in ye minds of angels only and hearts of men that love his laws
and trust in his promises. And wheresoever God finds such an heart, there he
hears the prayer in all places and times indifferently. So that the outward
place neither helps or hinders except (as I said) that a man's mind be more
quiet and still from the rage of wordly businesses, or that some thing styre up
the word of God and example of our Savior more in one place then in an other.

Whence Idolatry or image service spryngeth.
NOw that thou may see whence all this Idolatry or image service is sprung,
mark a little, and then I will answer unto the Arguments which these Image
seruers make against the open truth. All the ceremonies ornaments and
sacrifices of the old Testament were Sacraments. Sacraments.
That is to wete, signs preaching unto the people one thing or an other. As
Circumcision.
circumcision preached unto them, that God had chose^ them to be his people,
and that he would be their God and defend them and increase and multiply them
and keep them in that land and All the ceremonies of the old law were
preachers to the people.
bless the fruits of the earth and all their possessions. And on the other
side it preached, how that they had promised God again to keep his
commaundeme^ts, ceremonies and ordinances. Now when they saw their young
children circumcised, if they consented unto the appointement made between God
and them, moved by the preaching of that same, then were they justified thereby.
Howbeit the deed in it self, the cuttyng of of yt foreskyn of the manchilds
The ^t^es by says were justified, and not by the deeds of the law.
priuey member justified them not, nor was a satisfaction for the childs
sins, but the preaching only did justify the^ that received the faith
thereof. For it was a badge given indifferently as well unto them that never
consented in their hearts unto Gods law, as unto the elect in whose hearts the
law was written. And that this was the meaning of Circumcision may be proved
many ways: But namely by Paul Romans 2. where he says, circumcision is much
worth, if thou keep the law (whose sign it was) and else not. And Romans iij.
where he says that God did justify the circumcised of faith (whose sign it
was on the other side) and else not.

And the Paschall lamb was a memorial Paschall lamb.
of their deliverance out of Egypt only, and no satisfaction or offering for
sin.

And the offering of their first fruits preached how they had received all
First fruits.
such fruits of the hand of God, and that it was God that gave them that land,
and that kept them in it, and that did bless and make their fruits grow. In
token whereof as unto a Lord royal they brought him the first ripe fruits of
their harvest. Which remembrance as long as it abode in their harces, it moved
the^ to love God again and their neighbor for his sake, as he so often desired
them. And out of this ceremony was fette the blessing of our new ripe fruits
for like purpose, though we have lost the signification.

And their other offerings, as yt sacrices Sacrifices
of Dones, Turtles, Lambs, kiddes, sheep, Calves, Goats and Oxen were no
satisfactions for sin, but only a sign and token, that at yt repentance of
the heart, through an offering to come, and for that seeds sake that was
promised Abraham, their sins were forgeuen them.

And in like manner the ornaments Ornaments.
and all other ceremonies were either an open preaching or secret prophesies
and not satisfactions or iustifyinges. And thus the works did serve them,
Worked must serve us, and not we the works.
and preach unto them, and they not the works, nor put any confidence therein.

False worshipping.
BUt what did the children of Israel and the Jews? They let the
significations of their ceremonies go, and lost the meaning of them, and
turned them unto the works to serve them, saying that they were holy works
commanded of God, and the offerers were thereby justified, and obtained
forgeuenes of sins, and thereby become good: as the parable of the Pharesey
and Publican declare, Luke. xviij. and as it is Luke. 18.
to see in Paul and thoroughout all the Bible: and became captive to serve and
put their trust in that which was neither God nor his word. And so the better
creature against nature did serve the worse. Whereof all likelihode God should
have accepted their work by the reason of them, if their hearts had The Jews
became servants and captives to their works.
been right, and not have accepted their souls for the bloods sake of a Calfe
or sheep, for as much as a man is much better then a Calfe or sheep, as Christ
testifies Math. xij. For what pleasure should God have in the blood of Calves
or in the light of our candels? his pleasure is only in the hearts of them
that love his commandments.

Then they went further in the imagination of their blind reason saying, The
blind reason of hipocrites.
in as much as God accepts these holy works, that we be made righteous
thereby, then it follows that he which offers most, is most righteous, and
the bestman: yea and it is better to offer an Ox then a sheep, because it is
more costly. And so they strove who might offer most, and the priests were well
apayde. Then went they further
in their fleshly wisdom, saying: if I be good for the offering of a Dove, and
better for a sheep, and yet better for an Ox, and so ever the better thing I
offer the better I am, Oh how accepted should I be if I offered a man, and
namehym O blind and ^^ll the imagination.
that I most loved? And upon that imagination, they offered their own
children, and burnt them to ashes before Images that they had imagined.

And to co^ti^e their blindues, they laid for them (no doubt) the ensample of
Abraham, which offered his son Isaac, and was so accepted that God had
promised him, how that in his seed all the world should be blessed. Hereof ye
see unto what abomination blind reason brings a man, when she is destitute
of Gods word.

And to speak of y^ Sabbath (which was ordained to be their servant, and Holy
day.
to preach and to be a sign unto the^, that God through his holy spirit and
word Exodus 31.
did sanctify them, in that they obeyed his commandments, and believed and
trusted in his promises (and therefore were charged to leave workyng The Saboth
day must serve us, and not we the Saboth day.
and to come on the holy day and hear the word of God by which they were
sanctified) unto it, also they became captive and bond to serve it, saying that
they were justified by absteyning from bodily labor (as ours think also) in
so much that though they bestowed not the holy day in virtue prayer and How the
Saboth day should be occupied.
hearing the word of God, in almosedede, in visiting the sick, the needy and
comfortless and so forth, but went up and down idlye, yet what soever need
his neighbor had, he would not have help him on the Saboth day, as thou may
see by the ruler of the Sinagoge which rebuked Christ for healyng the Luke. 13.
people on the holy day Luke. xiij.

And of like blyndnesse they went and The brazen Serpent.
fet out the brazen Serpent (which Moses commanded to be kept in the Arc for
a memory) and offered before it: thinkyng (no doubt) that God must be there
present, for else how could it have healed the people that came not nigh it, but
stood a far of and beheld it only. And a thousand such madness did they.

And of the temple they thought that The temple.
God heard them there better then any where else: yea and he heard them no where
save there. And therefore they could not pray but there, as ours can no where
but at Church and before an Image. For what prayer can a man Prayer without
faith is n^ prayer.
pray, when the word of God is not in the temple of his heart: yea and when such
come to Church, what is their prayer and what is their devotion, save the blind
image service of their hearts.

But the Prophets ever rebuked them for such faythlesse works and for Psalm.
46.
such false faith in their works In the xlix. Psalm says yt Prophet, I will
receive no Calves of your houses nor Goats out of your foldes, think ye God
despise^ the sacrifices of y^ unfaithful ^ewes.
that I will eat the flesh of Oxen or drink the blood of Goats? And Esayas
says in his first Chapter, what care I for the multit^de of your sacrifices
says the Lord. I am full. I have no lust in the burnt offeringes of your
Rams, or in the fat of fa^ beasts or blood of Calves, Lambs or Goats:
offer me no more such false sacrifice. And thereto your sweet cense is an
abhominatio^ unto me. And thus he said because of the false faith and
peruertyng the right use of them.

And for their calfe fasting, not referryng Fasting.
their fast unto the tamyng and subduyng of their flesh unto the spirit,
Superstious falling does God abhor.
when they complained unto God justifying the^ selves and saying, how happens
it that we have fasted and thou would not look upon it, we have humbled
our souls and thou would not know it, God answered them by Esa. ^8.
the Prophet Esayas in the. lviij. chapter, behold, in the day of your fast, ye
do your own lusts and gather up all your dettes. And how soever ye fast, ye
nevertheless strive and fight and s^inite with tiste cruelly. I have chosen no
such fast and humblyng of soul. etc. But that ye louse wicked bonds and True
fasting, what it is.
let the oppressed go free, and to break bread unto the hungry and to cloth
the naked and so forth.

And concerning the temple, Esaya^ says in his last chapter. What house Temple.
will ye build for me or in what place shall I rest? heaven is my seat and the
earth my foot stole. As who should say I am to great for any place that ye can
make, and (as Steven says Acts vij. and Paul Acts. xvij. I dwell not Acts.
7. Acts. 17.
in a temple made with hands.

How ceremonies sprang among us.
Understand also (to see how we came into like blindness) that before the
coming of Christ in the flesh, the Israelites and Jews were scattered
thoroughout all the world, for their Image service, both East, West, South, and
North, as ye read in the Chronicles how England was once full: so that there
was no Province or great City in the world where no Jews were: God so
prouidyng for the spedy preaching of the Gospel among the heathen throughout
the world. Now Christ, as he was promised, so was he sent, unto the Jews or
Israelites. And what by Christ's preaching and the Apostles after his
resurrection, there were innumerable Jews converted happily an hundred thousand
or mo in Jerusalem and Iewry and in the countries about, and abode still in the
la^d. Then Paul rose up and persecuted the^ Pa^e a truell persecutor.
in Jerusalem and throughout all Iewry and Damasco, slaying all that he could
catch or making them for ^weare Christ. For fear of which persecution they
fled into all costs and preached unto the Jews that were scattered, proving
that Jesus was Christ the Savior of the world, both by the scripture and also
by miracles: so that a great part of the Jews came to the faith every Many
Jews were converted to ye ^aith of Christ.
where, and we heathen came in shortly after, and part abode still in unbelief
as unto this day.

Now the Jews being borne and bred up, rooted and noseld in ceremonies as I
have showed and as ye may better see in the. v. books of Moses, if ye would
read them, could but with great difficulty, depart from them as it is to see
in all the Epistles of Paul, how he fought against them, and in process gat
the upper hand. And thereto the first that were christened, and all the officers
and Bishops of y^ church, even so much as ye great God of Rome were Jews for
the most part a great season.

And moreover, as Paul says. To. All that came of Israel are not ^sraelites.
ix. not all that came of Israel are right Israelites, neither are all they
Abraham's sons that are Abraha^s seed, why so? because they followed not the
steps of y^ faith of their graundfathers. Even so, not all they that were
called and also came unto the marriage which God the father made between Christ
Math. 22.
his son and all sinners, brought their marriage garment with them, that is to
were, true faith wherewith we be married unto Christ, and made his flesh and his
blood and one spirit with him, his brethren and heirs with him, and the sons
of God also. But many of the^ (to fulfill the saying of Christ, that the
kingdom of heaven, which is the gospel, is like a net that ketcheth good and
bad) were driven into the net and compelled to confess that Jesus was Christ
and that seed that was promised Abraham and Messiah that should come: not of
any inward felyng that the spirit The Jews cam^ (...) to vn^ of Christ of
love, bu^ (...) enforced the^ unto by the scriptures.
of God gave them, neither of any lovely consent that they had unto the law of
God that it was good, mourning, both because they had broken it, and because
also they had no power to fulfill it, and therefore to obtain mercy and power
came to Christ and unto the father through him, with the heart of natural
children which receive all thing freely of their fathers bounteous liberality,
and of love become servants unto their brethren for their fathers sake: But
were compelled only with violence of the scripture which every where bare
witness unto Christ, and agreed unto all that he did, and overcome also with
the power of miracles that confirmed the same. That is to say, they came with a
story faith, a popish faith, a faithless faith, and a feigned faith of their
own making, and not as God in the scripture describes the faith, so believing
in Christ, that they would be justified by their own deeds, which is the
denying of Christ. As our Papists believe, which more mad the^ those Jews,
believe nothing by the reason of the scripture, but only that such a multitude
consent thereto, compelled with violence of sword, with falsifiyng of the
scripture and feigned lies. Which multitude yet is not the fifth part so many The
Turk^^ are a ^re greater number then the Papists.
as they that consent unto the law of Mahomet. And therefore by their own
arguments, the faith of the Turks is better then theirs. And their faith
thereto may stand by their own confession, with all mischief (as it well
appears by them) and with yeldyng themselves to work all wickedness with
full delectation, after the ensample of the faith of their father the devil,
and without repenraunce and consent unto the law of God, that it is good. And
the popish also do so believe in Christ, and so will be his servants, that
they will be bound unto dumme ceremonies and dead works putting their trust
and confidence in them, and hoping to be saved by them, and ascribing unto them
the thank of their salvation and righteousness.

And therefore because, as I said, the Jews ye and the Heathen to, were so
accustomed unto ceremonies, and because such a multitude came with a faithles
faith, they went clean contrary Ceremonies set up in the new testament.
unto the mind of Paul, and set up ceremonies in the new testament, partly
borowing them of Moses and partly imagening like, as ye now see, and called
them sacraments, that is to say, signs (as it is plain in the stories) the
sacrament of holy water, of holy fire, holy bread, holy salt and so forth. And
they gave the^ significations. As holy water signified the sprincling of What
holy water signifies.
Christ's blood for our redemption, which sacrament or sign) though it seem
superstuous, in as much as the sacrament of Christ's body and blood signifies
ye same daily) yet as long as ye signification bode, it hurted not. And the
kissing of the Pax was set up to signify, The Pax.
that the peace of Christ should be ever among us, one to love an other after
his ensample, as the word it self well declares. For pax is as much to say as
peace.

And as for confirmation, it is no doubt but that it came this wise up, and
Confirmation.
that this was the use, which the word it self well declares. We read in the
stories, that they which were converted unto the faith of the age of
discretion, Confirmation how it came first unto the church.
were full taught in the law of God (as right is) and in the faith of our
savior Jesus, yer they were baptized, and upon the profession or promising to
to keep that law and faith, were baptized. And then for the s^ccour and help
of young children, baptized before the age of discretion, to know the law of
God and faith of Christ was confirmation instituted, that they should not be
always ignorant and faythlesse, but be taught the profession of their Baptim.
And this no doubt was the manner, as we may well gather by probable conjectures
and evident tokens, when the children were of six or seven years old, their
elders brought them unto the priest or Deacon in every parish, which officer
taught the children what their baptim meant, and what they had professed
therein: that is to wete: the law of God and their duty unto al degrees, and
the faith of our savior. And then because it should not be neglect or left
undone, an higher officer, as the Archdeacon (for it has not been as I suppose
in the Bishops hands always as now, neither were it meet) came about from
parish to parish, at The manner of confirming of children.
times convenient. And the Priests brought the children unto him at xj. or
xii. year old, before they were admitted to receive the sacrament of Christ's
body happily. And he apposed them of the law of God and faith of Christ, and
asked them, whether they thought that law good, and whether their hearts were
to follow it. And they answered yea.

And he apposed them in the articles of our faith, and asked them, whether they
put their hop and trust in Christ, to be saved through his death and merits.
And they answered ye. The^ confirmed This is a right confirmation.
he their baptim saying: I confirm you, that is, I denounce and declare, by
the authority of Gods word and doctrine of Christ, that ye be truly baptized
within in your hearts, and in your spirits, through prosessing the law of God
and the faith of our savior Jesus, which your outward baptim does signify,
and thereupon I put this cross in your foreheades, that ye go and fight
against the devil, the world and the flesh, under the standard of our Savior,
in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost. Ame^. Which manner I
would to God for his tender mercy were in use this day.

But after that the devil was broken lowse and the Bishops began to purchase,
and the Dea^s to scratch all to them, and the spirituality to clime an high:
then because the labor se^ to tedious and paynfull, to appose the children one
by one, they asked the Priests that presented the^ only, whether The abuse of
confirmation.
the children were taught the profession of their Baptism. And they answered
y^^. And so upon their words they confirmed the^ without apposing. So when
they no longer apposed them, the Priests no longer taught them, but committed
the charge to their Godfather and Godmothers, and they to the father and
mother, dischargyng them selves by their own authority within half an hour.

And the father and mother taught the^ The fruts of ignorance.
a monstrous Latin Pater noster and an Aue and a Creed. Which gibbresh every
Pop^iaye speaks with a sundry pronunciation and fashion, so that one Pater
noster seems as many languages almost as there be tounges that speak it.
Howbeit, it is all one, as long as they understand it not. And in process as
the ignorance grew, they brought them to confirmation straight from Baptism:
so that now oftymes they be volowed and bishoped both in one day, that is, we
be confirmed in Confirmation is made now a confirmyng in all superstition,
ignorance and popery.
blindness to be kept from knowledge for ever. And thus are we come into this
damnable ignorance and fierce wrath of God through our own deseruyng, because
when the truth was told us we had no love thereto. And to declare the full and
set wrath of God upon us, our Prelates whom we have exalted over us to whom we
have given almost all we had, have persuaded the wordly Princes (to who^ we
have submitted our selves and given up our power) to devour us up body and
soul, and to keep us, down in darkness, with violence of sword, and with
all falsehead and guile. In so much that if any do but lift up his nose to
smell after The Papisticall tyranny.
the truth, they swap him in the face with a fire brande to seng his smellyng,
or if he open one of his eyes once to look toward y^ light of gods word, they
bleare and daze his sight with their false iugglyng: so that if it were
possible, though he were Gods elect, he could not but be kept down and perish
for lack of knowledge of the truth.

And in like manner, because Christ How the ceremonies about the ministration of
the Lords Supper came first into the Church. ^mice.
had institute the Sacrament of his body and blood, to keep us in remembrance
of his body breaking and blud sheding for our sins, therefore went they and
set up this fashion of the Mass and ordained Sacraments in the ornaments
thereof to signify and express all the rest of his passion. The amice on the
head is the kercheue that Christ was blind folded with, when the soldiers
buffeted him and mocked him saying: prophecy unto us who smote thee? But now
it may well signify that he that puts it on, is blind and has professed to
lead us after him in darkness, according unto the beginning of his play. And
the flappe thereon is the crown of thorn. And the albe is the The flappe on
the amice.
white garment that Herod put on him, saying he was a fool because he held
his peace and would not answer The albe.
him. And the ij. flappes on the sleues and the other ij. on the albe beneath
over The flappes on the albe.
against his fete behind and before, are the. iiij. nails. And the fanon on
his hand, the cord that his hands were The fanon
bound with: And the stole the rope The stole.
wherewith he was bound unto the pillar, when he was scorged: And the
corporiscloth, The corp^rescloth. The altar.
the sindon wherein he was buried: and the altar is the cross or happily the
grave and so forth. And the casting abroad of his hands, the splaying of Christ
upon the cross. And the light and sticking up of candles and bearyng of
candles or tapers in procession happly signified this text. Math. v. ye Candels.
be the light of the world, and let your Math. 5.
light so shine before me^, that they may see your good works and glorify
your father which is in heaven. And the salt signifies the wisdom of
Christ's doctrine, Salt.
and that we should therewith salt our deeds and do nothing without the
authority of Gods word. So that in one thing or other, what in the garments
and what in the gestures all his
playde, in so much that before he will go to Mass, he will be sure to sell him,
lest Iudases part should be left out.

And so throughout all the Sacraments, ceremonies or signs (iij. words All
ceremonies at the beginning had significations.
of one signification) there were significations unto them at the beginning.
And so long as it was understand what was meant by them and they did but serve
the people and preach one thing or an other unto them, they hurted not greatly,
though that the free servant of Christ ought not to be brought violently into
captivity under the bondage of traditions of men. As S. Augustine complayneth
in his days, how that Austine.
the condition and state of the Jews was more easy then the Christians under
The state of ye Jews more easy then the Christians under traditions.
traditions: so sore had the tyranny of the shepheardes invaded the flock all
ready in those days. And the^ what just cause have we to complain our
captivity now, unto whose yocke from that time hitherto, enen. xij. hundred
years long, has ever somewhat more weight been added to, for to keep us bowne
and to confirm us in blyndnesse? howbeit, as long as the significatio^s bode,
they hurted not the soul, though they were paynefull unto the body.
Nevertheless I impute this our Out of the ceremontes sprang the ignorance o^
the scripture.
grievous fall into so extreme and horrible blyndnesse (wherein we are so deep
and so deadly brought a sleep) unto no thing so much as unto the multitude of
ceremonies. For as soon as the Prelates had set up such a rabble of ceremonies,
they thonght it superflnous to preach the plain text any longer and the law of
God, faith of Christ, love toward our neighbor and the order of The multitude
of ceremonies put away preaching.
our justifying and salvation, for as much as all such things were played
before the peoples faces daily in the ceremonies and every child wist the
meaning: but got them unto allegories, faynyng them every man after his own
brain, without rule, all most on every silable, and from thence unto disputyng
and wastyng their brains about words, not attending the significations until
Ceremonies are the chirt cause of ignorance.
at the last the lay people had lost the meaning of the ceremonies and the
Prelates the understanding of the plain text, and of the Greek Latin and
specially of the Hebrew which is most of need to be known, and of all
phrases, the proper manner of speakynges and borrowed speech of the Hebrews.

Remember ye not how within this The doctrine of Dunce advanced.
xxx. years and far less, and yet dureth unto this day, the old barkyng
curres Dunces disciples and. like draffe called Scotistes, the children of
darkness, raged in every pulpit against Greek Latin and Hebrew, and what The
blind Papists are enemies to all good learning and knowledge
sorrow the Scholemasters that taught the true Latin tongue had with them, some
beatyng the pulpit with their fistes for madness and roaryng out with open and
somyng mouth, that if there were but one Tirence or Virgil in the world and
that same in their fleues and a fire before them, they would burn them
therein, though it should cost the^ their lives, affirming that all good
learning decayed and was utterly lost sense men gave them unto the Latin tou^g?
yea and I day say, that there be. xx. thousand Priests Curates this day in
England Igaoraunt Priests.
and not so few, that ca^ not give you the right English unto this text in the
Pater noster, fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo and in terra and answer thereto.

And as soon as the signification of the ceremonies was lost, and the priests
preached Christ no longer then the common people began to wax mad and out of
their minds upon the ceremonies. And that trust and confidence which the
ceremonies preached, to be
given unto Gods word and Christ's blood, that same they turned unto the
Ignorance made us servants to ceremonies.
ceremony it self, as though a man were so mad to forget that the bushe at
the tavern door did signisse wine to be sold within, but would believe that y^
bushe it self would quench his thirste. And so they became servants unto y^
ceremonies, ascribing their justifying and salvation unto them, supposyng that
it was nothing else to be a christian man, then to serve ceremonies, and him
most christen that most served them, and contrary wise him that was not Popish
and ceremonial, no christian man at all. For I pray you, for what cause worship
we our spirituality so highly, or wherefore think we their prayers better then
the poor lay men's, then for their disguisings and ceremonies? yea and what
other virtue see we in y^ holiest of them, then to wait upon dumme
superstitious ceremonies?

Yea and how comes it that a poor lay man having wife and xx. children, and
not able to find them, though all The sole Papists are preserred by
ceremonies.
his neighbors know his necessity, shall not get with begging for Christ's
sake in a long summers day enough to find them two days honestly, when if a
disguised monster come, he shall with an hours lying in the pulpit, get enough
to find thirty or forty sturdy lubbers a month long, of which y^ weakest
shall be as strong in the belly when he comes unto the manger, as the
might^est porter in y^ weyhouse, or best courser that is in y^ kings stable?
Is there any other cause then disguising and ceremonies. For ye deeds of the
ceremonies we count better the^ the deeds which God commands to be done to
our neighbor at his need, who thinks it as good a deed to feed the poor,
as to stick up a candle before a post, or as to sprinckle himself with holy
water? Neither is it possible to be otherwise, as long as the signification is
lost. For what other thing Is long as we had the signification of the
ceremonies, so long they were sufferable, but y^ ^can^tion being gone, the
ceremony is mere superstuio^.
can the people think, then that such deeds be ordained of God, and because
as it is evident, they serve not our neighbors need, to be referred unto ye
person of God, and he though he be aspirite, yet served therewyth? And then he
can not but forth on dispute in his blind reason, that as god is greater then
man, so is that deed that is appointed to serve God greater then that which
serves man. And then when it is not possible to think them ordained for
naught, what can I other wise think then that they were ordained to iustitie,
and that I should be holy thereby, according to the popes doctrine, as though
God were better pleased when I sprinkle my self with water or set up a candle
before a block, then if I fed, or clothed, or help at his need him whom he so
tenderly loves that he gave his own son unto the death for him, and
commanded me to love him as my self?

And when the people began to When the people by ignorance waxed
superstitious then y^ clergy help them forward with falsifiyng the scripture.
run that way, the prelaces were glad, and help to heue after with subtle
allegories and falsifying the scripture, and went and hallowed the ceremonies,
to make them more worshipful, that the lay people should have them in greater
estimation and honor, and to be afraid to touch them for reverence unto the
holy charm that was said over them, and affirmed also that Christ's death had
purchased such grace unto y^ ceremonies to forgive sin and to justify. O
monster, Christ's death purchased grace for man's soul, to repent Christ's
death purchased grace for ma^s soul.
of evil, and to believe in Christ for remission of sin, and to love the law
of God, and his neighbor as himself, which is the true worshipping of god in
the spirit, and he dyed not to purchase such honor unto vnse^sible things,
that man to his dishonor, should do them honorable service and receive his
salvation of them.

This I have declared unto you, yt ye might see and feel every thing sensibly.
For I entend not to lead you in darcknesse. Neither though twice ij. Cranes
make not iiij. wild Gees, would I therefore that he should believe that twice
two made not four. Neither entend I to prove unto you that Paul's steple is
the cause why Temmes is broke in about Erith, or y^ Teinterden steple is the
cause of the Teinterden steple.
decay of Sandwich haven as M. More iesteth. Nevertheless, this I would were
persuaded unto you (as it is true) that the building of the^ and such like,
through y^ false faith that we have in them, is the decay of all the havens in
England, and of all the cities, towns, hye ways, and shortly of the whole
common wealth. For since these false monsters crope up into our consciences,
and robbed us of the knowledge of our savior Christ, making us believe in such
popeholy works, and to think that there was none other way unto heaven, we
have not ceased to build the^ abbeyes, cloisters, coledges, The building of
^beies, clopsters and religious houses have been (...) great decay to the good
state of this realing
Chauntries, and cathedral churches with hye steples, striving and envying one
an other, who should do most. And as for the deeds that pertayne unto our
neighbors, and unto the common wealth, we have not regarded at all, as things
which seemed no holy works, or such as God would not once look upon. And
therefore we left them unseen to, until they were past remedy, or past our
power to remedy the^, in as much as our slowbellies with their false blessings
had iugled away from us, that wherewith they might have been helped in due
season. So that y^ silly poor man though he had happily no wisdom to express
his mind, or yt he durst not, or y^ M. More fashioneth his tale as he does
other men's to lest out the truth, saw that neither Goodwinsandes nor any other
cause alleged was the decay of Sandwich haven, so much as that the people had
no lust to mainteyne the common wealth, for blind devotion which they have to
popeholy works.

The solutions and answers unto M. Mores first book.
IN the first chapter to begin the book wythal, to bring you good luck and
to give you a say or a taste what truth shall follow, he fayneth a letter sent
from no man.

The second Chapter.
Worshipping.
In the second chapter, besides that it is untrue this use to have been ever
since the time of the Apostles, he makes many sophistical reasons about
worshipping of saints, relics, and Images, and yet declares not with what
manner worship, but iuggleth with the term in comune, as he does with this
word church, and this word faith, when the words have diverse significations:
for all faithes are not one manner faith and so forth, and therefore he
beguileth a man's understanding. As if a man said, the boys will was good
Subtle suggling (...) words.
to have given his father a blow, and an other would infer, that a good will
could be no sin, and conclude that a man might lawfully smite his father.
Now is good will taken in one sense in the mayor and in an other in y^ minor,
to use scholars terms, and therefore the conclusion does mock a ma^s wit.
Then disputes he, the servant is honored for the masters sake, and what is
done to the poor is done to Christ (as the popish shall once feel for their
so robbing them). And the xii. Apostles shall have their seats and sit and
judge with Christ (as shall all that here preach him truly as they did) and
Mary that powered the ointment on Christ's head before his passion, has her
memorial, and therefore we ought to set candles before Images. First I ask
him by what rule his argument holds. And secondarily I answer that the true
worshipping of True worshipping of Saints.
Saints is their memorial: to follow them as they did Christ. And that honor
we give them, and so do not ye papists, but follow the steps of your father
the Pope, as he does the steps of his father the devil. And as for sticking
up of candles, I answer that God is a spirit, and in the spirit must be
worshipped only. Faith to his promises, True worshipping of God.
and love to his laws, and longing for the life that is in his son, are his
due honor and service. All bodyly service must be referred unto our selves,
and not unto the person of God immediately. All outward things which we
receive of God are given us. to take our parts with thanks, and to bestow the
rest upon our neighbors. For God uses no such things in his own person,
but created the^ for to gene the^ us, that we should thank him, and not to
receive them of us, to thank us: for that were our praise and not his.
Fasting, watching, Bodily exercise.
wolward going, pilgrimage, and all bodily exercise must be referred unto yt
taming of the flesh only. For as god deliteth not in y^ taste of meat, drink,
or in the sight of gold or silver, no more does he in my fast and such like,
that I should refer them unto his person, to do him a pleasure withal. For
God in himself is as good as he can be, and has all the delectation that he
ca^ have. And the refore to wish that God were better then be is, or had more
pleasure then he has, is of a worldly imagination.

And all the spirits that be in heaven are in as good case as they can be, and
have all the delectation they can have, and therefore to wish them in better
case or to study to do them more pleasure then they have, is fleshly minded
popishnes. The pleasure of them that be in heaven is, that we harken to god and
keep his commandments, They that are in heaven do chiefly desire that we
harken to God and do his will.
which when we do, they have all the pleasure that they can have in us. If in
this life I suffer hell gladly, to win my brother to follow God, how much more
if I were in heaven should I rejoice that he so did? If in this world when I
have need of my neighbor, by the reason of mine infirmities, yet I seek
naught of him, save his wealth only, what other thing should I seek of him, if
I were in heaven, where he can do me no service, nor I use any pleasure that he
can do me?

THe devil desired to have his imaginations worshipped as God, and his popish
children desire the same, and compel men so to honor them, and of their
deuelishe nature describe they both God and his Saints. And therefore All
popish imaginations are I dolatry.
I say, all such fleshly imaginations, as to fast the wensday in the worship of
S. John or of S. Katerine, or what Saint it be, or to fast Saints eues, or to
go a pilgrimage unto their images or to offer to them, to do them pleasure,
thinkyng thereby to obtain their favor and to make special adnocates of them,
as a man would win the favor of an other with presents and gifts, and
thinking that if we did it not, they would be angry, are plain Idolatry and
image service, for the saint deliteth in no such. And when thou stickest up a
candle before the image, thou Candle.
might with as good reason make an holow belly in the image and power in
meat and drink. For as the Saint neither eats nor drinks, so has he no
bodyly eyes to delight in the light of a candle.

An other is this, God gives not the promises that are in Christ for bodyly we
receive all things of God out father for Jesus Christ's ^ake his son and our
only Savior.
service, but of his mercy only, un to his own glory. Yea and of the fathers
goodness do all natural children receive. Ask a little boy, who gave him his
gay coat, he au^swereth, his father. Ask him why, and he annswereth, because
he is his father and loves him, and because he is his son. Ask him whether
his father love him, and he says yea. Ask him how he knows it and he says,
because he gives me this or that. Ask him whether he love his father, he
says yea. Ask him why, he says, for his father loves him and gives him all
thing. Ask him why he works, he answers, his father will so have it. Ask
him why his father geneth not such and such boys coats to. Nay says he, they
be not his sons their fathers must give them as mynt does me. Go now ye
Popish bond servants and receive your reward for your false works and rob
your brethren and reign over them with violence and cruel tyranny and make
the^ worship your pillars, polaxes images and hattes. And we will receive of
the We must dot all thyuges of love.
merciful kyndnesse of our father and will serve our brethren freely, of very
love and will be their servants and suffer for their sakes. And there to our
good deeds which we do unto our neighbors need, spryng out of our
righteousness or justifying, which is y^ forgiveness of our sins in
Christ's blood, and of other righteousness know we not before God. And
contrariwise your righteousness or justifying which stands, as your faith
does, with all wickedness, springs out of your holy works which ye do to no
man srely save unto painted posts.

And when he alleges the sacrifices Sacrifices
of the old law, I say they were Sacraments and preached unto the people (as
no doubt, our candels once were) and were no holy works to be referred unto
Gods person to obtain his favor, and to justify the people, and that the
people should do them for the works selves. And when the people had lost the
significations and looked on the holiness of the deeds, to be justified
thereby, they were image service and hateful to God and rebuked of the
Prophets, as it is to see throughout all the old Testament.

Then he iuggleth with a text of S. Paul Romans xiiij. let every man for his
Romans 14.
part abound, one in this Idolatry and an other in that: when the sense of
the text is, let every man be sure of his own conscience, that he do nothing,
except he know well and his conscience serve him that it may be lawfully dove.
But what care they to abuse Gods word and to wrest it unto the contrary.

And in the last end, to utter his excel lent blindness, he says, the wiseman
Luther thinks that if the gold were taken from the relics, it would be
given unto the poor immediately, when he sees the contrary, that they which
have their purses full will give y^ poor (if they give ought) either an half
penny or in his country the iiij. part of a farthyng. Now I ask M. Mores
conscience, A sure ^ken of a self faith and ^seruice.
seeing they have no devotion unto the poor which are as Christ's own person
and for whom Christ has suffered his passion that we should be kind to them
and whom to visit with our alms is Gods commandment, with what mind do
they offer so great treasure, to the garnishyng of shrines images and relics?
It is manifest that they which love not Gods commandment, can do nothing
godly. Wherefore such offrynges come of a false faith, so that they think the^
better the^ works commauaded by God and believe to be justified thereby. And
therefore are they but image service.

And when he says, we might as well rebuke the powryng of the annoyntment A
dissere^ce between Christ's natural body, and a painted Image.
on Christ's head. Nay, Christ was the^ mortal as well as we, and used such
things as we do, and it refreshed his body. But and if thou would now pour
such on his image to do him pleasure, I would rebuke it.

The third Chapter.
IN the third Chapter he brings in miracles done at S. Steues tomb. Miracles.
I answer that the miracles done at Miracles were done by y^ saint to
confirm their doctrine.
Saints tombs, were done for the same purpose that the miracles which they
did when they were alive, were done: even to provoke unto the faith of their
doctrine, and not to trust in the place or in bones or in the Saint. As Paul
sent his napke^ to heal the sick, not that me^ should put trust in his nap
kin, but beieue his preaching.

And in the old Testament Eliseus Helisens.
healed Naaman the heathen man in the water of Iordayne, not to put trust in
the water or to pray in that place, but to wonder at the power of God and to
come and believe as he also did. And that his bones, when he was dead, raised up
a dead man, was not done that me^ should pray to him: for y^ was not lawful
the, by their own doctrme, neither to put their trust in his bones. For Dead
bones may not be worshypped.
God to anoyde all such Idolatry, had poluted all dead bones, so that
whosoever touched a dead bone, was unclean and all that came in his company,
until he had washed him self: in so much that if a place were abused with
offering unto Idols, there was no better remedy then to scatter dead bones
there, to drive the people thence, for being defiled and poluted. But his boues
did that miracle, to testify that he was a true Prophet and to move men unto
the faith of his doctrine.

And even so miracles done at the holy cross, were done, to move men unto
faith of him that dyed thereon, and not that we should believe in the wood.

He says that pilgrims put not trust in the place, as Nicromancers do in
Pilgrimages.
their circles, and says he wotteth not what, to mock out the text of our
Savior of praying in the spirit. And in the end he confounds him self
saying, we reken our prayers more pleasant in one place the^ in an other. And
that must be by the reason of the place, for God is as good in one place as in
an other and also the man. Moreover More reasons untowardly.
where a man pleases God best, thither is he most bound to go. And so that
imagination byndeth a man to the place with a false faith, as Nicromancers
trust in their circles.

And again if God had said that he God is like good in every place.
would more hear in one place then in an other, he had bound him self to the
place. Now as God is like good every where generally so has he made his
Testament generally, wheresoever mine heart moves me and am quiet to pray unto
him, there to hear me like graciously.

And if a man lay to our charge, that Temple.
God bound them unto the tabernacle and after to the Temple in the old
Testament. I say that he did it not for ye places sake, but for the monumentes
and The people were specially called to ye Temple to behold the momuments
there, whereby they might the better learn the mighty power of God.
testimonies, that their preached the word of god unto them, so that though the
priests had been negligent to preach, yet should such things that there were
have kept the people in the remembrance of the Testament made between God and
them. Which cause and such like only should move us to come to Church, and
unto one place more then an other. And as long as I come more to one place then
an other because of ye quietness or that some thing preaches gods word more
lively unto me there then in an other, the place is my servant and I not bound
to it: which cause and such like taken away, I can not but put trust in the
place as Nicromancers do in their circles, and am an image seruer and walk
after mine own imagination and not after Gods word.

And when he says, we might as Paschall Lamb.
well mock the obseruau^ce of the Paschall Lamb. I answer, Christ our
Paschall Lamb is offered for us and has delivered us as Paul says. 1. Cor.
v. whose sign and memorial is 1. (...).
the Sacrament of his body and blood. Moreover we were not delivered one of
Egypt. And therefore in as much as we be ouerladen with our own, I see no
cause why we should become Jews, to observe their ceremonies to.

And when he says holy strange gestures. Holy strange gestures is like
anapes play.
I answer, for the holiness I will not swear: but the strangeness I dare
well auow. For every Priest makes them of a sundry manner and many more madly
then the gestures of Jack anapes. And when he says that they were left from
hand to hand sense the Apostles time, it is untrue. For the Apostles used the
Sacrament as Christ did, as thou may see. 1. Cor. xj. More 1. Cor. 11.
over the Apostles left us in the light and taught us all the counsel of God,
as Paul witnesses Acts. xx. and hid nothing in strange holy gestures and
apes play the significations whereof no man might understand.

And a Christen man is more moved to pity says he, at the sight of ye cross,
then without it. If he take pity as Englishmen Pity.
do, for compassion, I say, that a Christen man is moved to pity when he
sees his brother bear the cross. And at the sight of the Cross, he that is
learned in God wepeth not, with The true be holdyng of the sign of the cross
ignorant women, as a man does for his father when he is dead: but mourns
for his sins, and at the sight of the cross comfort his soul with the
consolation of him that dyed thereon. But there is no sight whether of the
cross or ought else, that can move you to leave your wickedness, for the
Testament of God is not written in your hearts.

And when he speaks of praying at The Church is a place of prayer.
Church who denies him that men might not pray at Church or that the church
should not be a place of prayer? But that a man could not pray save at Church,
and that my prayers were God hears our prayer in all places.
not heard as well else where, If I prayed with like feruentnesse and strong
says, is a false lie.

And when he speaks of the presence of God in the temple. I answer, that
the Prophets testified, how that he dwelt not there, and so does Paul Acts
Acts. 17.
xvij. and so does Steue^ Acts. vij. and Solomon. iij. Of the kings. viij.
And no Acts. 7.
doubt as the mad Jews meant, he 3. Reg. 8.
dwelt not there, nor as we more mad suppose also. But he dwelled there only
in his signs Sacraments, and testimonies which preached his word Jerusalem
and the temple is destroyed.
unto the people. And finally for their false confidence in the temple, God
destroyed it. And no doubt for our false faith in visityng the monumentes of
Christ, therefore has God also destroyed them and given the place under the
infidels.

And when he speaks of the pillar of fire and cloud. I answer. that god The
pillar of fire.
was no otherwise present there, then in all fire and in all clouds save that
he showed his power there specially by the reason of the miracle, as he does in
the eyes of the blind whom he makes see, and yet is no other wise present in
those eyes then in other, nor more there to be prayed to then in other. And in
like manner he is no more God is present in all places alike.
to be prayed to where he does a miracle then where he does none. Neither
though we ca^ not but be in some place, ought we to seek God in any place,
save only in our hearts, and that in verity, in faith, hope, and love or
charity, according to the word of his doctrine.

And our sacraments, signs, ceremonies, Images, relics and monumentes ought
to be had in reverence, so farforth as they put us in mind of Gods word, and
of the ensample of them that lived thereafter and no further.

And the place is to be sought, and one to be preferred before an other for
quietness to pray, and for lively preaching, All places are to be preferred
where we may worship God most quietly.
and for ye preaching of such monumentes and so forth. And so long as the
people so used the^ in the old testament, they were acceptable and pleasant
to God, and God was said to dwell in the temple. But when the significations
being lost, the people worshipped such things for the things selves, as we now
do, they were abominable to God, and God was said to be no longer in the
temple.

The fourth chapter.
ANd in the fourth he says, that god M. More teaches false doctrine.
sets more by one place then an other. Which doctrine besides that it should
bind us unto the place, and God thereto, and can not but make us have
confidence in the place, is yet false. For first God unto whose word we may
add naught, has given no such commandment nor made any such covenant.
Neither is Christ here Math. 24.
or there says the scripture, but in our hearts is the place where God
dwells by his own testimony if his word be there.

And when he proves it, because God does a miracle more in one place then in
an other, I answer, if God Miracles were not done for ye place but for the
people.
will do a miracle, it requires a place to be done in. Howbeit he does it not
for the place but for the peoples sakes whom he would call unto the knowledge
of his name, and not to worship him more in one place then in an other.

As the miracles done in Egypt, in the red sea, in mount Sinay and so forth,
were not done that men should go in pilgrimage unto the places to pray there,
but to provoke them unto the true knowledge of god, that afterward they might
ever pray in ye sprite, whersoeuer they were. Christ also did not his miracles
that men should pray in the places where he did them, but to stir up the
people to come and hear the word of their souls health. And when he brings
the miracle of Silo, Siloe: Ioh. 4. and 9.
I answer, that the said miracle, and that Christ sent the blind thither to
receive his sight, were not done that men should pray in the poole: but the
second miracle was so done to declare the obedient faith of the blind, and to
make the miracle more known, and the first for the word of God that was
preached in the temple, to move the Miracles done to draw ye people to hear
the word of God.
country about to come thither and learn to know God, and to become a lively
temple, out of which they might ever pray, and in all places. Neither was the
miracle of Lazarus done, that men should more pray in that place then in an
other, but to show Christ's power, and to move the people through wondering at
the miracle to harke^ unto Gods word and believe it, as it is to see plainly.

Moreover God so loves no church, but that the parish have liberty to All
places must serve man, a not man bound to serve any place.
take it down and to build it in an other place: yea and if it be timber to
make it of stone, and to alter it at their pleasure. For the places, yea and
the Images must serve us and not God which is a spirit, and cares for none
more the^ other, nor is otherwise present in one place the^ in an other. And
likewise is it of Saints bones, we may remove them whether we will, yea and
break all Images thereto, and make new, or if they be abused, put them one of
the way for ever, as was the brazen serpent, so that we be Lords over all such
things, and they our servant. For if the Saints were our seruau^^s, how much
more their bones. It is the heart and not the place that worshippeth God. The
kitchen page turning the spit may have a puce^ heart to God God is worshipped in
our hearts, and not in any other place.
then his master at church, and therefore worship God better in the kitchen the^
his master at church. But when will M. More be able to prove that miracles done
at Saints tombs, were done that we should pray unto the Saints, or that
miracles done by dead Saints which a li^e neither preached Gods word nor
could do miracle are done of God?

God loves none Angel in heaven better then the greatest sinner in earth The
father ^th most for the you^gest.
that repents and believes in Christ. But contrariwise cares most for the
weakest, and makes all that be perfect their servants, until as Paul says
Ephe. 4. they be growe^ up in ye knowledge Ephesians. 4.
of God into a perfect man, and into the measure of age of the fullness of
Christ, that is, that we know all the mysteries and secrets that God has hid
in Christ, that we be no more children wa^ering with every wind of doctrine,
thorough the subtlety and wylines of men that come upon us to bring us into
error or beguile us. So far it is of that he would have us kept down to serve
Images. For with God cannot be served with bodily service.
bodily service we can serve nothing that is a spirit. And thereto if it were
possible that all the Angels of heaven could be mine enemies: yet would I
hold me by the testament that my mer^ifull and true father has made me in the
blood of my Savior, and so come unto all that is promised me, and Christ has
purchased for me, and give not a straw for them all.

The fifth chapter.
IN the fifth chapter he falls from all he has so long swet to prove, and
believes, not by the reason of the miracles, but by the common consent of the
church and that many so believe. This Our faith may be grounded upon men.
man is of a far other complexion the^ was the Prophet Elias. For he believed
a love as he thought, against the consent by all likelihode of ix. or x.
hundred thousand beleuers. And yet M. Mores church is in no other condition
under the Pope, then was that church against whose consent Elias believed alone
under the kings of Sama^y.

The sixth chapter.
IN the sixth chapter and unto the xviij. he proves almost naught save that
which never man denied him, that miracles have been done. But how to know the
true miracles from the false A^ true miracles prououe us to faith and trust in
God.
were good to be known, which we shall this wise do if we take those for true
sacraments and ceremonies which preach us Gods word, even so we count them
true miracles only which move us to harken thereto.

The xvi. Chapter.
COncerning his xvi. chapter of the maid of Ipswiche, I answer, that The may
be of Ipswich.
Moses warned his Israelites that false miracles should be done to prove the^,
whether their hearts were ta^^ in ye Lord. And even so Christ and the Apostles
showed us before ye lying miracles should come to pervert the very elect if it
were possible. And therefore we must have a rule to know the true miracles from
the false, or else it were impossible that any man should escape vndeceaued and
continue in the true way. And other rule then this is True miracles are done to
provoke us to the hearing of Gods word, and the false do ye contrary.
there not: that the true are done to provoke me^ to come and harke^ unto Gods
word, and y^ false to confirm doctrine yt is not gods word. Now it is not gods
word it thou read all the scripture thoroughout, but contrary thereto, that
we should put such trust and confidence in our blessed Lady as we do, and
clean against the testament that is in Christ's blood. Wherefore a man need
not to fear, to pronounce that the devil did it to mock us withal.

Never the later let us compare the The maid of Kent.
maid of Ipswiche and the maid of Kent together. First they say that the
maid of Ipswich was possessed with a devil, and the maid of Kent with the
holy ghost. And yet the tragedyes are so like the one to the other in all
points, that thou could not know the holy ghost to be in the one and the
devil in the other by any difference of The maid of Ipswich (...) the maid
of Ke^t were both false dissembling ha^^^tes.
works. But that thou might with as good reason say that the devil was in
both, or the holy ghost in both, or the devil in the maid of Kent and the
holy ghost in the maid of Ipswich. For they were both in like tra^nses, both
ravished from themselves, both tormented a like, both disfigured, like terrible
ougly and grysely in sight, and their mouths drawn a side, eue^ unto the very
ears of them, both en^pyred, both preach, both tell of wonders, will be both
carried unto our Lady, and are both certified by revelation that our Lady in
those places and before those Images should deliver them.

Now as for the maid of Ipswich was possessed of ye devil by their own
confession. Whence then came that revelation, that she should be help and all
her holy preaching? If of the devil, then was the miracle and all of the
devil. If of the holy ghost, then was she inspired with the holy ghost and had
the devil within her both at once. And in The maid of Kent.
as much as the maid of Kent was inspired by the holy ghost by their
confession, whence came that stoppyng of her throat, that rauyng, those grievous
panges that tormentyng, disfiguryng, drawing of her mouth awrye and that
fearful and terrible countenance? If of the holy ghost, and the why not the
revel and gamboldes of the maid of Ipswich also? and then what matter makes
it whether a man have the devil or the holy ghost in him. If ye say of the
devil, the^ had she likewise both the devil and the holy ghost both at once.
Moreover those possessed which Christ Such as were possessed with devils fled
from Christ.
help avoided Christ and fled from him, so that other which believed were fame
to bring them unto him against their wills. For which causes and many more that
might be made, thou may conclude, that the devil vexed them and preached in
them, to confirmed feigned confession and dome ceremonies and Sacraments
without signification and damnable sects, and showed them those A false
delusion to bring us to Idolatry.
revelations. And as soon as they were brought before our Ladies image,
departed out of them, to delude us and to turn our faythes from Christ unto an
old block. As we read in the Legend of S. Bartholomew, how the devils S.
Bartholomew.
hurt men in their lynnues and as soon as they were brought into a certain
temple before an Idol, there they departed out of them and so beguiled the
people making them believe that the Idol had healed them of some natural
diseases.

Howbeit let it be the holy ghost that was in the maid of Kent. The^ I pray you
what thing worthy of so great praise has our Lady done? Our Lady Our Lady did
the maid of Kent small pleasure.
has delivered her of the holy ghost and emptied her of much high learning
which as a goodly Poetisse, she uttered in Rimes. For appose her now of Christ,
as Scripture testifies of him, and thou shall find her clean without rhyme or
reason. The maid was at home also in heavenly pleasures, and our Lady has
delivered her out of the joys of Orestes and brought her into Orestes.
the miseries of middell earth again.

The xvij. Chapter.
AS for Doulia, Hyperdoulia and Lattia, though he show not with which of the^
he worshypped the Cardinals hat, is answered unto him already.

The xviij. Chapter.
IN the xviij. where he would feign Tradit^
prove that the Popes Church can not err, he alleges things whereof he
might be ashamed, if he were not past shame, to prove that the Bishops have
authority to lade us with traditions neither profitable for soul nor body. He
brings a false allegory upon the overplus that the Samaritane if it were
laid out, promised to pay when he came again, for the Bishops traditions. Nay.
M. More, besides that allegories which every man may feign at Allegory*
his pleasure can prove nothing, Christ interprets it him self, that it
betokens a kind mind and a loving neighbor, which, so loved a stranger,
that he never left caryng for him, both absent as well as present, until he
were full whole and common out of all necessity.

It signifies that the Prelates, if they were true Apostles and loved us after
the doctrine of Christ, would sell their myters, croses, plate, shrynes, iuels
and costly shows to succor the poor and not rob them, of all that A true
exposition of the parable of the ^a^tan.
was offered unto them, as they have done: and to repare things fallen in
decay and ruin in the common wealth, and not to beggar the realms with false
Idolatry and imagese^uice, that they have not left them wherewith to bear the
cost of the common charges.

And moreover when the Scribes and Phariseis taught their own doctrine, they
sat not upon Moses seat, but on their own. And therefore Christ (so far it is
of that he would have us hearken All that God has not planted shall be plucked
up by the roots.
unto man's doctrine) ^ayd, beware of the leven of the Scribes, Phariseis and
Saduces which is their doctrine and rebuked them for their doctrine and brake
it him self and taught his Disciples so to do and excused them, and said of
all traditions, that what soever his heavenly father had not planted, should be
plucked up by the roots. And thereto all the persecution that the Apostles had
of the Jews, was for breakyng of traditions.

Our Prelates ought to be our servants as the Apostles were, to teach Bishops
should be seruaunted and not Lords.
us Christ's doctrine, and not Lords over us, to oppress us with their own.
Peter calls it temptyng of the holy ghost Acts. xv. to lade the heathen
Acts. 15.
with ought above that which necessity and brotherly love required. And Paul
rebukes his Corinthians for their over much obedience and the Galathians also
and warns all men to stand fast and not to suffer them selves to be brought
into bondage.

And when he says Peter and Paul The Pope will not obey princes though God
have commanded him so to do.
commanded us, to obey our superiors. That is troth, they commanded us to
obey the temporal sword which the Pope will not. And they commanded to obey
the Bishops in the doctrine of Christ and not in their own. And we teach not
to break all things rashly, as M. More untruly reports on us) which is to
be seen in our books, if men will look upon them. Of traditions therefore
understand generally. Traditions
He that may be free is a fool to be bond. But if through wiliness, thou be
brought into bondage: then if the tradition hurt thy soul and thy faith, they
are to be broken immediately, though with the loss of thy life. If they grieve
the body only, the^ are they to be borne till God take them of, for breakyng
the peace and unity.

Then how sore makes he Christ's Christ's burden is easy and gentle.
burden. If it be so sore, why is M. More so cruel to help the Bishops to
lade us with more? But surely he speaks very indiscreetly. For Christ did not
lade us with one sillabe more then we were ever bound to, neither did he any
thing but interpret the law truly. And besides that, he gives unto all his,
love unto the law: which love makes all things easy be borne that were
before impossible.

And when he says, ye be the salt of Math. 5.
the ^earth that it was spoken for the Bishops and Priests only it is untrue,
but it was spoken generally unto all that believe and know the truth, that they
should be salt unto the ignorant, and the perfecter unto the weaker, each to
other every man in his measure. And moreover if it be spoken unto the Prelates
only, how fortuneth it y^
M. More is so ^usie to ^ault the world i^ his hygt, learning? And last of all
the The salt of our Prelates i^ vn^ery.
salt of Prelates which is their readitions and ceremonies without
signification is unsavory long a go, and therefore no more worth but to be cast
out at the doors and to be trodden underfoot.

And that he says in the end that a man may have a good faith with evil
living, I have proved it a lie in an other place. Moreover faith, hope and love
be iij. sisters y^ never can depart in Faith, love, and charity, ar^ iij.
sisters.
this world, though in y^ world to come love shall swalow up the other two.
Neither can the one be stronger or weaker then the other. But as much as I
believe, so much I love, and so much I hope ye and so much I work.

The xix. Chapter.
IN the xix. he proves that praying to Saints is good, and miracles that
confirm it are of God or else the church says he does err. It follows in
deed or that the Popes Church erreth. And We must believe neither to much nor
yet little.
when he says it is sin to believe to much I say we had the more need to
take heed what we believe and to search Gods word the more diligently that we
believe neither to much nor to little.

And when he says God is honored by praying to Saints because it is done for
his sake: I answer, if it spra^ge not out of a false faith but of the love we
have to God, then should we love God more. And moreover in as We are promised
all things for our Savior Christ's sake* and not for the Saints.
much as all our love to God springs put of faith, we should believe and trust
God. And then if our faith in God were greater then our fervent devotion to
Saints, we should pray to no Saints at all, seeing we have promises of all
things in our Savior Jesus and in the Saints none at all.

The xxv. Chapter.
IN yt xxv. how iuggleth he, to prove that all y^ perteyneth unto the faith,
was not written, alleging John in the John. 21.
last, that the world could not contain the books, if all should be written.
And John means of the miracles which Jesus did, and not of the necessary
points of the faith.

And how brings he in the perpetual virginity of our Lady, which The
virginity of our Lady.
though it be never so true, is yet none article of our faith, to be saved by.
But we believe it with a story faith, because we see no cause reasonable to
think the contrary.

And when he says many mysteries Antichrist is known.
are yet to be opened, as the coming of Antichrist. Nay verily the babe is
known well enough, and all the tokens spide in him, which the scripture
describes him by.

And when he alleges Paul's traditions to the Thessalo. to prove his Paul's
traditions were the doctrine of the Gospel
fantasy. I have answered Rochester in the obedience, that his traditions
were the Gospel that he preached.

And when he alleges Paul to the Corin. I say that Paul never knew of this
word Mass. Neither can any Christ's Supper and not Mass.
man gather thereof any strange holy gestures, but the plain contrary, and
that there was no other use there then to break the bread among them at supper
as Christ did. And therefore he calls it Christ's supper and not Mass.

There was learned y^ manner of consecration. The consecration.
A great doubt, as though we could not gather of the scripture how to do it.
And of the water that the Priest mingleth with the wine. A great doubt also and
a perilois case if it were left out. For either it was done Water mixed with
the wine.
to slake the heat of the wine, or put to after as a ceremony, to signify
that as the water is changed into wine, so are we changed through says as it
were into Christ, and are one with him, how be it, all is to their own shame,
that ought should be done or used among us Christen, whereof no man wist the
meaning. For if I understand not the meaning, it helps me not. 1. Cor. 14.
and as experience 1. Cor. 14.
reaches. But if our shepherdes had been as well willing to feed as to shere,
we had needed no such dispicience, nor they to have burnt so many as they have.

And as for that he alleges out of the Epistle of James for the justifying of
works, I have answered in the Justification of works.
Mammon, against which he can not hiss, and will speak more in the iiij.
book.

And as for the Saboth, a great matter, Saboth.
we be Lords over the Saboth, and may yet change it into the monday or or any
other day, as we see need, or may make every tenth day holy day The Saboth
day and holy days are made for be and not ^e for the^.
only if we see a cause why, we may make two every week, if it were expedient
and one not inongh to teach y^ people. Neither was there any cause to change
it from the Saturday then to put difference between us and the Jews, and least
we should become seruanntes unto the day after their superstition. Neither
needed we any holyday at all, if the people might be taught without it.

And when he asks by what scripture we know that a woman may christen. I
answer if baptim be so necessary as they make it, then love thy Why women
Baptize.
neighbor as thy self, does teach women to baptize in time of need: yea and
to teach, and to rule their husbands to, if they be besides them selves.

And when he says that of likelihode the lay people understood the Gospel
of John and Paul's Epistles better then great Clerks now. I answer, the more
shame is theirs. How be it there be ij. causes why: the one is their diligent
shering, and an other, Why the Prelates understand not the Scripture
they deny the justifying of faith whereof both Paul and John do entreat and
almost of nothing else, if the signification of our baptim which is the law of
God and faith of Christ were expounded truly unto us, yt scripture would be
easy to all that exercised themselves therein. And sir in as much as the
prelates care so little for the loss of yt understanding of the Scripture and
to teach y^ people, how happens it that they care so sore for a balde
ceremony, which y^ signification lost, though Christ hymfelse had institute
it, we could not observe without a false faith and without hurtyng of our
souls?

And finally to rock us a sleep with all, he says, that he shall never
speed A good tale if it were long enough.
well that will seek in the scripture whether our Prelates teach us a true
faith, though ten preach each contrary to other in one day. And yet Christ for
Ye can not speed well if ye try the doctrine of our Prelates by the Scripture
all his miracles sends us to yt scripture. And for all Paul's miracles, the
Jews studied the scripture the deligenterly, to see whether it were as he said
or no. How be it he means that such ca^ not speed well because the prelates
will burn them, except M. More help them, and make them forswear Christ
before hand.

The xxvii. chapter.
IN the xxvij. he brings Paul exhorting to agree and to tell all one tale in
the faith, which can not be says M. More, except one believe by the reason of
an other. Yes verily we all believe ye the fire is hot, and yet not by the
reason of an other, and that with a more surer knowledge then if we believed it
y^ one by the tellyng of an other. And eue^ so they that have the law of God
written All believe in God that have the law written in their hart^
in their hearts, and are taught of yt spirit to know sin and to abhor it,
and to feel the power of the resurrection of Christ, believe much surer then
they that have none other certeintie of their faith then the Popes preaching
confirmed with so godly living.

And it is not unknown to M. More that the churches of late days and the
churches now being have determined things in one case the one contrary to the
other, in such wise that he can not deny but the one has or does err: the
which case I could show him if I so The Church must show a reason of their
doctrine.
were minded. The old Popes, Cardinals and Bishops said ye to the thing that
I mean, whereunto these that now reign say nay. Now sir if you gather a
general counsel for the matter, the churches of France and Italy will not
believe the Churches of Spain and Douchland, because they so say: but will ask
how they prove it. Neither will Louayne believe Paris because they say that they
can not err, but will hear first their probation. Also how shall we know that
the old Pope and his Prelates erred, because these that are now so say? When
yt old Popes may not be believed without Scripture.
Pope lived we were as much bound to believe that he could not err, as we be
now that this can not: wherefore you must grant me, that God must show a
miracle for the tone part, or else they must bring aute^tike scripture.

Now sir God has made his last and everlasting testament, so that all is open
and no more behind then the appearyng of Christ again. And because he will
not stir up every day a new prophet with a new miracle to confirm new
doctrine or to call again the old that was forgotten: therefore were all
things necessary to salvation comprehended in scripture ever to endure. By
which scripture the counsels general Corusailes ought to conclude eccordyng to
the Scriptures.
and not by open miracles, have concluded such things as were in them
determined, as stories make mention. And by the same fcripture we know which
counsels were true and which false. And by the same scripture shall we, if any
new question ar^e determine it also. Abraham answered the rich man, they have
Moses and the Prophets, let the^ Luke. 16.
hear them, and said not, they have the Scribes and the Phariseis whom they
should hear preaching out of the seat of their own doctrine without
scripture.

And when he alleges, he that hears Luke. 10.
you hears me, and if any man hear not the church take him for an Math. 18.
heathen, concluding that we must believe whosoever is shaven in all that he
affirms without scripture or miracle, I would feign know in what figure that
silogismus is made. Christ's disciples taught Christ's doctrine confirming it
with miracles, that it might be known for Gods and not theirs. And even so
must the Church that I will believe show a miracle, or bring autentike scripture
that is come from the Apostles which consirmed it with miracles.

The xxix. Chapter.
IN the xxix. he alleges that Christ said not the holy ghost shall write, but
shall teach. It is not the use to say the holy ghost writes, but inspireth y^
writer. I maruayle that he had not brought, as many of his brethren do, Matthew
in the last, where Christ commanded the Apostles to go and teach Math. (...).
all nations, and said not write. I auswere, that this precept love thy
neighbor as thy self, and God above all The cause why the Apostles wrote the
Gospels.
thing, went with the Apostles and compelled them to seek Gods honor in us,
and to seek all means to continue the faith unto the worlds end. Now the
Apostles knew before that heresies should come, and therefore wrote, that it
might be a remedy against heresies, as it well appears John. xx. Where he
says, these are John. 20.
written that ye believe and through belief have life. And in the second of his
1. John. 2.
first Epistle he says, these I write because of them that deceive you. And
Paul and Peter thereto warn us in many places. Wherefore it is manifest that
the same love compelled them to leave nothing unwritten that should be
necessarily required, and that if it were left out, should hurt the soul.

And in the last chapter to make all fast, he brings in the kings grace, how
he confuted Martin Luther, with this conclusion, ye Church can not err: The
Pope and his Cardinals erred in K. Henry the ^ights case
where unto I will make none answer for fear to displease his grace,
nevertheless because Martin could not soil it, if his grace look well upon
the matter, he shall find that God has assoyled it for him in a case of his
own.

And upon that M. More concludes M. Mores conclusion*
his first book, that what soever the Church, that is to were, the pope and
his brood say, it is Gods word, though it be not written nor confirmed with
miracle nor yet good living, yea and though they say to day this and to morrow
the contrary, all is good enough and Gods word: yea and though one Pope
condemn an other (ix. or x. Popes
arow) with all their works for he retickes, as it is to see in the stories,
yet all is right and none error. And thus good night and good rest, Christ is
brought a sleep and laid in his grave and the door sealed to, and the men of
arms about the grave to keep him down with polaxes. For that is the si^ rest
argument, to help at need and to be rid of these babblyng heretics, that The
furest way to oppress true doctrine, is to say the preachers fall.
so bark at the holy spirituality with yt Scripture, being thereto wretches of
no repuration, neither Cardinals nor Bishops nor yet great beneficed men, yea
and without torquottes and pluralities, having no hold but the very Scripture,
whereunto they cleave as burres so fast that they can not be pulied away save
with very syngyng them of.

A sure token that the Pope is Antichrist.
ANd though unto all the arguments and persuasions which he would blind us
with, to believe that the Pope with his sect were the right Church, and that
God for the multitude will The Pope is (...) ^st.
not suffer them err, we were so simple that we saw not the suttiltie of the
Arguments nor had words to sol^e the^ with, but our bare faith in our hearts
yet we be sure and so sure that we can therein not be dec^aued, and do both
seele and see that the conclusion is false and the contrary true.

For first Peter says. ij. Pet. ij. there (...). Pet. 2.
shall be false teachers among you which shall secretly bring in damnable
sects, denying the Lord that bought them, and many shall follow their damnable
ways, by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, and with feigned words
they shall make marchaundise over you? Now says Paul. Romans iij. Romans 3.
the law speaks unto the^ that are under the law. And even so this is spoken
of the^ that profess the name of Christ. Now the Pope has x. thousand sects
A swarm of sects set up by the Pope.
^ropen in, as pied in their consciences as in their coats, setting up a
thousand manner of works to be saved by, which is the denying of Christ. And we
see many and all most all together follow their damnable ways. And in that
Peter said that they shall rail and blaspheme the truth, it follows that
there shall be a little flock reserved by the hand of God to testify the truth
unto them or else how could they rail on it? And it follows that those raylers
shall be the mightier part in the world, or else they durst not do it. Now what
The Pope by setting up of false works denies the truth of gods word.
truth in Christ does not the Pope rebuke and in setting up false works deny
all together? And as for their fayued words, where find thou in all the
Scripture Purgatory, shrift penance, pardon, poena culpa, hyperdoulia and a
thousand feigned terms mo? And as for their marchaundise, look whether they
sell not all Gods laws and also their own, and all sin and all Christ's
merits and all that a man The Pope sells sin and pain and all that (...)
be sold.
can think. To one he sells the fault only and to an other the fault and
the pain to, and purges his purse of his money and his brains of his wits,
and makes him so beastly, that he can understand no godly thing.

And Christ says Math. xxiiij. there Math. 24*
shall false anointed arise and show signs and wonders: that is, they shall
show miracles and so prevail that, if it were possible, the elect should be
brought out of the true way. And these false anointed, by the same rule of
Paul and in that Christ says also that they shall come in his name must be in
the Church of Christ and of them that shall call the^ selves Christen, and shall
show their wonders before the elect and be a sore temptation unto them, to
bring the^ out of the way. And ye elect which (...) few in comparison of them
that be called and come faynedly, shall among that great multitude be kept by
the mighty hand of God against all natural possibility. So that the Church
and The popish church are (...) but no sufferes.
very elert shall never be such a multitude together by them selves without
persecution and temptation of their ^ayth, as the great multitude under the
pope is which persecute and ^t. And these which the Pope calls heretics show
no miracles, by their own confession, neither ought they* (...) as much as
they bring no new learning nor ought save the Scripture which is all ready
received and confirmed with miracles. Christ also promises us naught in this
world save persecution for our faith. And the stories of the old Testament are
also by Paulus. 1. Cor. x. our 1. Cor. 10.
examples. And there, though God at a time called with miracles a great
multitude, The church of Chri^ ever persecuted.
yet the very chosen that received the faith in their hearts, to put their trust
in God alone, and which endures in temptations, were but few and ever
oppressed of their false brethren and persecuted unto the death, and driven
unto corners.

And when Paul. ij. These. ij. says 2 Thessalonians. (...).
that Antichrists coming, shall be by the working of Satan with all power,
signs and wonders of falsehead and all deceaueablenesse for them that perish,
because they conceived not love unto the truth, to be saved by, and therefore
shall God send them strong delusio^ or guile, to believe lies: the text must
also pertain unto a multitude gathered The church of Antichrist is the false
church* and ever ye greater number
together in christ's name, of which one part and no doubt the greater, for
lack of love unto the truth that is in Christ, to live thereafter, shall fall
into sects and a false faith under the name of Christ and shall be indurate and
stablished therein with false miracles to perish for their unkindness. The
pope first has no Scripture that he dare abide The Pope is a deuelishe
blasphemer of God.
by in the light, neither cares, but blasphemeth that his word is truer the^
the Scripture. He has miracles with out Gods word, as all false Prophets had.
He has lies in all his Legendes in all preachynges and in all books. They
have no love unto the truth, which appears by their great sins that they
have set up above all the abhominatio^ of all the heathen that ever were, and
by their long continuance therein, not of frailty: but of malice unto the
truth and of obstinate lust and self will to sin. Which appears in two
things: the one, that they have gotten them with wiles and falsehead from
under all laws of man and even above King and Emperor, that no man The Pope
is above king and Emperor.
should constrain their bodies and bring them unto better order, that they may
sin freely without fear of man. And on the other side, they have brought Gods
word a sleep, that it should not unquiet their consciences, in so much The Pope
persecuteth the word of God.
that if any man rebuke them with that, they persecute him immediately and pose
him in their false doctrine and make him an heretic and burn him and quench
it.

And Paul says. ij. Timo. iij. in the later days there shall be perilous
times. For there shall be men that love them selves, covetous, high minded, S.
Paul describes the Pope and his in their co^ters.
proud, raylers, disobedient to father and mother, unthankful, ungodly,
churlish, promisebreakers, accusers or pickquareles, vnlouyng, despisers of the
good, traitors, hedy, pu^sed up and that love lusts more the^ God, having an
appearaunce of godliness, but denying the power thereof. And by power I
understand the pure faith in gods word which is the power and pith of all
godliness and whence all that pleases God springs. And this text pertains
Gods word is yt power and pith of all goodness.
unto them that profess Christ. And in that he says having an appearaunce of
godliness and of that follows in the text, of this sort are they that enter
into men's houses and lead women captive laden with sin, ever askyng and never
able to atteine unto the truth (as our hearers of co^fessions do) it appears
Confession.
yt they be such as will be holyer then other and teachers and leaders of the
rest. And look whether there be here any sillabe that agrees not unto our
spirituality in the highest degree. Love they not them selves their own Love
is of themselves.
decrees and ordinances, their own lies and dreams and despise all laws of
God and man, regard no man but the^ only that be disguised as they be? And as
for their covetousness which Covetous.
all the world is not able to satisfy, tell me what it is that they make not
serve it? in so much that if God punish the world with an evil pocke, they
immediately paynt a block and call it Job to heal the disease instead of
warning the people to mend their living. And as for their high mind and pride,
see Hye minded. Proud.
whether they be not above Kings and Emperor and all the names of God, and
whether any man may come to bear rule in this world except he be sworn to
them and come up under them.

And as for their raylyng look in their excommunication, and see whether
Raylers.
they spare King or Emperor or the Testament of God. And as for e^edience to
father and mother, Nay, they Disobedient.
be immediately under God and his holy vicare the Pope, he is their father and
on his ceremonies they must wait. And as for unthankful, they be so kind,
Unthankful.
that if they have received a thousand pound land of a man, yet for all yt they
would not receive one of his ofspryng unto a nights harbor at his need, for
their founders sake. And whether they be ungodly or no I report me unto
Ungodly* Churlishe.
the parchement. And as for churlishness, see whether they will not have their
causes venged, though it should cost whole regions, yea and all Christendom,
as ye shall see and as it has cost half Christendom all ready. And as for
their promise or trucebreakyng, see Promise breaks.
whether any appoyntement may endure for their dispensations, be it never so
lawful, though the Sacrament were received for the co^firmatio^. And see
whether they have not broken all the appointementes made between them and their
founders. And see whether they be not accusers and ^^aytours also Accus^rs.
of all me^, and that secretly and of their very own Kings and of their own
nation. And as for their headmeste, see Heady^.
whether they be not prove, bold and run headlo^g unto all mischief, without
pity and compassion or caryng what misery and destruction should fall on other
men, so they may have their present pleasure fulfilled. And see whether they
love not their lusts, that they Leuyng lusts.
will not be refrained from them either by any law of God or man. And as for
Appearaunce of godliness.
their apperau^ce of godliness, see whether all be not Gods service that they
feign, and see whether not almost all consciences be captive thereto. And it
follows in the text, as the sorcerers of Egypt resisted Moses, so resisted
they the truth. They must be therefore mighty The Pope and his are mighty
iugglers.
iugglers. And to point the popish with the finger he says, men are they with
corrupt minds, and cast awaies concerning faith, that is, they be so fleshly
minded, so crooked so stubbu^ne and so monstrous shapen, that they ca^ receive
no fashion to stand in any buildyng that is grounded upon faith: but when you
have turned them all ways and done thy best to hew them and to make them
frame, thou must be feign to cast them out with the Turks and Jews, to serve
God with the image service of their own false works. Of
these and such like textes, and of the similitudes that Christ makes in the
Gospel of the kingdom of heaven it appears, that though the holy ghost be
in the chosen, and teaches them all truth in Christ, to put their trust in
him, so that they cannot err therein, yet while the world stands, God shall
never have a church that shall either persecute or be vnpersecuted them selves
any season, after the fashion of y^ Pope. But there shall be in the church In
the Church shall there be for ever, both good and evil.
a fleshly seed of Abraham and a spiritual, a Cain and an Abell, an Ismael
and an Isaac, an Esan and a Jacob, as I have said, a worker and a beleuer, a
great multitude of them that be called and a small flock of them that be elect
and chosen. And the fleshly shall persecute the spiritual, as Cain did Abel,
and Ismaell Isaac, and so forth, and the great multitude shall persecute y^
small little flock, and Antichrist will be ever the best christen man.

SO now the church of God is double, This word Church is taken ij. manner ways.
a fleshly and a spiritual: the one will be and is not, the other is and may
not be so be called, but must be called a Lutheran, an heretic, and such The
spiritual Church of God are called Luthera^s and heretics.
like. Understand therefore, that God when he calls a congregation unto his
name, sends forth his messe^gers to call generally, which messengers bring in
a great multitude amassed and astonished with miracles and power of the reasons
which the preachers make, and therewyth be compelled to confess that there is
but one God of power and might above all, and that Christ is God and man, and
borne of a virgin, and a thousand other things. And the^ the great multitude
that is called and not chosen, when they have gotten this faith common as well
to the devils as them, and more strongly persuaded unto the devils then unto
them, then they go unto their own imaginations, saying: we may no longer serve
Idols, but God that is but one. And the manner of service they fet out of their
own The fleshly Church serve God with works of their own.
brains and not of the word of God, and serve God with bodily service as they
did in times past their Idols, their hearts serving their own lusts still.
And one will serve him in white, an other in black, an other in gray, and an
other in pyed. And an other to do Friars.
God a pleasure withal, will be sure, that his show shall have two or three
good thick soles under, and will cut The blasing of hypocrites.
him above, so that in summer while the weather is hot thou may see his bare
foot, and in winter his socke. They will be shorn and shaven and Saduces: that
is to say, righteous, and Phariseis, that is separated in fashions from all
other men. Yea and they will consecrat themselves altogether unto God, and will
anoint their hands, and halow them as the chalice, from al manner lay uses: so
that they may serve neither father nor mother, master, Lord or Prince, for
poluting themselves, but must wait on God only, to gather up his rentes,
tithes, offeringes, and all other duties. And all the sacrifice that come, they
consume in the altar of their bellies, and make Calil of it, that is, a
sacrifice that no man may have part of. Calil, is a sacrifice that no m^ may
have any part thereof.
They believe that there is a God: But as they can not love his laws, so they
have no power to believe in him. But they put their trust and confidence in
their own works, and by their own works they will be saved, as the rich of
this world, when they sue unto great men, hope with gifts and presents to
obtain their causes. Neither other serving of God know they, save such as
their eyes may see and their bellyes feel. And of very zeal they will be Gods
vicars, and prescribe a manner unto other, and after what fashion they shall
serve God, and compel the^ thereto, for the avoiding of Idolatry, as thou see
in the Phariseis.

But little flock, as soon as he is The small flock of Christ comes to the
word and promises of God.
persuaded that there is a God, he runs not unto his own imaginatio^s, but
unto the messe^ger that called him, and of him asks how he shall serve God.
As little Paul Act. ix. when Christ had overthrown him and caught him Acts. 9.
in his net, asked saying: Lord what will thou that I do. And as the multitude
that were converted Act. 2. asked Acts. 2.
of the Apostles what they should do. And the preacher sets the law of God
before them, and they offer their hearts to have it written therein, consenting
that it is good and righteous.

And because they have run clean contrary unto that good law, they sorrow
and mourn, and because also their bodies and flesh are otherwise disposed. But
the preacher comfort them and shows the^ the testament of Christ's Christ
only is the perfect co^forte^ of the Christian.
blood, how that for his sake all y^ is done is forgiven, and all their weakness
shall be taken in worth until they be stronger, only if they repent and will
submit themselves to be scholars and learn to keep this law. And a little
flock receaueth this testament in his heart, and in it walks and serves God,
in the spirit. And from henceforth all is Christ with him, and Christ is his,
and he is Christ's. All that he receaueth, he receaueth of Christ, and all that
he
does, he does to Christ. Father, mother, master, Lord and Prince, are
Christ's unto him, and as Christ he serves them with all love. His wife,
children, servants and subjects are Christ unto him, and he teaches them to
serve Christ and not himself and his lusts. And if he receive any good The
Christian man in all things seeks ^he honor of Christ.
thing of man, he tha^keth god in Christ, which moved the man's heart. And his
neighbor he serves as Christ in all his need, of such things as God has
lent, because that all degrees are bought as he is, with Christ's blood.

And he will not be saved, for serving his brethren, neither promises his
brethren heaven for seruyng him. But heaven, justifying, forgeuenes, all gifts
The Christian sel^eth his salvation only in Christ.
of grace, and all that is promised them they receive of Christ and by his
merits freely. And of yt which they have received of Christ they serve each
other freely as one hand does the other, seeking for their service no more the^
one hand does of an other each the others health, wealth, help aid, succor,
and to assiste one an other in the way of Christ. And God they serve in the
spirit only, in love, hope, faith and dread.

When the great multitude that be A pretye (...) n^^thesis between the Popes
Church and Christ's little flock.
called and not chosen, Cain, Ismaell, Esau and carnal Israel that serve God
night and day with bodily service and holy works, such as they were wont to
serve their Idols withal, behold little flock that they come not forth in
the service of god, they rore out, where are thou? Why come thou not forth
and take holy water? Wherefore says y^ little flock. To put away thy sins.
Nay brethren, god forbid that ye should so think, Christ's blood only washes
away the sins of all that repent and believe. Fire, salt, water, bread, and
oil be bodily things, given unto man for his necessity and to help his
brother with, and God that is a spirit cannot be served therwyth. Neither can
such things enter into the soul to purge her. For Gods word only is her
purgation. No say they, are not such things hallowed. And say we not in the
halowing of them that who The Popish church au^swereth.
soever is sprinkled with the water, or eats of the bread shall receive
health of soul and body? Sir the blessings The little flock.
promised unto Abraham for all nations are in Christ, and out of his blood we
must fet them, and his word is the bread, salt, and water of our souls. God
has given you no power to give through your charms such virtue unto vnse^sible
creatures, which he has hallowed himself and made them all clean (for the
bodily use of them that believe) through his word of promise and permission and
our thanks giving. God says, if thou believe Saint Ihons gospel thou shall be
saved, and not for ye bearyng of it about thee with so many crosses, or for the
observing of any such obseruaunces.

God for thy bitter passion rore they The Popes church
out by and by, what an heretic is this? I tell thee that holy church need to
allege no scripture for them, for they have the holy Ghost which inspireth
the^ ever secretly, so yt they can not err whatsoever they, say, do, or
ordain. What will thou despise the blessed Sacraments of holy church
wherewyth God has been served this xv. hundred year (ye verily this v.
thousand years, even since Cain hitherto, and shall endure unto the worlds
end, among the^ that have no love unto the truth to be saved thereby) thou art
a strong heretic and worthy to be burnt. And the^ he is excommunicat out of
the church. If yt little flock fear not that bugge, then they go straight
unto the king, And it like your grace, perilous people and seditious, and even
enough to destroy The manner o^ yt Popes clergy.
your realm, if ye see not to them betimes. They be so obstinat and tough,
that they will not be converted, and rebellious against God and the ordinances
of his holy church. And how much more shall they so be against your grace, if
they increase and grow to a multitude. They will pervert all, and surely make
new laws, and either subdue your grace unto them, or rise against you. And
the^ goes a part of yt little flock to pot, and the rest scatter. Little
flock g^^th ever to wrack.
Thus has it ever been and shall ever ^e, let no man therefore deceive
himself.

An answer to M. Mores second book.
IN the first Chapter ye may not try the doctrine of the spirituality by the
Scripture: But what they say, that believe undoubtedly and by that try the
Scripture. And if thou The Pope(...)be ^^^d by scripture and by scripture must
be judged (...).
find the plain contrary in the Scripture, thou may not believe the
Scripture, but seek a Gloss and an allegory to make them agree. As when the
pope says, ye be justified by the works of the ceremonies and Sacraments
and so forth, and the Scripture says, that we be justified at the repentance
of the heart through Christ's blood. The first is true plain, as the pope says
it and as it stands in his text, but the second is false as it appears unto
thine understanding and the literal sense that kills. Thou must therefore
believe the Pope and for Christ's doctrine seek an allegory and a mystical
sense: that is, thou must leave the clear light and walk in the miste. And
yet Christ and his Apostles for all their miracles required John. 5.
not to be believed without scripture, as thou may see John. v. and Act. xvij.
and by their diligent alledgyng of Scripture through out all the new Testament.

And in the end he says for his pleasure, None can minister the Sacraments
super^ly but the Popes generation.
that we knowledge, that no man may minister Sacraments but he that is deriuede
out of the Pope. Howbeit this we knowledge, that no man could minister
Sacraments without signification which are no Sacraments, save such as are of
the Popes generation.

The iij. Chapter.
IN the third Chapter and in the Chapter following, he utters how fleshly
minded he is, and how beastly he imagines of God, as Paul says. 1. 1. Cor. 2.
Cor. 2. the natural man can not under stand the things of the spirit of God.
He thinks of God, as he does of his The natural and carnal man sauoreth not
the thing that be of God.
Cardinal, that he is a monster, pleased when men flatter him, and if of
whatsoever frailty it be, men break his commandments, he is the^ ragyng
mad as the Pope is and seeks to be venged. Nay, God is ever fatherly minded
toward the elect members of his Church. He loved them yer the world began, in
Christ. Ephe. 1. He loves the^, while they be yet evil and his enemies in
their Romans 5. God is fatherly to his elect members.
hearts, yer they be come unto y^ knowledge of his son Christ, and yer his
law be written in their hearts: as a father loves his young son, while he is
yet evil and yer it know the fathers law to consent thereto.

And after they be once actually of his Church and the law of God and faith of
Christ written in their hearts, their hearts never sin any more, though as
Paul says. Romans vij. the flesh does Romans 7.
in them that the spirit would not. And when they sin of frailty, God
cease I^ we sin of frailty God is merciful and ready to forgive.
not to love them still, though he ^e angry, to put a cross of tribulatio^s
upon their backs, to purge them and to subdue the flesh unto the spirit or to
all to break their consciences with threatnyng of the law and to fear the^
with hell. As a father when his son offe^deth him fears him with the rod,
but hates him not.

God did not hate Paul, when he persecuted, but had laid up mercy for him in
store, though he was angry with him to scourge him and to teach him better.
Neither were those things laid on his back which he after suffered, to make
satisfaction for his foresinnes, but only to serve his brethren and to keep
the flesh under. Neither The new life does tame the flesh and serve her
neighbor*
did God hate David when he had sinned, though he was angry with him. Neither
did he after suffer to make satisfaction to God for his old sins, but to keep
his flesh under and to keep him in meekness and to be an example for our
learning.

The iiij. Chapter.
IN the fourth says he if the Church were an unknown company, how should the
infidels, if they longed for the faith, come thereby? O whether wandereth a
fleshly mind, as though we first God seeks us and we not him.
sought out God. Nay, God kitoweth his and seeks them out and sends his
messengers unto them and gives them an heart to understand. Did the heathen or
any nation seek Christ? Nay, Christ sought them and sent his Apostles unto
them. As thou see in the stories from the beginning of the world and as the
parables and similitudes of the Gospel declare.

And when he says, he never found nor heard of any of us, but that he would
More a lying papist.
forswear to save his life. Answer, the more wrath of God will light on them,
that so cruelly delight to torment them and so craftily to beguile the weak.
Nevertheless yet it is untrue. For he has heard of Sir Thomas Hitton who^ Sir
Thomas Hitton.
the Bishops of Rochester and Caunterbury slew at Maydstone and of many yt
suffered in Braband, Holand, and at Colen and in all quarters of Dutchland and
do daily.

And when he says that their Church has many Martyrs, let him show me The
Pope has no martyrs.
one, that dyed for pardons, and Purgatory that the Pope has feigned, and let
him take the mastrie.

And what a do makes he, that we say, there is a Church that sins not and
that there is no man but that he sins, which are yet both true. We read. i.
John. iij. he that is borne of God sins 1. John. 3.
not. And Ephesians. v. men love your wives as the Lord does the Church, and gave
him self for her, to sanctify There is a church that sins not.
her and to cleanse her in the fountain of water through the word, and to make
her a glorious Church unto him self, without spot or wrincle.

And i. John. i. If we say, we have no sin we deceive our selves and make him
a liar and his word is not in us. M. More also will not understand that the
Church is some time taken for The churh is double.
the elect only which have the law of God written in their hearts and faith
to be saved through Christ written there also. Which same for all that say with
Paul, that good which I would, that do I not. But that evil which I hate,
that do I: so it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in my flesh.

And Gala. v. the flesh lusts contrary to ye spirit and the spirit contrary
to y^ flesh, Gal. 5.
so that these two fightyng between the^ selves, ye can not do what ye would.
For they never consent that sin is good nor hate y^ law nor cease to fight
against the flesh, but as soon as they be fallen, rise and fight a fresh. And
that the Church is some time taken for the common rascal of all that believe,
whether with the mouth only and carnally with out spirit neither loving the
law in The carnal church sins.
their hearts, nor feelyng the mercy that is in Christ, but either run all
together at riot or keep the law with cautels and expositions of their own
faynyng and yet not of love but for fear of hell, as the thieves do for fear
of the galowes, and make recompense to God for their sins with holy deeds.

He also will not understand, that Two manner faithes.
there be two manner faythes: one, that is the faith of the elect, which purges
them of all their sins for ever. As ye see John. xv. ye be clean says
Christ, John. 15.
by the reason of the word: that is, thorough beleuyng Christ's doctrine. And
John. i. he gave them power to be the sons of God, through beleuyng in his
name. And John. iij. he that believes the son has everlasting life, and a
thousand like textes.

And an other of them that be called The ^aith of them that be called* but not
elect.
and never elect. As the faith of Judas, of Simon Magus, of the devil, and of
the Pope. In whose hearts the law of God is not written, as it appears by
their works. And therefore when they believe many things of Christ, yet when
they come unto the salvation that is in his blood, they be but Jews and Turks
and forsake Christ and run unto the justifying of ceremonies with the Jews
and Turks. And therefore they remain ever in sin within in their hearts.

Where the elect having the law written in their breasts and leuyng it in their
spirits, sin there never, but without in the flesh. Against which sin
they fight continually and minishe it daily with the help of the spirit,
thorough prayer, fasting and serving their neighbors louyngly with all manner
service, out of the law that is written in their hearts. And their hope of
forgiveness is in Christ only, through his blood and not in ceremonies.

The v. Chapter.
ANd unto his v. Chapter I answer, by the Pope the scripture The Pope hides
the scripture.
is hid and brought into ignorance, and the true sense corrupt. And by the^
that ye call heretics we know the scripture and the true sense thereof. And I
say, that the Pope keeps the scripture as did ye Phariseis, to make
marchaundise of it. And again, that the heretics become out of you, as out
of the Scribes and Phariseis came the Apostles and Christ himself and John
Baptist, and that they be plucked out of you and graffed in Christ and built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.

And in the end, when he says that The heretics be fallen out of the mist.
the heretics be fallen out of Christ's mystical body, which is the Pope and
his. I answer that ye be a mystical body, and walk in the mist and will not
come at the light, and the heretics be departed out of your mist, and walk in
the clear light of Gods word.

The vj. Chapter.
IN the vj. he says that the heretics be all naught, for they all periure and
abjure. He yet says untrue. Many abide unto the death. Many for their Why many
^all.
weakness are kept out of your hands. Many for their over much boldness in
their own strength be delivered into your hands and fall in the flesh, their
hearts abiding still in the truth, as Peter and thousands did, and after
repent and be no less Christen the^ before, though ye have them in derision
unto your own damnation. And many because they come to Christ for fleshly
liberty and not for love of the truth, fall as it becomes them under your
hands: as Judas and Balam, which at the beginning take Christ's part, but
afterward when they find either loss or no vauntage, they get them unto the
contrary part, and are by profession the most cruel enemies, and subtellest
persecuters of the truth. Look Master More and read and mark well.

The vij. Chapter.
IN the vij. he says, that he has holy Saints and holy counsels on his side.
Name the Saints and prove it. Name the counselles and the holy Prelates
Councels.
thereof. Thou shall show me none other Popes or Cardinals, then such as we
have now, that will obey neither God nor man, or any law made by God or man:
but compel all men to follow them, strengthening their kingdom with the
multitude of all misdoers.

He says also that good and bad worship Saints, the good well and the bad
evil How comes it then that ye show not the difference, and teach to do it
well? I see but one fashion among all the popish.

And finally he says, he is not boun^ to answer unto the reasons and
scriptures that are laid against them. It is enough to prove their part, that
it is a
common custom, and that such a multitude do it, and so by his doctrine the
Turks are in the right way.

The viij. Chapter.
IN the viij. he says, the Saints be Saints.
more charitable now then when they lived. I answer, Abraham was while he
lived as charitable as the best. And yet dead, he answered him that prayed to
him, they have Moses and y^ Prophets, let them hear them. And so Luke. 1^
have we, not Moses and the prophets only, but a more clear light, even
Christ and the Apostles, unto which if we harken, we be Saints already.

And to prove that they in heaven be better then we in earth, he alleges a
text of our Savior Luke. vij. that the worst in heaven is better then Ihon
Baptist. Now ye text is, he that is less in the kingdom of God is greater
the^ Luke. 7.
he. We that believe are Gods kingdom. And he that is least (in doing service
unto his brethren) is ever the greatest after the doctrine of Christ. Now
Christ was less then Ihon, and Christ dy^ such service as all the Saints
could not do.
therefore greater then he. And by their own doctrine, there was no Saint in
heaven before the resurrection of Christ, but what care they what they say,
blinded with their own sophistrye.

Moreover cursed is he that trusts in ought save God says the text, and
therefore the Saints would have no man to trust in them while they were alive.
As Paul says 1. Cor. 3. What 1. Cor. 3.
is Paul save your servant to preach Christ. Did Paul dye for you? were ye
baptized in the name of Paul? Did I not mary you to Christ to put your trust
in him? And again, let no man rejoice or trust in man, says he. For all are
youres, whether Paul, or Appollo, or Cephas: whether the world, life, death,
present things, or things to come: all are youres, and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. If my faith be steadfast in the promises that I have in Christ's
blood, I need but to pray my father in Christ's name, and he shall send me a
legion of Angels to help me: so that my faith is Lord over the Angels and over
all creatures to turn them unto my souls health and my fathers honor, and
may be subject unto no creature, but unto Gods word in our Savior Christ We
may not trust to Saints.
only. I may have no trust therefore in the Saints. If ye say, ye put no
trust in them, but only put them in remembrance of their duty, as a man
desires his neighbor to pray for him, remembering him of his duty, and as
when we desire our brethren to help us at our need. That is false, for ye put
trust in all your ceremonies and all your holy deeds, and in whosoever
disguiseth himself and alters his coat from the common fashion, ye and even
in the coats of them that be not yet Saints, after your dortrine.

If a priest said mass in his gown, would ye not rise against him and slay
him, and that for the false faith that ye have in the other garments. For what
honor can those other garments do to God more then his gown or profit unto
your souls* seeing ye understand naught thereby? And thereto in the collectes of
Saints ye say, save me God and give me everlasting life for the merits of
this or that Saint, every man after his fantasy, choosing him one Saint
singularly to be saved Prayer to Saints is a great superstition.
by. With which collectes I pray you show me, how stands the death of Christ?
Paul would say that Christ dyed in vain if that doctrine were true.

And thereto in as much as ye say, the Saints merit or deserve not in heaven,
but in this world only, it is to be feared least their merits be sore
wasted, and the deservings of many all spent through our holy fathers so great
liberality.

Abraham and the Prophets, and y^ Apostles, and many since prayed to no Before
Christ we used not to pray to Saints.
Saints, and yet were holy enough.

And when he says, they could help when they were alive. That was through
their faith in believing the promise. For they had promises that they should do
such miracles to stablish their doctrine, and to provoke unto Christ, and not
unto them selves.

And when he proves that ye Saints be in heaven in glory with Christ already,
saying: if God be their God they be in heaven, for he is not the God of the
dead. There he steals away Christ's argument wherewyth he proves the M. More
destroys the resurrection.
resurrection, that Abraham and all Saints should rise again, and not that
their souls were in heaven, which doctrine was not yet in the world. And with
that doctrine he takes away the resurrection quite, and makes Christ's
argument of none effect. For when Christ alleges the Scripture that God is
Abraham's God, and adds to, that God is not God of the dead but of the living,
and so proves that Abraham must rise again: I deny Math. 2^.
Christ's argument and say with M. More, that Abraham is yet alive, not because
of the resurrection, but because his soul is in heaven. And in like manner
Paul's argument unto the Corrinthians is naught worth. For when 1. Cor. 15.
he says, if there be no resurrection, we be of all wretches the miserablest.
Here we have no pleasure, but sorrow, care, and oppression. And therefore if we
rise not again, all our suffering is in vain. Nay Paul, thou art unlearned*
go to Master More and learn a new way. We be not most miserable, though we
rise not again, for our souls go to heaven as soon as we be dead, and are
there in as great joy as Christ that is rise^ again. And I marvel that Paul
had not comforted the Thessalonians with that doctrine, if he had wist it, that
the souls of their 1. These. 4.
dead had been in joy, as he did with the resurrection, that their dead should
rise again. If the souls be in heaven in as great glory as the angels after
your doctrine, show me what cause should be of the resurrection.

And when he says, Whether the Saints do it them selves, or by intercession
made to God, it makes no matter, so we be help, it appears by his doctrine,
that all is good that helps, though a man pray unto the devil, by whom many
be help. Now in Christ we have promises of all manner help and The more trust
we have in Saints, the less we have in Christ.
not in them. Where then is our faith to be help by Christ when we hope to be
help by the merits of Saints? So it appears that the more trust we have in
Saints, the less we have in Christ.

And when he brings in a similitude that we pray Physicians, though God can
Physicians
help us, and therefore we must pray to Saints. It is not like, for they have
natural remedies for us which we must use and not tempt God. But the Saints
have no natural remedies nor promise of supernatural. And therefore it can be
but a false superstitious faith. And where no natural remedy is there god has
promised to help the^ that believe in him,

And moreover when I pray a Physician or Surgion and trust to be help by them,
I dishonor God, except I first pray to God and believe that he will work with
their doctrine and medicines and so receive mine health of the hand of God. And
even so when I pray to man, to help me at mine need, I sin except I
complain first to God We must first call upon God, and then send for the
physician.
and show him my need and desire him to move one or an other to help me, and
then when I am help, thank him and receive it of his hand, in as much as he
moved the heart of him that help me and gave him wherewith, and a commandment
to do it. M. More, Christ is not dishonored because that they which here
preach him truly, shall sit and judge with him. Tyndale. That to be true ye
Scripture testifies, but what is that to your purpose that they which be dead
can hear us and help us? How beit, if M. More should describe us those
sects, I am sure he would paint them after the fashion of my Lord Cardinals
holy chair, as he does God after the similitude of worldly tyraunts and not
according to his own word. For they that be worldly and fleshly minded The
fleshly minded cannot judge the things that be of God.
can but fleshly imagine of God all together like unto the similitude of
worldely things.

M. More. The Apostles and Saints were prayed so when they were alive and God
not dishonored. Tynd. What helps that your carnal purpose. I have answered
you unto that and many things ^o in the obedience and other places against
which ye reply not, but keep your tune and unto all thing sing kokow, kokow,
we be the Church and can not err. The Apostles had Gods word for all that they
did and ye none. 1. Cor. 3.
And yet many dishonored God and Christ for their false trust and confidence
which they had in ye Apostles as thou may see by Paul to the Corinthians.

Then he breaks forth into open blasphemy and says that it behooves More
drives from God.
us to pray unto Saints and that God will else not hear us, for our
presumptuous malapertenesse. So it is now presumptuous malapertenesse to trust
in Gods word and to believe that God is true. Paul teaches us to be bold Heb.
4.
to go unto God and shows us good cause in Christ, why we so may and that
God would so have us. Neither is there any cause to keep us back, save that we
love him not nor trust him. If a man say, our sin should keep us back. I
say it we repent and believe in Christ, Christ has taken them away and
therefore, through him we may be bold. And Christ said at his last Supper John.
xvj. I say not that I will John. 1^.
pray for you unto my father, for my father loves you. As who should say, be
not afraid nor stand without the doors as a dastard: but be bold and go into
my father your selves in my name, and show your complayntes, for he now loves
you, because ye love my doctrine. And Paul says Ephe. ij. we have all an open
Ephesians. 2.
way in through him, and are now no more forenners or strangers but of ye
household of God. Of God therefore we be bold as of a most loving and merciful
We may be bold to ^^sort to god for he ^leth us so to do.
father, above all the mercy of fathers. And of our Savior Jesus we be bold,
as of a thing that is our own and more our own then our own skins, and a
thing that is so soft and gentle, that lade we him never so much with our
sins, he can not be angry nor cast them from of his back, so we repent and
will amend. But M. More has an other doctrine to drive us from God and to
make us tremble and be afferde of him.

He likeneth God to worldly tyrauntes, at whom no man may come, save a few
flatterers which minister unto them all vol^ptuousnesse and serve their lu^^es
at all points which flatterers must first be corrupt with gifts, yer a man
may come at the king. The^ he says, a man may pray to every dead M. More is
against the Popes profit.
man. That me thinks should be against the Popes doctrine and profit also.
For he will have no man prayed to until he have ca^uesed him, I would say,
canonised him, and till God or at the le^t way the devil have showed miracles
for him.

Then he brings how one that was dead and in the invisible purgatory help
Purgatory*
an other that was alive and in the visible Purgatory. This is a strange case,
that a man there may help an other and not him self. And a more strange case
that God hears a man here for him self, being in his own Purgatory and
helps (...) purgatory visible, and a purgatory in^^sible.
him clean out, or caseth him if it be to sore. But and he be in the Popes
Purgatory God will not hear him for him self, and that because the Pope might
have somewhat to deliver him. And the straungest case of a^ is that the Pope is
almighty there and God can do there naught at all as the Pope can not here in
this Purgatory. But because this is not Gods word nor like Gods doctrine, I
think it no damnable sin to believe it Poetry.

Then how ye may pray for them and to them, till they be canonised: and when
Canonis^
they be canonised, but to them only, for then ye be sure that they be in
heaven. By what token? I may be as sure by ye canonising, as I am that all the
Bishops How you may know who be Saints in heaven.
which the Pope confirms, be holy men, and all the Doctors that he makes
well learned, and that all the Priests which he annoynteth have the holy ghost.
If ye say, because of the miracles, then do men wrong to pray King Henry of
Windsore.
for king Henry of Windsore at Cambridge and Eton. For he, as men say does
miracles. And also if the miracles certify us, what needs to buy the Popes
canonisyng?

The ix. Chapter.
IN the ix. he puts no ieopardy to A strange doctrine to pray to him for
help that is dead and damned,
pray to him that, is damned and to stick up a candle to him, nor I trow unto
the devil thereto, if he might have a vauntage by him.

Then he makes no ieopardy to do and believe what soever an open multitude
called Gods Church does and believes. For God will have an open Church that can
not err. For says he, when the Israelites fell to Idolatry, the true church
remained in Jerusalem among the Jews. First I say, if a man had no better
understanding then M. Mores doctrine, he could not know whether were yt true
Church, the Jews or the Israelites. For the Israelites were in number v. The
Israelites were ^o in number the^ the Jews.
times more then the Jews and worshypped God, though as present in the Image of
a Calfe, as yt Jews for the most part, present in the Arcke of testimony. And
secondarely he says false. For the Jews were fallen into open Idolatry a
thousand times worse the^ the Israelites, even in their very temple, as it
appears by open stories and by the Prophets: so that for their open
Idolatry, which they would for no The Jews committed Idolatry.
preaching of the Prophets amend, their Priests thereto resistyng the
Prophets and encoragyng the people in their wickedness, God sent them captive
out of the land. Yea and the people erred in following the Scribes and Phariseis
and the open multitude called Gods Church, at yt coming of Christ, as it is to
see in the Gospel, contrary unto M. Mores deceitful Poetry. And again, God
reserved him a little flock ever in Israel and had ever Prophets God ever
reserueth a little flock.
there, some time openly and some time in persecution, that every man must hide
him self and keep his faith secret: and even in the houses of the evil
kings both of Iewry and also of Israel he had good people, and that among the
high officers, but secretly, as Nicodemus among the Phariseis. So that the
very Church was every where ofttymes in captivity and persecution under their
brethren, as we be under ours in the kingdom of the Pope.

Then he puts no ieopardy to worshpp an unconsecrated host. But with More
fears not to worship an vnco^secrated hos^e.
what worship men should woorshyp the consecrated does he not teach, neither
the use of that Sacrament or any other, nor how ought may be worshipped but
teaches only that all things may be worshypped, and shows not the right
worship from the false.

Then he notes Paul. 1. Cor. 1. how he exhorts us to agree only, but not 1.
Cor. 1.
on the truth or on the good, but only to agree a great multitude together. O
this We must first know the true way and then agree in the same.
deep blindness. Did not Paul first teach them the true way? And did he not
instruct them a new in the true way and in the said Epistle rebuke the false
confidence that they had in men, the cause of all their dissension and all
errors that were among them?

Then he says, the Jews had Saints in honor, as the Patriarchs and
Prophets. We teach to dishonor none: But the Jews prayed to none.

More. Christ rebuked not the Phariseis for garnishyng the sepulchers of the
Prophets but for that they followed the conditions of the^ that slew them.
Tyndale. Christ rebuked the false trust the Jews had in their will works.
Yes and for their false trust in such works as we do you. And ye Sir think
that ye deserve heaven in worshyppyng the Saints bones, and be as ready to
slay them that believe, teach and live as the Saints did, as your fathers were
to slay the^: besides that ye worship Saints that followed Christ after the
example of your holy Cardinal, of whom I doubt not but that ye will make a God
in process of time also.

Then repeateth he for forgettyng, how Eliseus bones raised up a dead body That
was to confirm his preaching only. For the Israelites, as wicked as they
were, neither prayed to him, The miracles done by the prophets and Apostles.
was to confirm their doctrine.
neither kissed his bones, nor offered nor sticked up candels before him.
Which thing if they had done in the kyngdo^e of y^ Jews, I doubt not but that
some good king would have burnt his bones to ashes, as well as the brazen
Serpent, that was as great a relic as dead bones. And Christ showed miracles
at the findyng of the cross. That was to stablish the faith of Christ's death
and that it should be a memory of his death, and not that we should trust in the
wood as we do. For which false abuse, yt whole land where Christ did his
miracles, is destroyed.

Then he alleges the woman that was healed, through touching of Christ's
Christ made the woman whole and not his coat.
coat, because we should worship it. When Christ said her faith has made
her whole, not in the coat, but in Christ.

And the miracle was showed, to provoke to the worshyppyng of the preaching and
not of the coat. Though to keep the coat reverently in the memorial of the
deed, to provoke unto the faith of Christ were not evil of it self. Miracles
were done for the confirmation of doctrine.
And Paul by your doctrine, sent his napkin to heal yt sick, that me^ should
shrine his sneueled napkin, and not to believe his preaching.

The x. Chapter.
THe x. chapter of Saint Walary is meet for the auctor, and his worshipful
doctrine. A filthy chapter.


The xi. Chapter.
IN the xi. he iuggleth with this mystical term Latria. I answer God is no
vain name, but signifies one that is almighty, all merciful, all true Latri^.
and good, which he that believes will go to God, to his promises and
Testament, and not follow his own imaginations, as M. Mores doctrine teaches.

He says, that bodily service is not Latria. No but bodily service done and
referred unto him* which is a spirit, is Idololatria.

He trusts, that men know the Image from the Saint. I ask M. More why God
did hide Moses body and diverse Moses.
other. The Jews would have known yt Moses had not been God, Moses* bones.
and that Moses bones had not been Moses. And they knew that the brase^ serpent
was not God, and that yt golden The brazen Serpent.
calves were not God, and that wod and stone were not God. But Sir there is
ever a false imagination by. The world because they can not worship God in the
spirit, to repent of evil and to love the law, and to believe that he will
help at al need, therefore run they unto their own imaginations, and think
that God for such service as they do to Images, will fulfill their worldly
desires: for godly ca^ they naught desire. Now God is a spirit and will be
worshipped in his word God is a spirit and will be worshipped spiritually.
only which is spiritual, and will have no bodily service. And the ceremonies
of the old law he set up, to signify his word only, and to keep the people
in mind of his testament. So that he which observes any ceremony of any other
purpose is an Idolater, that is, an Image seruer.

And when he says, if men ask women whether it were our Lady of Walsingam or
Ipswich that was saluted of Gabriel, or that stood by Christ when he hung on
the cross, they will say neither another. Then I ask him what means it that
they say, our Lady of Walsingam pray for me, our Lady of Ipswich The Idolatrou^
person worshippeth the Image for yt Saint.
pray for me, our Lady of Wilsdo^ pray for me, in so much y^ some which reckon
themselves no small fools, make them roules of half an hour long, to pray
after that manner. And they that so pray, thou may ^e sure, mean our Lady
that stood by the cross, and her that was saluted thereto.

Then he rehearses many abuses, and how that women sing songs of ribaudry
Procession^, though they be abused may not be put down.
in processions in cathedral churches, unto which abhominatio^s yet our holy
church that cannot err, consent with full delectatio^. For on the one side
they will not amend the abuse. And on the other side they have hired M. More
to prove with his sophistry that ye things ought not to be put down.

Then he brings in how the wild Wild Irishe. Welsh me^.
Irish and the Welsh pray, when they go to steal. And asks whether, because
they abuse prayer, we should put all praying down. Nay M. More, it is not
like. Many things are altered for the abuses sake.
Prayer is Gods commandment, and where faith is, there must prayer needs be
and cannot be away. How be it, things that are but men's traditions and all
indifferent things which we may be as well without as with, may well be put
down for their dishonouring of God, through y^ abuse. We have turned kissing in
the Church into the Pax. We have put down watching all night in the church on
saints eues, for the abuse. And Ezechias brake the Ezech^as.
brazen serpent 4. King. 18. for the abuse. And even so, such processions and
the multitude of ceremonies, and of holidays to, might as well be put down.
And the ceremonies that be left would have their significations put to them,
and the people should be taught them. And on the Sondayes Gods word would be
truly preached. Which if his holy church would do, neither the The true
preaching of Gods word remoueth theft and an other wickedness
Irishe nor yet the Welshe would so pray. By which praying and other like
blyndnesse M. More may see, that buzsing in Latin on the holy days helps
not the hearts of the people. And I wonder that M. More can laugh at it and not
rather weep for compassion, to see the souls for which Christ shed his blood
to perish. And yet I believe that your holy Church will not refuse at Easter to
receive y^ tithes of all that such blind people rob, as well as they
dispense with all false gotten good that is brought them, and will lay the
ensample of Abraham and Melchisedeck for them.

The xii. Chapter.
IN the xij. he alleges that S. Hierome and Augustine prayed to Saints, and
concludes, that if any sect be one better then an other they be the best. I
answer, though he could prove that they prayed to Saints, yet could he not
prove himself thereby of the best sect nor that it were good therefore to pray
to Saints. For first the Apostles, Patriarchs and Prophets were sure to be
followed, which prayed to none.
And again, a good man might err in many things and not be damned, so that
his error were not directly agayust A good man may err and yet not be dampened.
the promises that are in Christ's blood, neither that he held them
maliciously. As if I believed that the souls were in heaven immediately, and
that they prayed for us, as we do one for an other, and did believe that they
heard all that we spoke or thought, and upon that prayed to some Saint, to pray
for me, to put him in remembrance only, as I pray my neighbor, and without
other trust or confidence, and though all be false, yet should I not be damned
so long as I had no obstinacy therein, for the faith that I have in Christ's
blood should swalow up that error, till I were better taught, but M. More
should have alleged the places where they prayed unto saints.

And then he alleges against him self, that the miracles were wrought by
God, to confirm his doctrine and to testify that the preacher there was a
true messenger. But the miracles that confirm praying to Saints, do not
confirm. The miracles of Saints confirm man's imaginations.
Gods doctrine. But man's imaginations. For there was never man yet that came
forth and said, lo, the s^ul^s of the Saints that be dead be in heaven in joy
with Christ, and God will that ye pray unto them. In token whereof I do this or
that miracle.

And when he triumphs a little after, as though all were won saying, if our
old holy doctors were false and their doctrine untrue and their miracles
feigned, let them come forth and do miracles themselves and prove ours feigned.
Sir, ye have no doctors that did miracles to stablishe your worshippyng There
were no doctors neither Apostles that did miracles to establishe the
worshipping of ^amages.
of Images and so forth. Your doctrine is but the opinion of faythlesse people,
which to confirm yt devil has wrought much subtlety. And as for the miracles
done at Saints graves and at the presence of relics, as long as true miracles
endured, and until the scripture was antentickly received, were done to
confirm the preaching yt such Saints had preached while they were alive. And
thereto the miracles which Witches do, we confound not with other miracles, but
with scripture we Witches.
prove them not of God, but of the devil, to stablishe a false faith, and to
lead from God, as your doctrine does. And likewise where we can confound your
where true doctrine is set forth* there needs no miracle.
false doctrine with aute^ticke and manifest scripture, there need we to do no
miracle. We bring Gods testament confirmed with miracles for all that we do,
and ye ought to require no more of us.

And in like manner do ye first give
us autenticke scripture for your doctrine. If ye have no scripture, come Let
y^ Papists for lack of scriptures come torch and do miracles.
forth and preach your doctrine, and confirm it with a miracle. And then if we
bring not autenticke scripture against you or confound your miracle with a
greater, as Moses did the sorcerers of Egypt, we will believe you.

And when he speaks of trial of Gods wor^ to y^ touchstone to tri^ miracles.
miracles, what do ye to try your miracles, whether they be true or feigned.
And besides that, Gods word which should be the trial ye refuse and do all
that ye can to falsify it.

And when he speaks of sects of heretics, I answer, that they which ye
call heretics, believe all in one Christ, as the scripture teaches, and ye in
all save Christ. And in your false The ^ectes in y^ popists church are almost
innumerable.
doctrine of your own fayning without scripture, ye have as many sundry sects
as all Monks and Friars and students in divinity in all your universities.
For first yer ye come to divinity, ye be all taught to deny the salvation that
is in Christ. And none of you teaches an another so much as the articles of
your faith. But follow almost every man a sundry doctor, and in ye scripture
his owue brain, framyng it ever after the false opinions which he has
professed yer he come at it.

And when he says that God would soon utter feigned miracles. I answer,
Mahomets doctrine has prevailed these viij. hundred years
God has had at all times one or another to improve yours with Gods word.
And I ask whether Mahometes feigned miracles have not prevailed viij. hundred
years. And your abominable deeds worse then the Turks testify that ye love
the truth less then they. And unto them that The cause of false miracles.
love not the truth has God promised by the mouth of Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. to
send them abundance and strength of false miracles, to stablishe them in lies
and to deceive them and lead the^ out of the way, so that they cannot but
perish for their unkindness, that they loved not the truth to live thereafter,
and to honor God in their members.

And when he says, the heretics have Where the Scripture is, there needs no
miracles.
no miracles. I answer, they need not, so long as they have autentickescripture.

And when he says, God shows no miracles for the doctoures of the
heretics. No more he needs not, for all they preach is the scripture
confirmed with miracles, and received many hundred years ago. And therefore
God needs not to show miracles for The preachers of the word of God need no
miracles.
them while they live to strength their preaching. And to show miracles for
them when they be dead, to move the people to pray to them and to put their
trust in them as ye do in yours, were to make them Idols and not Saints.

And when he speaks of miracles done in their churches in time of
persecution. I answer, those were not the miracles of your Church but of them
that believed the Scripture and suffered for it, as yt heretics do now. For ye
had never persecution for your false False docctrine was never persecuted.
doctrine, which ye have brought in besides the Scripture, nor any that dyed
for it: But ye persecute and ^lea, whos^ ever with Gods word does rebuke it.
And as for your own miracles of which ye make your boast, ye have feigned them
so grossly throughout al your The Papists are ashamed of their Lege^d of lies.
Legendes of Saints, that ye be now ashamed of them and would feign be rid of
the^ if ye wist how with honesty, and so would ye of a thousand things which
ye have feigned. And the cause why heretics feign no miracles as ye do, is
that they walk purely and entend no falsehead.

And why the devil does none for them, is that they cleave fast to Gods word
which the devil hates and can do no miracles to further it, But to hinder
it, as he does with you. Read the The devil has helped Popes to their
dignities.
stories of your Popes and Cardinals, and see whether the devil has not help
them unto their high dignities. And look whether your holy Bishops come any
otherwise unto their promotions, then by serving the devil, in setting all
Christendom at variaunce, in sheddyng blood, in bringyng the common wealth to
tyranny and in teaching Christen Princes to ^ule more cruelly then did ever any
heathen, contrary unto the doctrine of Christ.

And as for the Turks and Sarasenes that ye speak of, I answer that they
were Christian once, at the lest way for the most part. And because they had no
love unto the truth to live their after The cause why the Turks and Jews ca^
not come to to the truth
as ye have not, God did send them false miracles to carry them out of the right
way as ye be. And as for the Jews, why they hyde out, is only because they
have set up their own righteousness, as ye have, and therefore can not admit
the righteousness that is in Christ's blood, as ye can not, and as ye have
forsworn it.

And when he says, in that they have miracles and the heretics none, it is a
Popish doctrine needs miracles but Christ's doctrine needs not now of
miracles, for it was confirmed by Christ with miracles.
sure sign that they be the true Church and the heretics not. Had ye Gods
word with your miracles and the heretics doctrine were without, then it were
true. But now because ye have miracles without Gods word, to confirm your
false imaginatio^s, and they which ye call heretics have Gods word confirmed
with miracles, five hundred years together, it is a sure sign that they be
the true church and ye not, in as much also as Christ says, that y^ deceauers
shall come with miracles: ye and in his name thereto, as ye do. For when christ
says there shall come in my name yt shall say he him self is Christ, who is
Math. 24.
that save your Pope, that will be Christ's Vicare and yet makes men to believe
The Pope comes (...) Christ's name with false miracles.
in him self, in his Bulls and Calves skins and in what soever he lists.
And who be those false anointed that shall come with miracles to deceive the
elect if it were possible, save your Pope with his gresiamus?

And when he repeteth his miracles, to prove that the old holy Doctors were
good men in the right belefe. I answer again, that the Doctors which
planted Gods word watered it with miracles, while they were alive, And when
they were dead God showed The preachers of gods word confirmed the same with
miracles while they were alive.
miracles at their graves, to confirm the same, as of Heliseus. And that
continued till the Scripture was full received and autenticke. But ye can not
show, nor shall any Doctor which being alive preached your false doctrine
confirmyng it with miracles, as God does his Scripture.

Then says he, God had in the old Testament good me^ full of miracles, whose
living a man might be bold to follow, and whose, doctrine a man might believe by
reason of their miracles, and then iuggleth God suffe^eth such as have no love
to his truth, to be deceived with lying miracles.
saying: if God should not so now in the new Testament have Doctors with
miracles to confirm their doctrine and livings, but contrariwise should bring
to pass or suffer to be brought to pass with false miracles, that his church
should take hypocrites for Saints, which exposided the Scripture falsely, then
should he deceive his Church and not have his spirit present in his Church,
to teach them all truth, as he promised them. I answer, God suffers not his
Church Why the Pope tell.
to be deceived: But he suffers the popes Church: because they have no love
unto the truth to live after the laws of God, but consent unto all iniquity,
as he suffered the Church of Mahomet. Moreover y^ gift of miracles was not all
way among the preachers in the old Testament. For John Baptist did In the
Popish church all miracles are wrought by dead Saints.
no miracle at all. The miracles were ceased longyer Christ. And as for you in
the Popes kingdom had never man that either confirmed Gods doctrine, or your
own with miracles. All your Saints be first Saints when they be dead and then
do first miracles, to confirm tithes and offeringes and the Poetry which ye
have feigned, and not true doctrine. For to confirm what preaching S. Thomas of
Canterbury.
does S. Thomas of Canterbury miracles? He preached never nor lived any other
life then as our Cardinal, and for his mischief dyed a mischievous death. And
of our Cardinal, if we be not diligent, they will make a Saint also and make a
greater relic of his show then of the others. Thomas de Aquino


And of your dead Saints let us take on^ for an example. Thomas de Aquino is a
Saint full of miracles, as Friars tell. And his doctrine was, that our Lady was
borne in original sin. Dunce.
And Dunce doing no miracle at all, because I suppose no man wotteth where he
lies, improueth that with his sophistry and affirms the contrary. And of
the contrary has the Pope, for the devotion of that the gray Friars gave him,
ye may well think, made an Article of the faith.


And finally as for the miracles, they are to make a man astonished and to wonder
Miracles.
and to draw him to hear the word earnestly, rather then to write it in his
heart. For whosoever has no other felyng of the law of God that it is good,
then because of miracles, the sa^e shall believe in Christ, as did Simon Magus
and Judas: and as they that came out of Egypt with Moses, and fell away Our
faith may not be grounded only upon miracles, but upon the word of God.
at every temptation, and shall have good works like unto our Popes, bishops
and Cardinals. And therefore when the Scripture is fully received, there is no
need of miracles. In so much that they which will not believe Moses and the
Prophets when the Scripture is received, the same will be no true beleuers by
the reason of miracles, though one arose from death to life to preach unto them
by the testimony of Christ.

And again, how does S. Hierome, Augustine, Bid and many other old Doctors
that were before the Pope was cropped up into ye consciences of me^ and had sent
forth his damnable sects, to preach him under yt name of Christ, as Christ
prophesied it should be, expound this text, thou art Peter and upon this
rock I will build my Math. 1^.
Church, and this text, Peter feed my John. 21.
sheep, and all power is given me in heaven and in earth, and innumerable such
textes clean contrary unto all those new old holy doctors that have made the
Pope a God? They knew of no power that man should have in the kingdom of
Christ, but to preach Christ truly. They knew of no power The Apostles of
Christ knew no such authority as the Pope now usurps.
that the Pope should have to send to Purgatory or to deliver thence, neither
of any Pardons nor of any such confession as they preach and teach, neither
were many that are articles with you, Articles of their faith. They all
preached forgiveness of sins thorough repentance toward the law and faith
in our Savior Christ, as all the Scripture plainly does and can no otherwise
be taken, and as all the hearts of as many as love the law of God, do feel, as
surely as the finger feels the fire hoate.

An answer unto Master Mores third book.
IN his third book he proceeds forth as before to prove that the opinions
which the Popish teach without Scripture are of equal authority with the
Scripture. He asks what if there had never been Scripture written? I
answer, What i^ there had been no scripture.
God cares for his elect and therefore has provided them of Scripture, to try
all things and to defend them from all false Prophets. And I say moreover
that if there had been no scripture written, that God for his mercy and fatherly
love and care toward his elect must have provided, that there should never have
been heresies or against all times when sects should arise, have styred up
preachers to confound the he resies with miracles. Take this example, the
Greeks have the Scripture and Greeks.
serve God therein much more diligently the^ we. Now let us give that there were
no Scripture, but that we received all our faith by ye authority of our
elders, and the Greeks by ye authority of God to(...)^de heres^ caused the
scriptures to be written*
their elders. When I shall dispute with a Greek about the articles of the
faith which my elders taught me and his elders deny, as eareconfession, the
holy pardons of the Pope and all his power that he has above other Bishops and
many other things beside the Scripture which we hold for articles of our faith
and they deny. If there be no other proof of either part, then to say, my
elders which ca^ not err so affirm, and that he should answer, his Elders
which can not not err so deny, what reason is it, that I should leave the
authority of my elders and go and believe his, or that he should leave the
authority of his elders and come and believe mine? none at all verily. But the
one party must show a miracle or else we must refer our causes unto
aute^ticke scripture received in old time, and confirmed with miracles, and
therewith try the controversy of our Elders.

And when he asks, whether there Noe.
were no true faith from Adam to Noe. I answer, that god partly wrote their
faith in their sacrifices and partly the Patriarchs were full of miracles as ye
may see in the Bible.

And when More to utter his darcknes and blind ignorance says, that they
which were overwhelmed with No yes flood, had a good faith, and brings for
him Nicolaus de Lira. I answer, that Nicolaus de Lira delirat. For it is What
faith ^th.
impossible to have a faith to be saved by except a man consent unto Gods law
with all his heart and all his soul, that it is righteous, holy, good, and to
be kept of all men, and thereuppon repent that he has broken it, and sorrow
that his flesh moves unto the contrary, and then come and believe that god for
his mercy will forgive him all that he has done against the law, and will
help him to tame his flesh, and suffer his weakness in the mean season, till
Where true faith is, there is repentance and ame^dment of (...).
he be waxed stronger: which faith if they that perished in Noyes flood had
had, they could not but have mended their liuinges, and had not hardened their
hearts through unbelief, and provoked the wrath of God, and waxed worse and
worse an hundred and twenty years which God gave the^ to repent, until God
could no longer suffer the^, but washed their filthiness away with ye flood (as
he does ye Popes shameful
abhominacions with like invndacions of water) and destroyed the^ utterly.

And when he asks whether Abraham believed no more the^ is written of him. I
ask him how he will prove that there Abraham.
was no writing in Abraham's time, and that Abraham wrote not. And again, as for
Abraham's person, he received his faith of God, which to confirm unto other,
miracles were showed daily.

And when he fayneth forth, that The elder^ did err.
they believed only because they knew their elders could not err. How could
they know that without miracles or writing confirmed with miracles, more the^
the Turk knows that his elders so many hundred years in so great a
multitude can not err and teach false doctr^ne to damn the beleuers. And ye
contrary does M. More see in all ye Bible, how after all was received in The
elders in ye time of the Jews did err.
scripture confirmed with miracles, and though miracles ceased not, but were
showed daily, yet ye elders erred and fell to idolatry, an hundred for one yt
bode in the right way, and led the younger in to error with them so sore, that
God to save the younger, was feign to destroy the elders and to begin his
testament a fresh with the new generation.

He sees also that ye most part were always Idolaters for all the scripture The
Scribes, Phariseis and Elders did err.
and true miracles thereto, and believed the false miracles of the devil,
because his doctrine was more agreeable unto their carnal understanding, then
the doctrine of Gods spirit, as it now goes with the Pope: did not y^ Scribes,
Phariseis, and Priests which were the elders err?

And when he asks, who taught the church to know the true scripture from
false books. I answer, true miracles The scripture was aucthorised by true
miracles.
that confounded the false, gave authority unto the true scripture. And thereby
have we ever since judged all other books and doctrine.

And by that we know that your legendes False books set forth by the Papists.
be corrupt with lies. As Erasmus has improued many false books which ye have
feigned and put forth in the name of S. Hierom, Augustine, Ciprian, Erasmus.
Dionise and of other, partly with autenticke stories, and partly by ye style
and latin and like evident tokens.

And when M. More ^ayth (unto the^ that believe naught but ye scripture) he will
prove with ye scripture, that we be bound to believe the church in things,
wherefore they have no scripture. Because God has promised in the scripture,
that the holy ghost shall teach his church all truth. Nay, that text will not
prove it. For the first Church taught naught but they confirmed it with
miracles which could not be done but of God, till the scripture was
autentickly received. And the Church following The true church teaches nothing
but that which the scripture proves and mainteineth.
teaches naught that they will have believed as an article of the faith, but
that which the scripture proves and mainteineth. As S. Augustine protests of
his works that men should compare them unto the scripture, and thereby judge
them and cast away whatsoever the scripture did not allow. And therefore they
that will be believed without scripture are false hypocrites and not Christ's
church. For though I know that that messenger which Christ sends can not lie,
yet in a co^^any where many liers be, I can not know which is he without a
token of scripture or of miracle.

And when he says, the scripture it self makes us not to believe the
scripture, but the church teaches us to know the scripture: for a man might
read it and not believe it. And so I say, that a man might hear you preach and
yet believe The Pope hides the scripture.
you not also. And I say thereto, that your church teaches nor to know the
Scripture, but hides it in the Latin from the common people. And from The
Papists hide ye scripture.
them that understand latin they hid the true se^^e with a thousand sal^e
gloses.

And I say moreover that the scripture is the cause why men believe the The
scripture is the cause why men believe y^ scripture.
scripture as well as a preacher is the cause why men believe his preaching. For
as he that first told in England that the Rhodes was taken, was the cause why
some believed it, even (...) might writing sent from those parties be the cause
that some men which red it believed it. M. More will say, that letter had his
authority of the man that sent it, and so has the ^cripture her authority of
the church. Nay, the scripture has her authority of him that sent it, that is
to wete of God, which thing the miracles did testify, and not of the man that
brought it. He will say, thou know ye scripture by their showing. I grant
at the beginning I do.

Then will he say, why should ye not believe them, in all their other doctrine
The Papists docctrine is n^^ to be believed wiihou^ scripture.
besides the scripture and in all their expositions of y^ scripture, as well as
ye believe them, when they tell you that such and such books are the scripture.
May they not show you a false book? yes, and therefore at the beginning I
believe all a like. Every lie that they tell out of their own brains we believe
to be scripture, and so should I believe the^ if they showed me a ^alse book,
but when I have read the scripture and find no^ their doctrine there nor depend
thereof, I do not give so great credence unto their other doctrine as unto ye
scripture. Why? For I find mo wi^^esses unto the scripture the^ unto their
other doctrine. I find whole nations and Why the (...) is not to be believed
without scripture, and why he is not the true church.
countries that receive the scripture and refuse their other doctrine and their
expositions in many places. And I find the scripture otherwise expounded of
them of old time the^ they which now will be the church expound it. Whereby
their doctrine is the more suspect. I find mention made of the scripture in
stories, that it was, when I can find no mention or likelihode that their
doctrine was. I find in all ages The doctrine of the Papists has been (...)
resisted by ye scripture.
that men have resisted their doctrine with the scripture and have suffered
death by the hundred thousands in resisting their doctrine. I see their
doctrine brought in and maintained by a contrary way to that by which the
scripture was brought in. I find by the self same scripture, when I look
diligently thereon, that their other doctrine can not stand therewith.

I find in the scripture that they What things (...) find in scripture. Romans
(...).
which have not Christ's spirit to follow the steps of his living pertain
not unto Christ. Romans viij. I find in the scripture, that they which walk in
their carnal birth after the manner of the children of Adam cannot understand
the things of the spirit of God. 1. Cor. 1. Cor. ^.
2. I find in the scripture that they 1. Cor. 2.
which seek glory ca^ not believe Christ. Ioh. 5. I find in ye scripture that
they John. 5.
which submit not themselves to do ye will of God, can not know what doctrine is
of god and what not. Ioh. 7. I find John. 7.
in the scripture, Iere. 31. and Heb. 8. that all the children of God, which
only are the true members of his church have Heb. 8.
every one of them the law of god written in their hearts: so that if there
were no law to compel, they would yet naturally out of their own hearts keep
the law of God: yea and against violence compelling to the contrary. And I see
that they which will be the church (and to prove it has not so great trust in
the scripture as in their sophistry and in the sword which they have set up in
all lands to keep them with violence in the room) are so far of from
having the laws of God written in their hearts, that they neither by Gods law
The Papists will neither by Gods law nor man's refrain from their wicked
living.
nor man's refrain from their open outward wicked living. Look in the
Chronicles what blood it has cofle England to attempt to bring the^ under the
law, yea and see what business ye Realm has had, to keep the Prelates within
the Realm from taking the benefices with them and lying at Rome, and yet
scarsely brought it to pass, for all that the Pope has the stint of every
Byshoppricke and of every great Abbey thereto as often as any is void, yer a new
be admitted to the room. And I see the^ bond unto their own will, and both to
do and to consent unto other to do all that God has forbidden. I see the^ of
all people most vain glorious. I see them walk after their John. 10.
fleshly birth. I see them so far of from the Image of Christ, that not only
they will not dye for their flock after his ensample, but also, yer they would
lose one town, or vilage, any polling or privilege which they have falsely
gotten, bryngyng them selves into good pastures with wiles and shuttyng their
The Papists will lose nothing that belongs to them.
flock without, they would cast away an hundred thousand of the^ in one day
and beggar their Realms, yea and interdite them and bring in strange nations,
though it were the Turk, to co^quere them and slay them up, so much as the
innocent in the cradle. And I see that their other doctrine is for their
va^tage only and that therewith they have gotten all that they have.

And I find in the Scripture that ye Jews before the coming of Christ, knew
that those books were the scripture by the Scribes and ye Phariseis. And yet
as many as believed their other doctrine and many expositions of Christ
delivered the Jews out of error.
the scripture were deceived, as ye see, and how Christ delivered them out of
error. And I see again (which is no small miracle) that the merciful care of
God to keep the Scripture to be a
testimony unto his elect, is so great, that no men be more gelous over the
books, to keep them and show them, and to allege, that they be the Scripture
of God and true, then they which when it is read in their ears have no power
to believe it, as the Jews and the Popish. And therefore because they neither
can believe it false, neither consent None have more care of the scripture, then
those that believe it not.
that it is true as it sounds plainly in their ears in that it is so
contrary unto their fleshly wisdom, from which they can not depart, they seek
a thousand gloses to turn it into an other sense, to make it agree unto their
beastlynesse, and where it will receive no such gloses, their they think that
no man understands it.

Then in the end of the Chapter M. More comes unto his wise conclusion and
proves nothing save shows his ignorance, as in all thing. He says we
believe the doctrine of the Scripture without Scripture, as for an example, the
Popes pardons, because only that the Church so teaches, though no Scripture
confirms it. Why so? because says he the holy ghost by inspiration, if I do
my endeavor and captiuate mine understanding, teaches me to believe the Church
concerning Gods word taught by the Church and graven in men's hearts with out
Scripture, as well as he teaches us to believe words written in the Scripture.
Mark where he is now. Before he says, the Scripture causes us not to believe
the Scripture, for a man may M. More reasons against himself.
read it and believe it not. And much more the preacher makes us not to believe
ye preacher, for a man may hear him and believe him not also. As we see the
Apostles could not cause all men to believe them. For though the Scripture be an
outward instrument and the preacher also to move me^ to believe, yet the chief
and principal cause why a man believes or believes not is within. That is the
spirit of God teaches his children
to believe and the devil blyndeth his children and keeps them in vnbeleffe
and makes them to consent unto lies and think good evil and evil good. As
the Acts of the Apostles say in many Acts. 13.
places there believed as many as were ordained unto everlasting life. And
Christ says John. viij. they that John. 8.
be of God hear Gods word. And unto the wicked Jews he says ye ca^ not
believe because ye be not of God. And in the same place says he, ye be of your
father the devil and his will ye will do, and he bode not in the truth, and
therefore will not suffer his children to consent to the truth. And John in ye
x. says They that preach not Christ truty are murderers.
Christ, all that came before me, be thieves and murderers, but my sheep heard
not their voices. That is, all that preach any salvation save in Christ murder
ye souls. Howbeit Christ's sheep could not consent to their lies, as the rest
ca^ not but believe lies, so that there is ever a remanaunt kept by grace. And
of this I have seen diverse examples. I have known as holy men as might be, as
the world counts holiness, which at the hour of death had no trust in God
at all, but cried cast holy water, light the holy candell, and so forth, sore
lamentyng that they must dye. And I have known other which were despised, as
men that cared not The end of hipocrites.
for their divine service, which at death have falsen so flat upon the blood
of Christ as is possible and have preached unto other mightyly as it had been
an Apostle of our Savior and comforted them with comfort of the life to come
and have dyed so gladly, that they would have received no worlds good, to bide
still in the flesh. And thus is M. More Predestination.
fallen upon predestination and is compelled wish violence of Scripture to
confess that which he hates and studieth to make appear false, to stablish
freewill with all, not so much of ignorance I fear as for lucres sake and to
get honor, promotio^, dignity and money by help of our mitred monsters. Take
example of Balam the false Balam.
Prophet which gave counsel and sought means, through like blind
covetousness, to make the truth and prophecy which God had showed him false.
He had the knowledge of ye truth but with out love thereto and therefore for
vauntage became enemy unto the truth, but what came of him?

But M. More pepereth his conclusion lest men should feel the taste, saying, if
we endeavor our selves and captive our understanding to believe. O how
betleblynd is fleshly reason? the will has none operation at all in the
workyng of faith in my soul, no more then the child has in the begettyng of
his father. For says Paul it is the gift of God and not of us. My wit must
conclude good or bad yer my will can love or hate. My wit must show me a true
Wit must first show a cause, and then will is sturted to work.
cause or an apparent cause why, yer my will have any workyng at all. And of
that peperyng it well appears what the Popes faith is: even a blind
imagination of their natural wit, wrought without the light of the spirit
of God, agreing unto their voluptuous lusts in which their beastly will so
deliteth that he will not let their wits atte^de unto any other learning for
vnquietyng him self and styrring from his pleasure and delectation.

And thus we be as far a sunder as ever we were and his mighty arguments
prove not the value of a poding prick. M. More feels in his heart More
feels.
by inspiration and with his endeueryng him self and captiuatyng his
understanding to believe it, that there is a Purgatory
Purgatory as whot as hell. Wherein if a sily soul were appointed by God, to
lie a thousand years, to purge him with all, the Pope for the value of a
Popish do trine concerning Purgatory
groat shall command him thence full purged in the twinkelyng of an eye, and
by as good reason if her were going thence, keep him there still. He feels by
inspiration and in captiuatyng his wits that the Pope can work wonders with
a Caiues skin, that he can command one to eat f^esh though he be never so
lusty, and that an other eat none on pain of da^natio^, though The pope, how
he can both forgive and receive sin.
he should dye for lack of it: and that he can forgive sin and not the
pain, and as much and as little of the pain or all if he lust, and yet can
neither help him to love the law or to believe or to hate the flesh, seeing he
preaches not. And such things innumerable. M. More feleth true, and therefore
believes that the Pope is the true Church.

And I clean contrary feel that there Tyndall feels Purgatory
is no such worldly and fleshly imagined Purgatory. For I feel that the souls
be purged only by the word of God and doctrine of Christ, as it is written
John. xv. ye be clean through the John. 15.
word, says Christ to his Apostles. And I feel again that he which is clean
through the doctrine, needs not but to wash his feet only, for his head
and hands are clean all ready John. xiij. John. 13.
that is, he must tame his flesh and keep it under for his soul is clean all
ready through the doctrine. I feel also that bodyly pain does but purge the
body Bodyly pain purges the body, and not ye soul,
only: in so much that the pain not only purges not the soul, but makes
it more foul, except that there be kind learning by, to purge the soul: so
that the more a man beats his son, the worse he is, except he teach him
lovingly and show him kindness besides, partly to keep him from desperation
and partly that he fall not into hate of his father and of his commandment
thereto, and think that his father is a tyrant and his law but tyranny.

M. More seleth with his good endeavor and inspiration together, that a man M.
More ^o of an evil opinion.
may have the best faith coupled with the worst life and with consentyng to
sin. And I feel that it is impossible to believe truly except a man repent,
and that it is impossible to trust in y^ mercy y^ is in Christ or to feel it,
but y^ a man must immediately love God and his commandments, and therefore
disagree and disconsent unto the flesh, and be at bate therewith and fight
against it. And I feel that every soul that loves y^ law and hates his
flesh and believes in Christ's blood, has his sins which he committed and
pain which he deserved in haryng the law and consentyng unto his flesh,
forgeuen him, by that faith. And I feel that the frailty Faith in Ch^ (...)
purchases forg^ of sin.
of the flesh against which a beleuyng soul lights to subdue it, is also
forgeuen and not rekened or imputed for sin all the time of our curyng: as a
kind father and mother reken not or impute the imposu^bilitie of their young
children to consent unto their law, and as when the children be of age and
consent, the^ they reken not nor impute the impossibility of the flesh to
follow it immediately, but take al a worth and love them no less, but rather
more tenderly then their old and perfect children that do their
commandments, so long as they go to schole and learn such things as their
fathers and mothers set the^ to.

And I believe that every soul that repe^teth, believes and loves the law, is
thorough that faith a member of Christ's Church and pure without spot or
wrincle, as Paul affirms. Ephe. v. And it is an Article of my beleffe Ephe.
5.
that Christ's elect Church is holy and pure without sin and every member
There is no purgatory for him that dies repent^unt and believes.
of the same, through faith in Christ, and that they be in the full favor of
God. And I feel that the uncleanness of the soul is but the consent unto sin
and unto the flesh. And therefore I feel that every soul that believes and
consents unto the law, and here in this life hates his flesh and the lusts
thereof, and does his best to drive sin out of his flesh, and for hate of the
sin gladly departs from his flesh, when he is dead (and the lusts of the
flesh slain with death) needs not as it were bodily tormenting to be purged
of that whereof he is quit already. And therefore if ought remain, it is out to
be taught and not to be beaten. And I feel that every soul that bears fruit
in Christ shall be purged of the father to bear more fruit day by day, as it is
written Ioh. xv. not in the Popes John. 15.
Purgatory where no man feels it, but here in this life such fruit as is unto
his neighbors profit, so that he which has his hope in Christ purges
himself here, as Christ is pure. 1. Ioh. 1. John. (...).
3. and that ever yet the blood of Jesus only does purge us of all our ^s for
the imperfectnes of our works. And I feel that the forgeuenes of sins is
to remitte mercifully the pain that I have deserved. And I do believe that the
pain that I here suffer in my Pain of sin.
flesh is to keep the body under, and to serve my neighbor, and not to make
satsfaction unto god for the sore sinses.

And therefore when the Pope describes God after his covetous complexion, and
when M. More feleth by inspiration (...) popes (...).
and captiuating his wits unto the Pope, that God forgeueth the everlasting
pain and will yet punish Purgatory pr^ to y^ Pope.
me a thousand years in the Popes purgatory, that leaven sauoreth not in my
mouth. I understand my fathers words as they sound, and after the most
merciful manner and not after the Popes leaven and M. Mores captining his
wits, to believe that every Poets fable is a true story. There is no father
here that punishes his son to purge him, when he is purged already and has
utterly forsaken sin and eu^^l, and has submitted himself unto his fathers
doctrine. For to punish a man that has forsaken sin of his own accord, is
not to purge him, but to satisfy the lust of a tyrant. Neither ought it to be
called Purgatory, but a Iayle oftormenting and a satisfactory. Purgatory to a
tormenting Iayle as y^ Pope makes it.
And when the Pope says it is done to satisfy the righteousness as a judge. I
say we that believe have no judge of him, but a father, neither shall we come
into judgment as Christ has promised us, but are received under grace, mercy,
and forgeuenes. Show the Pope a little money, and God is so Money dispatcheth
Purgatory
merciful that there is no Purgatory. And why is not the fire out as well, if
I offer for me the blood of Christ? If Christ has deserved all for me, who
gave the Pope might to keep part of his deseruinges from me, and to buy and
sell Christ's merits, and to make marchaundise over us with feigned words. And
thus as M. More feleth that y^ Pope is holy church, I feel that he is
Antichrist. And as my feeling can be The Pope is Antichrist.
no proof to him, no more ca^ his with all his captiuating his wits to
believe fantasies be unto me, wherefore if he have no other probation to prove
that the Pope is holy church, then that his heart so agrees unto his learning,
he ought of no right to compel with sword unto his sect. How be it there are
ever two manner people that will cleave unto God a fleshly, and a spiritual.
The spiritual which be of God shall hear Gods word and the children of the
truth shall consent unto the truth. And contrary, the fleshly and children of
The fleshly children do naturally consent unto lies.
falshead and of the devil, whose hearts be full of lies, shall naturally
consent unto lies (as young children though they have eat themselves as good
as dead with fruit, yet will not nor ca^ believe him that tells them that such
fruit is naught: but him that prayseth them will they hear and eat themselves
starcke dead, because their hearts be full of lies, and they judge all things
as they appear unto the eyes). And the fleshly minded, as soon as he believes
of God as much as the devil The fleshly minded can never consent unto Gods law.
does, he has enough, and goes to and serves God with bodily service as he
before served his Idols, and after his own imaginacion and not in the
spirit, in loving his laws and believing his promises or longing for them: no
if he might ever live in the flesh, he would never desire them. And God must
do for him again, not what he The fleshly persecute them of the spirit.
has promised, but what he lusts. And his brother y^ serves God in ye
spirit according to Gods word, him will the carnal beast persecute. So that he
which will godly live must suffer persecution unto the worlds end, according
unto the doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles, and according unto the
ensamples that are gone before.

And finally, I have better reasons for my feeling that the Pope is Antichrist
then M. More has for his endeavoring himself and captiuing his wits The true
church is not with out a sign of a miracle to prove that it is Gods church.
that h^ is the true Church. For the church that was the true messenger of God
has ever showed a sign and a badge thereof, either a present miracle or
autentickescripture, in so much that Moses when he was sent, asked how shall
they believe me, and God gave him a sign, as ever before and since. Neither was
there any other cause of the writing of the new and last and everlasting
testament, then that when miracles ceased, we might have wherewith to detende
our selves against false doctrine and heresies. Which we could not do, if we
were bound to believe that were no where written. And again, if the The popes
life and doctrine is more wicked the^ the Turks and all ye heathen that ever
were.
Pope could not err in his doctrine, he could not sin of purpose and
profession, abhominably and openly above the Turks and all the heathen that
ever were, and defend it so maliciously as he has viij. hundred years long,
and will not be reformed, and makes them his Saints and his defenders y^
sin as he does. He persecuteth as the carnal church ever did. When the
scripture is away, he proves his doctrine with the scripture, and as soon as
the scripture comes to light he runs away unto his sophistry and unto his
sword. We see also by stories how your confession, penance and pardons are
come up, and whence your purgatory is sprung. And your falshead in the
sacraments we see by open scripture. And all your works we rebuke with the
scripture, and therewith prove that the false belief that ye couple to them,
may not stand with the true faith that is in our Savior Jesus.

The second chapter.
IN the end of ye second chapter he brings in Euticus that fell out at a
window Euticus.
Act. 20. who^ says he, S. Paul's merits did recover. Verily Paul durst not
say so, but that Christ's merits did it. Peter says Act. 3. Ye men of Acts.
3.
Israel, why gase ye and stare upon us, as though we by our power and
godliness had made this man go. Nay the name of Jesus and faith that is in All
glory and honor is to be given to the name of Jesus.
him, has given him strength and made him sound: And even here, it was the
name of Jesus through Paul's faith that did that miracle, and not Paul's merits,
though he were never so holy.

The third Chap.
IN the iij. chapter he says that Bilneyes judges (which he yet names not for
fear of sclaundering the^) were indifferent. Nay, they that take rewards
Judges.
be not indifferent. For rewards and gifts blind the eyes of the seeing and
pervert the words of the righteous. Deuteronomy. 17. Now al they that be shoren take
great rewards to defend Deuteronomy. 17.
Pilgrimages, Purgatory, and praying unto Saints: even the third part I trow
of all Christendom. For Purgatory to the foundation of Abbeyes, Colleges. etc.
all they have, they have received in the name of purgatory, and of Saints,
and on that foundation be all their bishopprickes, Abbeyes, colleges and
Cathedral churches built. If they be indifferent Judges, they must be made
servant, and do service, as their duty is. And when they have done a
quarters service, then give them wages as right is, unto every man that
labors in Christ's harvest a sufficient living, and no more, and that in the
name of his labor, and not of Saints, and so forth. And then they shall be
more indifferent Judges, when there comes no vauntage to judge more on one
side then an other.

The fourth Chap.
IN the end of the fourth he says, the man took an oath secretly, and was
dismissed with secret penance. O ypocrites, why dare ye not do it openly.

The fifth Chapter.
IN the fifth the messenger asks him whether he were present. And he denies
and says ever, he heard say Alas Sir, why take you bribes to defend that
you know not? why suffer you not them that were present, and to whom the matter
pertains, to lie for themselves?

Then he iesteth out the matter with M. More is a common ^ester and a scou^er.
Wilken and Simken, as he does Hunne and every thing, because men should not
consider their falshead earnestly. Wherein behold his subtle co^ueiaunce. He
asks, What if Simken would have sworn that he saw men make those printes.
Whereunto M. More answers under the name of, quod he, that he would swear,
that besides the loss of the wager, he had lost his honesty and his soul
thereto. Behold this man's gravity, how could you that do when the case is
possible. You should have put him to his proves, and bid him bring record.

Then says he, the church receaueth
no man convict of heresy unto mercy, but of mercy receaueth him to open
shame. Of such mercy, God give them plenty that are so merciful.

Then he shows how mercyful they were to receive the man to penance that
abode still in perjury and deadly sin. O shameless hypocrites how can ye
receive into the congregation of Christ an open obstinate sinner that repe^tet^
not, when ye are commanded of Christ to cast all such out? And again, O
Scribes The Papists are cruel and unmercifully.
and Phariseis, by what example of Christ and of his doctrine can ye put a man
that repents unto open shame and to that thing whereby ever after he is had
in derision among his brethren of whom he ought to be loved and not mocked: Ye
might enjoin honest things, to tame his flesh, as prayer and fasting: and not
that which should be to him shame ever after and such as ye your selves would
not do.

The vij. Chapter.
IN the vij. chapter he makes much Sweryng.
to do about swearyng and that for a subtle purpose. Notwithstanding, the truth
is, that no judge ought to make a man swear against his will for many
inconuenients. If a man receive an office he that puts him in the rowme
ought to charge him to do it truly, and may and happly ought to take an oath of
him. If a man offer him The oath of a witness may be taken, but no man may be
compelled to swear and be a witness.
self to bear witness, the judge may and of some happily ought to take an oath
of them: but to compel a man to bear witness ought he not. And Moreover if a
judge put a man to an oath that he shall answer unto all that he shall be
demanded of, he ought to refuse. How beit if he have sworn, and the^ the
wicked judge ask him of things hurtful unto his neighbor and against the
love that is in Christ, then he must repent A godly lesson.
that he has sworn, but not sin again to fulfill his oath. For it is
against Gods commandment, that a man should hurt his neighbor that has not
deserved it.

The viij. Chapter.
Unto Church, priest, charity, grace, M. More is a liar.
confession and penance is answered him in the beginning of the book. And
when he says Tyndall was confederate with Luther, that is not truth.

The ix. Chapter.
THe^ his ix. chapter is there nothing more foolish. For if he would have any
wise man to believe that my translation would destroy the Mass any otherwise
then the Latin or Greek text, he should have alleged the place and how.

The xi. Chapter.
IN the xj. chapter M. More will not defend the living of our spirituality,
because it is so open that he can not. And as little should he be able to defend
their lies, if the light were abroad that men might see. And as he ca^ not deny
them The Papists are obstinate and will not repent.
abominable, so can he not deny them obstinate and indurat therein, for they
have been often rebuked with Gods word, but in vain. And of such ye text is
plain that they can not understand the Scripture. And yet M. More will receive
rewards to dispute against the heresies of some such as be cast out of
Christ's Churches by such holy Patriarchs, whose liuinges he him self can not
praise. As holy Judas, though Judas.
the Prelates of his Church that is the Phariseis were never so abominable yet
because Christ's doctrine was condemned of them as of Gods Church that could
not err, and all that believed on him exco^municat, he was bold to say. Quid
^ult^s mihi dare and ego trada^ eu^ ^obis? That is, what will you give me and I
will deliver him unto you?

The xii. Chapter.
IN the xij. he has one conclusion, that Prayers of an evil Priest profit
not.
the prayers of an evil Priest profit not. Which though it be true, yet the
contrary is believed among a great many, in all quarters of England, so blind be
the people and wotte not what prayer means. I have heard me^ of no small A
fond saying.
reputation say yer this in great audience, that it makes no matter whether
the Priest were good or bad so he took money to pray as they seldom pray
without, for he could not hurt the prayer were he never so noughty.

And when he says that the evil Priest hurts us not so much with his living
as he profitetn us with ministryng the Sacraments. O worldly wisdom, if a
man lead me thorough a ieoperdous place by day, he can not hurt me so greatly
as by night. The Turk sees that murder, theft, extortion, oppression, and
adultery be sin. But when To minister Sacraments with out signification is to
be lead in darkness.
he leads me by the darkness of Sacraments without signification, I ca^
not but ketch harm and put my trust and confidence in that which is neither
God nor his word. As for an example, what trust put the people in anoylyng and
how cry they for it, with no other knowledge then that the oil saves them,
unto their damnation and denying of Christ's blood?

And when he says the Priest offers or sacrifices Christ's body. I
answer, Sacrifice.
Christ was offered once for all as it is to see in the Epistle to the Hebrews.
Heb. 10.
As the Priest sleath Christ, breaks his body and shedeth his blood, so he
Christ's body in the Sacrament is not carnal, but spiritual.
sacrifices him and offers him. Now the Priest sleath him not actually nor
breaks his body actually nor shede^h his blood actually neither scourges him
and so forth, throughout all his passion: but represents his s^aying, his
body breakyng and blood shedyng for my sins and all the rest of his passion
and plays it before mine eyes only. Which signification of the Mass,
because the people understand not, therefore they receive no forgiveness of
their sins thereby, and thereto can not but ketch hurt in their souls, through
a false faith as it well appears, how every man comes thereto for a sundry
imagination, all ignorant of the true way.

Let no man beguile you with his iugglyng sophistry. Our offering of Christ is
to believe in him, and to come with a repentyng heart unto the remembrance of
his passion and to desire God the father for the breakyng of Christ's Christ
was sacrificed on the cross once for all.
body on the cross and shedyng of his blood and for his death and all his
passions, to be mercyful unto us and to forgive us according unto his Testament
and promise. And so we receive forgiveness of our sins. And other offering
or sacrificyng of Christ is there now none. Walk in the open light and feelyng
and let not your selves be lead with iugglyng words as Mules and Asi^s in
which there is none understanding.

M. Deacons were had in price in the old time. Tyndall. For the Deacons More.
Deacons. Tyndall.
then took the care of all the poor and suffered none to go a beggyng, but
provided a living for every one of them. Christ's Dea^s and the p^^e^ Deacons
differ much.
Where now they that should be Deacons make them selves Priests and rob the
poor of lands, rentes, offeringes and all that was given them, devouring all
them selves and the poor dying for hunger.

M. Priests be despised because of the More. Priests. Tyndall.
multitude. Tyndall. If there were but one in the world as men say of the
Fenix, yet if he lived abhominably, he could not but be despised.

M. A man may have a good faith coupled More. Tyndall.
with all manner sin. Tyndall. A good faith puts away all sin, how then
can all manner of sin dwell with a good faith? I dare say, that M. More durst
affirm, that a man might love God and hate his neighbor both at once, and yet
S. John in his Epistle 1. John. 4.
will say that he says untruly. But M. M. Mores faith was a common faith.
More means of the best faith that ever he felt. By all likelyhode he knows
of no other but such as may stand with all wickedness, neither in him self
nor in his Prelates. Wherefore in as much as their faith may stand with all that
Christ hates, I am sure he looks but for small thanks of God for his
defendyng of them. And therefore he plays surely to take his reward here of
our holy Patriarchs.

M. Few durst be Priests in the old time. Tyndall. Then they knew the More.
Tyndall.
charge and feared God. But now they know the vauntage and dread him not.

M. If the laws of the Church were executed which Tyndal and Luther would
More. Tyndall.
have burnt, it would be better. Tyndall. If the testament of our Savior might
be known for blind wretches and covetous tyrau^tes, it would write ye law of
God in all men's hearts that believed it, and then should men naturally and with
out compulsion keep all honesty. And again though the Popes law could As good
no law, as a law not executed.
help, yet is no law as good as a law unexecuted.

The xiij. Chapter.
IN the xiij. he rages and fares excedyng foul with him self. There he
biteth, sucketh, gnaweth, towseth, and mowseth Tyndall. There he weneth that he
has won his spurs and that it is not possible to answer him. And yet
there, because he there most stands in his own conceit, I doubt not unto
them that be learned in Christ to prove him most ignorant of all, and clean
without understanding of godly things.

And I say yet, that as no woman ought to rule a man's office^, where a Age is
to be preferred before ^outh.
man is present, by the order of nature, and as a young man ought not to be
chosen, to minister in ye Church, where an old mete for the rowme may be had by
the order of nature, even so it was Paul's meaning to prefer the married
before the unmarried, for the inconveniences that might chance by the reason of
unchastity, which inconveniences M. More might see with sorrow The chaste
vnchastirie of the Papists is abominable both to God and man.
of heart (if he had as great love to Christ as to other things) to happen
daily unto the shame of Christ's doctrine, among Priests, Friars and Monks,
partly with open whores, partly with their sodometrie, whereof they cast each
other in the teeth daily in every Abbey, for the least displeasure that one
does to an other. M. More might see what occasions of vnchas^itie be given unto
the Curates every where by the reason of their office and daily conversation
with the married.

And when he says, never man could find that exposition till now, there he
says untrue. For S. Hierome himself S. Hierome.
says that he knew them that so expo^ded the text, and rebuked them of Rome
because they would not admit into the clergy them that had had two wives, the
one before baptim and the other after, saying: if a man had killed xx. men
before his Baptime, they would not have forbidden him, and why then should that
which is no sin at all be The Pope judges no sin to be sin, and sin
to be no sin.
a let unto him. But the God of Rome would not hear him. For Satan began
then to work his mysteries of wickedness.

And when he says, he that has ten wives has one wife. I say that one is
taken by the use of speaking for one only. As when I say, I am content to give
thee one, meaning one only. And unto him that has no help, is there one
help, to look for no help where one help is taken for one only, and many
places else.

And when M. More says, he that has had two wives one after an another, may
not be Priest, and that if a Priests wife die he may not have another, or that
if he were made Priest having no wife, he might not after mary if he burnt. I
desire a reason of him: If he say, it has A Priest by the Popes order may have
a whore but not a wife.
been so the use: then say I an whore is better then a wife, for that has been
ye use of our holy father many hundred years. But I affirm unto M. More the
contrary. And I say first with Paul, that the kingdom of God is Romans 14.
not meat and drink, and by the same reason neither husband or wife, but yt
keeping of the commandments and to love every man his neighbor as himself.
And therefore as meat and drink were ordained for man's necessity, and as a
man may care and drink at all needs in all degrees, so far as it lets
him not to keep the commandments and to love his neighbor as himself:
even so was the wife created for the man's necessity, and therefore may a man
use her at all his need in all degrees, as far as she lets him not to
keep Gods law, which is nothing else by Paul's learning, then that a man love
his neighbor as himself. Now I desire a reason of M. Mores doctrine, what
does my second wife, or my third hinder me Mores doctrine is superstitious
to love my neighbor as my self, and to do him service against I come to be
priest? What let is your second wife to you to serve our holy father the Pope,
more then your first would have been? And in like manner if my first wife die,
when I am a Priest, why may I not love my neighbor and do him as good service
with the second as with ye first? And again, if I be made priest having no
wife, and after burn, and therefore mary, why may I not love my neighbor and
serve him with that wife, as well as he that brought a wife with him?

It was not for naught that Paul 1. Tim. 4.
prophesied that some should depart from the faith, and attend unto
disceaueable spirits and deuelishe doctrine, The Pope forbids marriage.
forbidding to mary and to eat meats which god has created to be received
with thanks of them that know the truth, to buy dispe^sations, to use lawful
meat and unlawful wives.

And I ask M. More why he yt has Apparent godliness why the Priest may not
have y^ second wife.
the second wife or has had two wives may not be a Priest, or why if a
Priests first wife die, he may not mary the second. He will answer because
the Priest must represent the mysteries or secret properties and union of
Christ the only husband of his only wife the church or congregation that
believes in him only. That is, as I have Christ's benefits toward us are
figured by matrimony.
in other places said, the scripture describes us in matrimonye the mysteries
and secret benefits which God the father has hid in Christ for all the^ that
be chosen and ordained to believe and put their trust in him to be saved. As
when a man takes a wife, he gives her himself, his honor, his riches, and
all that he has, and makes her of equal degree unto himself: if he be king,
and she before a beggars daughter, yet she is not ye less Queen, and in honor
above al other. If he be Emperor she is Empress, and honored of men as the
Emperor, and partaker of all. Even so if a man repent and come, and believe in
Christ to be saved from the dampnation of the sin, of which he repents,
Christ is his owue good immediately: Christ's death, pain, prayer, passion,
fasting, and all his merits are for that man's sins a full satisfaction, and
a sacrifice of might and power to absolve him (...) pena et a culp. (...).
Christ's enheritaunce, his love and favor that he has with God his father are
that man's by and by: and the man by that marriage is pure as Christ, and clean
without sin, and honorable, glorious, weibeloued and in favor through yt
grace of that marriage. And because that the Priest must represent us this
signification, is the cause why a Priest may not have the second wife say they,
which popish reason has deceived many wise, as who can be but deceived in
some thing, if he receive all his doctrine by the authority of his elders,
except he have an occasion as we have to run to Moses and the Prophets, and
there hear and see with our own eyes, and believe no longer by the reason of
our forefathers, when we see them so shamefully beguild themselves, and to
beguile us in a thousand things which the Turks see.

Now to our purpose, if this doctrine be true, then must every Priest have a
wife or have had a wife. For he that never had wife can not represent us this.
And again, he that has an whore or an other man's wife has lost this
property, and therefore ought to be put down.

And again, the second marriage the^ of no man is, or can be a Sacrament by
that doctrine. And yet I will describe you the marriage of Christ as well by his
marriage that has had ix. wives, and has now the tenth, as by his that has
now the first.

O will they say, his wife was no We were Idolaters when we came to Christ.
virgin, or he when they were married. Sir the signification stands not in yt
virginity but in the actual wedlock. We were no virgins when we came to
Christ but common whores believing in a thousand Idols.

And in the second marriage or tenth and ye will, the man has but one wife and
all his are hers, and his other wives be in a land where is no husband or
wife. I say therefore with Paul that this is a deuilishe doctrine and has a
similitude of godliness with it, but the power is away. The myste of it blyndeth
the eyes of the simple and beguileth them, that they can not see a thousand
abominations wrought under that cloak.

And therefore I say still, that the Apostles meaning was that he should S.
Paul's doctrine is that priests should have wives.
have a wi^e, if happily his age were not the greater, and that by one wi^e he
excludes them that had two, and them that were defamed with other save their
own wives, and would have the^ to be such as were known of virtuous living,
for to do reverence and honor unto the doctrine of Christ. As it appears by
the widows which he excludes before lx. years, for fear of Widows.
unchastity, and admits yet none of that age, except she were well known
of chaste, honest and godly behavior, and that to honor Gods word withal,
than which the Pope has nothing more vile. And when M. More to mock, brings
forth the text of the wydowe, that she must be the wife of one man. I answer,
for all his jesting, that Paul excludes not her that had x. husbands one
after an other, but her that had ij. husbands attonce. And when More laugheth
at it, as though it had never More is a sco^fer.
been the guise. I would to god for his mercy that it were not the guise at
this day, and then I am sure his wrath would not be so great as it is. Paul
means only that he would have no diffamed woman chosen wydowe for
dishonouring the word of God and the congregation of Christ, and therefore
excludes common women, and such as were diffamed besides their husbands, and
happily yt deuorced thereto. And that I prove by the same doctrine of Paul, that
the kingdom of God is no such business but the keeping of Gods commandments
only, and to love one an other. Now look on yt thing and on the office of the
widow. It was but to wait on the sick and poor people, and to wash
strangers feet. Now the widows of ten husbands must have be found of the
cost of the congregation, if they were desticute of friends, as all other poor
were, though in time passed they have been diffamed persons.

But under lx. would Paul let none minister for fear of occasions of
unchastity, and thereto none but such as were well known of honest living and
of good report. Now in as much as the widow of ten husbands must be found of
the common cost at her need, what uncleanness is in her by the reason of her
second husband, that she is not good enough to be a servant unto the poor
people, to dress their meat, washtheir clothes, to make their beds and so
The office of the w^ddowes in ye primatine church.
forth and to wash strangers feet, that came out of one congregation unto an
other about business* and to do all manner service of love unto her poor
brethren and sisters. To have had the second husband is no shame among the
heathen: it is no shame among the Christen for when the husband is dead, the
wife is free to mary to whom she will in the Lord, and by as good reason the
husband, and of right who more free then the Priest? And therefore they shame
not our doctrine nor our congregation, nor dishonor God among the heathen or
weak Christen. Now when we have a plain rule that he which Romans 13*
loves his neighbor as him self keeps all the laws of God, let him tell me
for what cause of love toward his neighbor, a widow of two lawful husbands
may not do service unto the poor people.

Why may not a widow of fifty do service unto the poor? Paul which knytteth
no snares nor leads us blind nor teaches us without a reason giving of his
doctrine, answers, for fear of occasions of evil, lest she be tempted or
tempt other: And then if she be taken in misdoyng, the doctrine of Christ be
evil spoken of thereto and the weak offended.

And when M. More mocketh with my reason that I would have every Priest to
have a wife because few men ca^ live chaste, I answer, that if he loved the
honor of Christ and his neighbor as he does his own covetousness, he should
find that a good Argument. Paul makes the same and much more sclenderly then
I after your sophistry. For he disputes thus, some young widows Young
widows were forbidden to minister in the common service.
do dishonest ye congregation of Christ and his doctrine, therefore shall no
young widow at all minister in the common service thereof: But shall all be
married and bear children and serve their husbands. And it is a far less
rebuke to the doctrine of Christ and his congregation, that a woman should do
amiss, then the Bishop or Priest. I am not so mad, to think yt there could no
Priest at all line chaste. Neither am I so foolish to think that there be not
as many women that could live chaste at fifty, as Priests as xxiiij. And yet
though of a thousand widows of fifty year old ix. hundred xc. and ix. could
live chaste, Paul because he knows not that one will let none at all minister
in the common service among occasions of unchastity. Christ's Apostles
considered all infirmities and all that might hinder the doctrine of Christ,
and therefore did their best to prevent all occasions. Wherefore, Fish no better
then flesh, nor flesh no better then fish in the kingdame of Christ.
as fish is no better then flesh, nor flesh better then fish in the kingdom of
Christ, even so virginity wedlock and widowed are none better then other to
be saved by in their own nature or to please God with all, but with what soever
I may best serve my brethren, that is ever best according unto the time and
fashion of the world. In persecution it is good for every man to live chaste if
he can, and namely for the preacher. In peace when a man may live quietly and
abide in one place, a wise is a sure thing to cut of occasions.

Then he would make it seem that Priests wives were the occasions of heresies
(...). Tyndall.
in Almany. Nay, they fell first to heresies and then took wives, as ye sell
first to the Popes holy doctrine and then took whores.

More. The Church byndeth no man More. Tyndall.
to chastity. Tyndall. of a truth, for it gives license to who soever will, to
keep whores, and permits to abuse men's wives and suffers sodomitrie, and
does but only forbid matrimony.

And when he says, chastity was all most received by general custom, before
Three lies at ^ce.
the law was made: one lie. And good fathers did but give their advise thereto:
an other lie. And it was ratified and received with the consent of all
Christendom: the third lie.

They did well to chose a Poet to be their defender. First it was attempted in
general Counsel and resisted by holy fathers which yet themselves were never
married, saying that men might not knit a ^ate for their weak brethren, against
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Neither could it be brought to pass,
until the Pope had got the Emperors sword out of his hand. The Greeks which
were the one half of Christendom then I suppose, would never admit it.

Now godly love would never suffer them to consent that we should be bound unto
that burden which they themselves could not bear as M. More in an other place
affirms that they did. And again, we have manifest stories that it was
brought in with violence ot sword and that all the Priests of Germany (...).
were compelled to put away their wives. And we find that whersoeuer the pope
reigns, he came in with deceauyng the king of the country and then with his
sword co^^elled the rest. The Pope came but now late into Wales to reign there
over the Bishops and Priests, and that with the sword of the king of England.

And yet though all the Clergy of christendom had granted it, all the Church
had not made it, nor yet the tenth part of the Church. The lay people be as
well of the Church as the Priests. Neither can all the Priests in the world
of right make any law wherein their part lies without their consent. Now it
pertains unto the common people and most of all unto the Priests must be
endued with virtue and honesty.
weakest, that their Priests be endued with all virtue and honesty. And the
chastity of his wife, daughter and servant pertains unto every particular
man, which we see by experience defiled daily, by the unchaste chastity of the
spiritualitie.

Wherefore if the Parishes, or any one Parish, after they had seen the
experience what inco^ueniences came of their chastity, would have no Curate
except he had a wife to cut of occasions, as Paul when he had seen that
proof, would have no young widows minister, who save a tyrant, should be
against them?

Moreover the general Councels of the spirituality are of no other manner,
General counsel.
sense the Pope was a God, then the general Parlamentes of the temporalitie.
Where no man dare say his mind freely and liberally for ^eare of some one, and
of his flatterers.

And look in what captivity the Parlamentes be under the private counsels
Parl^ment.
of kings, so are the general Councils under the Pope and his Cardinals. And
this is the manner of both. Some one two or three wilye Foxes, that have all
other in subjection, as ye The (...) used both in general to* ^es, and also
(...) parliamentes.
have seen in my Lord Cardinal, imagine, not what ought to be, but what they
lust to have and conceive in their own brains and go with child, some time a
year. ij. iij. iiij. v. vi. or. vij. and some time. xx. and above, castyng,
can^esing and compassing for the birth against opportunity: openyng the matter
privily under an oath a little and a little unto certain Secretaries whose part
is therein, as they find men of actiuitie and of courage, prepared to sell
soul and body for promotion.

And the matter in the mean time is turmoyled and tossed among themselves: and
persuasions and sutle reasons are forged to blind the right way and to beguile
men's wits. And who^ they fear to have adversaries able to resist them, for
such, means are sought to bring them in unto their party or to convey them
out of the way. And when opportunity is come, they call a counsel or Parlame^t
under a contrary pretense. And a Mass of the holy ghost, whom they desire as
far away as were possible, is song and a goodly Sermon is made, to blere men's
eyes with all. And then suddenly other me^ unprovided, the matter is opened,
after the most subtle manner. And many are beguiled with subtle arguments and
crafty persuasions. And they that hold hard against A practice used in all
counsayles and Parlamentes.
the^ are called aside and reasoned with a part and handled after a fashion,
and partly entised with fair promises and partly feared with cruel
threatnyngs, and so some are overcome with silver syllogismes and other for
fear of threatnyng are driven unto silence, And if any be found at the last,
that will not obey their falsehead and tyranny, they rail on him and jest him
out of countenance and call him opinatiue, self minded and obstinate, and
bear him in hand that the devil is in him that he so cleaves unto his own
wit, though he speak no silllable but Gods word, and is asked whether he
will be wiser then other me^. And in the spiritualitie, they excommunicate him
and make an heretic The spirituality make heretics of them that resist
their power and will.
of him. And this to be true in the Clergies chastity is as clear as ye day
by manifest chronicles, in so much that the Prelates of Rome, were a brewyng it
above an hundred years and I wot not how long longer, yer they could bring it
to pass, and yet in vain til they had got the Emperors sword to prove that
it was most expedient so to be. And for what intent? to Why Priests may have
no wives.
bring all under the Pope, and that the Prelates of all lands might as the old
manner was, come and wait on the Pope at Rome, where he prepared the^ whores
enough.

And that his sworn Prelates in every land, might the more conveniently wait
in Kings Courts, to minister the common wealth unto the popes pleasure and
profit. For had the Clergy kept their wives, they could never have come unto
this where they now be, and to these pluralities, vnio^s and totquottes. For
there is no lay man though he were never so evil disposed, that could for his
wife and children have leisure to co^tr^e such mischief, and to run from
country to country, to learn falshead and subtlety, as our spirituality do,
which without fear of The chastity of the ^^ergy pert^^neth to the tempo^ie,
as much as to the spirituality.
God and shame of man, keep whores whersoeuer they come. And thus ye see, that
the clergies chastity, pertayneth as much unto the temporaltie as unto the
spirituality.

And an other is this, no power among them that profess the truth may bind
where God lowseth, save only where love and my neighbors necessity requires
it of me. Neither can any power now bind them to come, but they may freely
keep or break, as the thing is hurtful or expedient. Neither can there be
any bond where love and necessity requires the contrary. So that this law,
love thy neighbor, to help him as thou would be holp, must interpret all
man's laws.

As if I had sworn young or unwisely that I would live chaste and all the world
had bound me, if afterward I burnt and could not overcome the passion, I ought
to mary.

For I must condition my vow and Vows.
show a cause of it thereto. I may not vow for the chastity it self, as
though it were sacrifice to please God in it self, for that is the Idolatry of
heathen. I must therefore vow to do my neighbor service (which in that case he
may not require) or to give my self more quietly to prayer and study (which
is not possible as long as I burn, and the mind will not be quiet) or that I
may the better keep ye laws of God, which if I burn, I stand through my
chastity in more ieopardy to break and No oath is to be kept that is against
charity or necessity.
to hurt my neighbor, and to shame yt doctrine of Christ. And in like manner,
if I had forsworn flesh, and all the world had bound me, yet if necessity
require it of me, to save my life or my health, I ought to break it. And
again though I had sworn chastity, and the common wealth or the necessity
of an other required the contrary, I must break it. But on the one side, of
all that ever burnt in the Popes chastity, he never gave priest license to
take wife, but to keep whores only. And on the other side, all that vow any
vow, do it for the thing it self, as though it were as I said service or
sacrifice to God that had delight in the deed, as young children have in
Apples, and that for that deed they shall have an higher room in heaven then
their neighbors, which is the Idolatry of the heathen, when he ought to bestow
his vow upon his neighbor to bring him to heaven, and not to envy him, and
to seek thereby an higher room, not caring whether his neighbor come thither
or no. And finally to burn and not to use the natural remedy that God has
made, is but to tempt God, as in all other things. But and if God have brought
thee into a strait, and have thereto taken the natural remedy from thee, then
to resist and to cry unto God for help, and to suffer, is a sign yt thou
love Gods laws. And to love Gods law is to be sure that thou art Gods child
elect to mercy. For in all his children only, he writes that token.

And then he says, every man has his choice whether he will be Priest or no.
But what nets and snares does The popes snares.
Antichrist lay for them?

First his false doctrine, where with the Elders beguiled, compel their
children (...).
and sacrifice them, to burn in the Popes chastity with no other mind, then
those old Idolaters sacrificed their children unto the false God Moloch: so
that they think, by the merits of their childrens burning, after the Popes
false doctrine, to please god and to get heaven, clean ignorant of the
testament made in Christ's blood.

Then what a multitude are blinded 2.
and drawn into the net, with the bait of promotion, honor, dignity,
pleasures, freedom and liberty to sin, and to do all mischief unpunished,
things which all evil that fear not God do desire?

And what a number brought up idely unto xx. and above, then put their 3.
heads in his halter, because they have no other crast to get their liuinges,
and not because they can live chaste.

Also some live chaste at xxiiij. which same burn at xxx. And that to be true 4.
daily experience teaches, and good natural causes there be.

And the^ look on the Apostles learning 5.
and ordinance. When one or two young wydowes had broken their chastity, he
would never after let any more be chosen of the same age. How comes it then
that the Pope for so many hundred thousands that miscary, will neither break
the ordinance or mitigat it, or let any go back, but if any burn, sends
them unto the shame of Christ's doctrine, and offending and hurt of his Church,
and never unto the lawful remedy of marriage.

And when M. More calls it heresy, Tyndall does here plainly prove More an
heretic.
to think that the married were as pleasant to God as the unmarried, he is
surely an heretic that thinks the contrary. Christ's kingdom is neither
meat nor drink, nor husband nor wife, nor widow nor virgin, but the keepyng
of the commandments and serving of a man's neighbor lovingly by the doctrine
of S. Paul, where not to eat helps me to keep the commmau^dementes better
then to eat, there it is better not to eat then to eat. And where to eat
helps me to keep the That is ever best, that moves man to the keeping of
Gods commandments.
commandments and to do my duty unto my neighbor, there it is better to
eat then not to eat. And in like case where to be without a wife helps more
to keep the commandments and to serve a man's neighbor, there it is better
to be unmarried then married, and where a wife helps to keep the
commandments better then to be without, there it is better to have a wife
then to be without. That heart only which is ready to do or let undone
all things for his neighbors sake, is a pleasant thing in the sight of God.

And when he will have the Priests to live chaste, for reverence of the
Sacraments, Deuilish doctrine.
it is deuillishe doctrine having the similitude of godliness, but the pith and
marow is away. If he mean water, oil, salt, and such like, then is y^ wife
with her body and all her uses in the laws of God, incomparable purer and
holyer. If he mean the sacrament of Christ's body, I answer, that the hands
defile not the man, nor ought that goes through the hands be they never so
unwashed, by the testimony of Christ, and much less can they then Math. 15.
defile Christ.

Moreover, the Priest touches not Christ's natural body is not in the
Sacrament.
Christ's natural body with his hands by your own doctrine, nor sees it
with his eyes, nor breaks it with his fingers, nor eats it with his mouth,
nor cha^meth it with his teeth, nor drinks his blood with his lips for
Christ is impassible. But he that repents toward the law of God, and The
Sacrament of the body (...) blood of Christ how it must be received.
at the sight of the sacrament, or of the breaking, feling, eating, chamming or
drinking, calls to remembrance the death of Christ, his body breaking and
blood shedding for our sins, and all his passion, the same eats our
Saviors body and drinks his blood through faith only, and receaueth
forgeuenes of all his sins thereby, and other not. And all that have not this
doctrine of the Sacrament come thereto in vain. And therefore there is no more
cause that he which says the Mass should live chaste, then he that hears it,
or he that ministers the Sacrament, then he that receaueth it. It is to me
great marvel that unlawful whoredom, covetousness, and extortion, can not
defile their hands, as well as law full matrimonye. Curssed therefore be their
deuillishe doctrine with false appearing godliness, the fruit and power away,
out of the hearts of all Christen men.

And when he brings the ensample of the heathen, I praise him. For the
heathen because they could not understand God spiritually, to serve him in the
spirit, to believe in him, and to love his laws, therefore they turned his glory
unto an Image, and served him after their own imagination with bodily service,
as the whole kingdom of the Pope does, having less power to serve him in
spirit then the Turks. For when the heathen made an Image of the axes or
fevers and sacrificed there
to, they knew that ye Image was not the fevers, but under ye similitude of ye
Image, they worshipped the power of God which plagued them with the fevers,
with bodily service, as the Pope does above all the Idolaters that ever were in
the world. As when we paint Saint Machael weying the souls, and S. Michael
wayeth (...) souls.
stick up a candle to flatter him, and to make him favorable unto us, and
regard not the testament of Christ, nor the laws of God, because we have no
power to believe nor to love the truth. And even so, to refer virginity unto
the person of God, to please him therewith, is false sacrifice and heathenishe
Idolatry. For the only service of god The true service of God, what it is.
is to believe in Christ and to love the law. Wherefore thou must refer thy
wedlock, thy virginity and all thy other deeds unto the keepyng of the law
and serving thy neighbor only. And then when thou look with a loving heart,
on the law that says, break not wedlock, keep no whore and so forth, and
find thy body weak, and thine office such that thou must have conversation
with men's wives, daughters and servants, then it is better to have a wife
the^ to be without. And again if thou see service to be done yt thou can not
so well do with a wife as without, then if thou have power to be without, it is
best so to be, and in such like. And else the one is as good as the other, and
no difference. And to to take a wife for pleasure, is as good as to abstain
for displeasure.

And when M. More sees no other cause, why it is not best that our
spiritualitie were all gelded, then for loss of merit in resistyng, besides
that that imagination is plain Idolatry, I hold M. More beguiled, if all we
read of gelded men be true and the experience we see in other beasts. For then
the gelded lust in their flesh as much as the vngelded. Which if it be true,
then the gelded, Whether it were best that priests were gelded.
in that he takes such great pain in geldyng, not to minishe his lusts, but
if lusts overcome him, yet that he have not wherewith to hurt his neighbor,
deserves more then the vngelded. And then it were best that we did eat and
drink and make our flesh strong that we burned, to deserve in resisting, as
some of your holy Saints have laid virgins in their beds; to kindle their
courage, that they might after
quench their heat in cold water, to deserve the merit of holy Martyrs.

And when he says, the Priests of the old law absteined from their wives when
they served in the temple. Many things were forbidden them, to keep them in
bond and servile fear and for other purposes. And yet I trow h^ finds it
not in the text that they were forbidden their wives. And when he imagines so
because Zacharias, when his course was out, gat him home to his house, I think
it was better for him to go to his house, then to send for his house to him, he
was also old and his wife to. But and if they were forbidden, it was but for a
time, to give them to prayer, as we might do right well and as well as they. But
I read that they were for Leuit. 10.
bidden to drink wine and strong drink, when they ministered: of which ours
power in without measure.

M. More. Christ lived chaste and exhorts More.
unto chastity.

Tyndall. We be not all of Christ's Tyndall.
complexion, neither exhorts he to other chastity then wedlock, save at a
time to serve our neighbors. Now yt Popes chastity is not to serve a ma^s
neighbor, but to run to riotte and to carry away with him the living of the
poor and of the true preacher, even the tithes of v. or vj. Parishes and to go
and either dwell by a stews or to carry a stews with him, or to corrupt other
men's wives.

Paphnutius a man that never proved Paphnutius.
Marriage is praised in the stories, for resistyng such doctrine with Gods word
in a general Council before the Pope was a God. And now M. More a man that
has proved it twice is magnified for defendyng it with sophistry. And again
me seems that it is a great More had two wives and therefore was Bigamus.
over sight of M. More to think that Christ though he were never married would
not more accept the service of a married man that would more say truth for him
then they that abhor wedlock: in as much as the spirituality accept his
humble service and reward his merits with so high honor, because he can
better feign for them, then any of their unchaste, I would say own chaste
people, though he be Bigamus and past the grace of his neck verse.

And finally, if M. More look so much on ye pleasure that is in Marriage, why
sets he not his eyes on the thanks geuyng for that pleasure, and on the
patience of other displeasures.

The xiiij. Chapter.
MOre. Wicleffe was the occasion of More.
the utter subversion of the Realm of Boheme, both in faith and good living
and of the loss of many a thousand lives.

Tyndall. The rule of their faith are Tyndall.
Christ's promises, and the rule of their living Gods law* And as for loss of
The Pope a cruel tyra^nt.
lives, it is truth that the Pope s^^e I think an hundred thousand of them,
because of their faith and that they would no l^nger serve him. As he s^^e in
England many a thousand, and s^^e the true ^yng and see up a false unto the
e^fusion of all the noble blood and murthe ryng up of the comminaltie, because
he should be his desender.

M. The constitution of the Bishops is More.
not that the Scripture shall not be in English, but that no man may translate
it by his own authority or read it, until they had approved it.

Tyndall. If no translation shall be had Tyndall.
until they give license or till they approve it, it shall never be had. And so
it is all one in effect: to say there shall be The spirituality would not have
the scripture in English.
none at all in English, and to say, till we admit it, seeing they be so
malicious that they will none admit, but feign all the cauillations they can,
to prove it were not expedient. So that if it be not had spite of their hearts
it shall never be had. And thereto, they have done their best to have had it
enacted by Parliament, that it should not be in English.

The xv. Chapter.
HE iesteth out Hunnes death with Hunne.
his Poetry were with he built Vtopia. Many great Lords came to Baynardes
Castle (but all namelesse) to examine the cause (as y^ credible Prelares so
well learned, so holy and so indifferent which examined Bilney and Arture, be
also all namelesse.)

M. Horsey took his pardon, because More. Horsey.
it is not good, to refuse Gods pardon and the kings.

Tyndall. Gods pardon can no man Tyndall.
have except he knowledge himself a sinner. And even so he yt receaueth the
kings yeldeth him self guilty. And moreover it is not possible yt he which If
we be not guilty, we need no pardon.
puts his trust in God, should for fear of the xij. men or of his judges,
receive pardon for that he never was faulty unto the dishonoring of our
savior Jesus, but would have denied it rather unto the death.

And thereto, if the matter were so clear as ye jest it out, then I am sure the
kings graces both courtesy and wisdom, would have charged the judges More
would excuse the murder of Hunne.
to have examined the evidence laid against him diligently and so to have quit
him with more honesty then to give him pardon of that he never trespassed in,
and to have rid the spiritualitie out of hate and all suspicion.

Then says he Hunne was sore suspect Hunne.
of heresy and convict. And after he says Hunne was an heretic in deed and
in peril so to be proved. And then
how was he convict? I heard say, that he was first convict, when he was dead
and then they did wrong to burn him, till they had spoken with him, to were
whether he would abjure or no.

M. The Bishop of London, was wise, virtuous and cunnyng. More.


Tyndall. For all those three yet he Tyndall.
would have made the old Deane Colet of Paul's an heretic, for translatyng
Doetour Lolet.
the Pater n^ster in English, had not the Bishop of Canterbury help the Deane.

The xvj. Chapter.
THe messenger asks him, if there be an old lawful translation before
Wicleffes, how happens it that it is Old translation.
in so few men's hands, seeing so many desire it? He answers the Printer dare
not Print it and then hang on a doubt^ul trial, whether it were translated
sense or before, for if it were translated sense, it must be first approved.

What may not M. More say by authority More was a subtle Poet.
of his Poetry? there is a lawful translation yt no man knows, which is as
much as no lawful tra^slatio^. Why might not ye bishops show which were that
lawful translation and let it be Printed? Nay if that might have been obtained
of the^ with large money it had be Printed ye may be sure long yer this. But
Sir answer me here unto, how happens that ye defenders translate not one
your selves, to cease the murmour of the people, and put to your own gloses, to
prevent heretics? ye would no doubt have done it long sense, if ye The having
of the Scripture in English is utterly against the minds of the Popish Clergy.
could have made your gloses agree with the text in every place. And what can you
say to this, how that besides they have done their best to disanull all
tra^slating by Parliament, they have disputed before the kings grace, that is
it perilous and not mete and so concluded that it shall not be, under a
pretense of deferring it of certain years: where M. More was their special
Orator, to feign lies for their purpose.

M. Nothing discourageth the Clergy More.
so much as that they of the worste sort most calls after it.

Tyndall. It might well be, Phariseis Tyndall.
full of holiness long not after it, but Publicans that hunger after mercy
might sore desire it. Howbeit, it is in very deed a suspect thing and a great
sign of an heretic to require it.

Then he iuggleth with allegories. The scripture was first delivered to the
p^op^e in their vulgere tongue
Sir Moses delivered them all that he had received of God and that in the
mother tongue, in which all that had the heart thereto studied and not the Priests
only as thou may see in the Scripture. And the Apostles kept nothing behind,
as Paul testified Acts xx. how he had showed them all the counsel of God and
had kept naught back. Should the lay people less hearken unto the expositions
of the Prelates in doubtful places, if the text were in their hands when they
preached?

M. The Jews give great reverence More.
unto the Bible and we sit on it.

Tyndall. The Pope puts it under Tyndall.
his feet and treads on it, in toke^ that he is Lord over it that it should
serve him, and he not it.

M. God has ordained the ordinaries More.
for chief Physicians.

Tyndall. They be Lawyers ordained Tyndall.
of the Pope, and can no more skill of the Scripture then they that never saw
it: ye and have professed a contrary doctrine. They be right hangmen to The
ordina^ are hangme^ to such as desire the knowledge of the scripture.
murder who soever desires for that doctrine that God has given to be the
ordinary of our faith and living.

And when he makes so great difficulty and hardness in Paul's Epistles. I
say, it is impossible to understand either Peter or Paul or ought at all in ye
scripture, for him that denies yt iustifiyng of faith in Christ's blood. And
again, it is impossible to understand in ye None can understand the Scripture
except he knew
scripture more then a Turk, for whosoever has not the law of God written in
his heart to fulfill it. Of which point and of true faith to, I fear me that
you are void and empty with all your spirituality, whose defender ye Christ to
be his justification.
have taken upon you to be, for to mock out the truth for lucre and vau^tage.

An answer to M. Mores fourth book.
Christ's church has the true doctrine already, More.
and the self same that S. Paul would not give an Angel audience unto the
contrary.

Tyndall. But the Tyndall.
Popes Church will not hear that doctrine.

More. Confirmed with such a multitude of miracles, and so much blood of More.
martyrs, and common consent of all Christendom.

Tyndall. Who showed a miracle to confirm his preaching of ear confession
Tyndall.
and Pardons with like pedlery? Ear confession and pardons were never
confirmed by miracle.
or who shed his blood for them? I can show you many thousands that ye have
slain for preaching the contrary. And again, Grecia the one half of
Christendom co^senteth not unto the^, which Greeks, if such things had come
from the Apostles, should have had them er ye.

M. The spirituality be not so tender eared, but that they may hear their
sins More.
rebuked.

Tyndall. They consent not unto the way of truth, but sin of malice, and
Tyndall.
of profession. And therefore as they have no power to repent, even so can they
The Popish spiritualitie are tyr^unts and persecutors
not but persecute both him that rebukes them and his doctrine to, after the
ensamples of the Phariseis and all tyrauntes that begun before, namely, if
the preacher touch any ground where by they should be reformed, or by what
means they maintain their mischief.

The second Chapter.
MOre. A Friars living that has married More.
a Nun, makes it easy to know that his doctrine is not good.

Tyndall. The profession of either other Tyndall.
is plain Idolatry, and deceauing of a ma^s soul and robbing him of his good,
and taken upon them ignorau^tly thereto. Wherefore when they be come unto the
knowledge of the truth, they ought no longer therein to abide, but the Popes
forbyddyng Matrimony and to eat of meats created of God Pope forbids
matrimony and the eating of meats.
for man's use, which is deuillishe doctrine by Paul's prophecy, his giving
license to hold whores, his continual occupiyng of Princes in shedding of
Christen blood, his robbing of ye poor thoroughout Christendom of all that
was given to maintain them, his setting up in Rome a stues not of women The
wicked and monstrous doings of the Pope.
only, but of the male kind also against nature, and a thousand abominations
to gross for a Turk, are tokens good enough that he is ye right Antichrist
and his doctrine sprung of the devil.

More. In penance Martin says there More.
needs no contricion nor satisfaction.

Tyndall. Call it repentance and the^ Tyndall.
it is contricion of it self. And as for mendes making with worldly things,
that do to thy brother whom thou have offended, and unto God offer the
repentance of thine heart, and the satisfaction of Christ's blood.

M. Tyndall says that the confessor More.
utters the confessions of them that be rich. But yet we see that both rich
and poor keep whores openly without paying penny.

Tyndall. If they be very rich they Tyndall.
be suffered, because they may be good defenders of the spiritualty, and if
they be very poor, because they have no money to pay, or else they fine with
one or other secretly.

More. Upon that lie Tyndall builds More.
the destruction of the sacrament of penance.

Tyndall. Sacrament is a sign signifiyng Tyndall.
what I should do or believe, or both. As Baptim is the sign of repentance,
signifiyng that I must repent All Sacraments teach us what to do, or what to
believe.
of evil, and believe to be saved therfro^ by the blood of Christ. Now Sir in
your penance describe us which is ye sign and the outward sacrament, and what
is the thing that* I must do or believe, and then we will ensearch whether it
may be a sacrament or no.

More. Tyndall says that confession is the worst invention that ever was. More.


Tyndall. As ye fashion it mean I, Tyndall.
and of that filthy priapishe confession which ye spew in the ear wherewyth
Ear confession destroys the bene^ite of Christ's blood.
ye exclude ye forgeuenes that is in Christ's blood for all that repent and
believe therein, and make the people believe that their sins be never forgeuen
until they be shriuen unto the Priest, and the^ for no other cause save that
they have there told them, and for the holy deeds to come which the
confessor has enjoined them more pro^itable ofttimes for himself then any
man else.

More. Never man had grace to spy More.
that before Tyndall.

Tyndall. Yes very many. For many nations never received it. And the Tyndall.
Greeks when they had proved it, and saw the baudery that followed of it, put
it down again. For which cause and to know all secrets, and to lead the
consciences captive, the Pope falsely maintains it.

M. What fruit would then come of More.
penance?

Tyndall.* Of your iugglyng term Tyndall. Repe^tau^ce
penance I can not affirm. But of repentance would come this fruit, that no
man that had it, should sin wyllingly, but every man should continually fight
against his flesh.

More. He teaches that the sacrament More.
has no virtue at all, but by faith only.

Tynd. The faith of a repe^ting soul Tyndall. Sacrament.
in Christ's blood does justify only. And the sacrament stands in as good
stead as a lively preacher. And as the preacher justifies me not, but my faith
in the doctrine: even so the sign justifies not, but the faith in the promise
which the sacrament signifies and preaches. And to preach is all the virtue
of the sacrament. And where the sacraments preach not, there they have no
virtue at all. And sir we teach not as ye do, to believe in the sacrament or in
holy church, but to believe the sacrament and holy church.

More. He teaches that faith suffiseth More. Faith.
unto salvation without good works.

Tyndall. The Scripture says, that Tyndall.
as soon as a man repents of evil, and believes in Christ's blood, he
obtayneth mercy immediately, because he should love God, and of that love do
good works, and that he tarieth not in sin still till he have done good
works, and then is first forgeuen for his works sake, as the Pope bears his
in hand, excluding the virtue of Christ's blood. For a man must be first
reconciled The P^pistes a^^ slaund^^^s of the Gospel.
unto God by Christ and in Gods favor, yer his works can be good and
pleasant in the sight of god. But we say not as some damnably lie on us, that
we should do evil to be justified by faith, as thou may see Romans iij. how
they said of the Apostles for like preaching.

M. He calls it sacrilege to please god with good works. More. Wo^ Tyndall*


Tyndall. To refer the work unto the person of God to buy out thy sin
therewith, is to make an Idol of god or a creature. But if thou refer^e thy
work unto thy neighbors profit or taming of thine own flesh, then thou
please God therewith.

More. Item that a man can do no good More.
work.

Tyndall. It is false. But he says a Tyndall.
man can do no good work till he believe that his sins be forgeuen him in
Christ, and till he love Gods law, and have obtained grace to work with. And
then says he that we ca^ not do our works so perfectly, by the reason We can
do no good work except we believe that our sins are forgiven in Christ.
of our corrupt flesh, but that there is some imper^ectnes therein, as in the
works of them that be not their crafts master. Which is yet not reckoned,
because they do their good wills, and be scholars and go to schole to learn
to do better.

M. Item that the good and righteous More. Sin.
man sins always in doing well.

Tyndall. In all his works there Tyndall.
lacks somewhat and is a fault until he do the^ with as great love unto his
neighbor as Christ did for him and as long as there is more resistaunce in his
flesh then was in Christ's, or less hope in God: and then no longer.

M. Item that no sin damneth a man More. Vnbel^efe.
save vnbeleffe.

Tyndall. What soever a man has Tyndall.
done, if he repent and believe in Christ, it is forgeuen him. And so it
follows, that no sin da^neth save there where there is no belefe.

M. Item that we have no frewill to do More. Frewill.
ought therewith, though the grace of God be joined thereto, and that God does
all in us both good and bad and we do but suffer as wax does of the workema^.

Tyndall. First where he affirms Tyndall.
that we say, our will is not free to do good and to help to compel the
members, when God has given us grace to love his laws, is false. But we say
that we have no frewill to captiuate our wits and understanding, for to
believe the pope in what soever he says without reason giving, when we find in
the Scripture contrary testimony, and see in him so great falsehead and deeds
so abominable and thereto all the signs by which the Scripture teaches us to
know Antichrist.

And we affirm that we have no frewill We have no freewill to prevent grace
and prepare our selves.
to prevent God and his grace, and before grace prepare our selves thereto,
neither ca^ we consent unto God before grace be come. For until god have
prevented us and powered ye spirit of his grace into our souls, to love his
laws, and has graue^ the^ in our hearts by the outward ministration of his
true preacher and inward workyng of his spirit or by inspiratio^ only, we
know no^ God as he is to be known nor feel ye good nesse or any swetnesse in
his law. How then can we consent thereto* Says not the text, that we can do no
good Math. 12.
while we be evil, and they which seek glory and to clyme in honor above
John. 5.
their brethren can not believe the truth, and that whores, thieves, murderers,
1. Cor. 6.
extortioners and such like have no part in the kingdom of God and Christ nor
any felyng thereof? And who shall take those diseases from them? God only
through his mercy, for they ca^ not put The hearing of gods word causes
repentance.
of that complexion of them selves, until they be taught to believe and to
feel that it is damnable and to consent unto the contrary living.

And unto the second part I answer, that in respect of God we do but suffer
only and receive power to John. 19.
do all our deeds whether we do good or bad, as Christ answered Pylate, that
he could have no power against him except it were given him from above, and no
more could Judas neither. There can be no repentance in us but god does first
work in us by his grace.
But in respect of ye thing, wherein or wherewith we work and sheade out again
the power that we have received, we work actually. As the axe does nothing in
respect of the hand that heweth, save receive: but in respect of the tree that
is cut, it works actually and powers out again the power that it has
received.

M. Item that God is author of good More.
and evil: as well of the evil will of Judas in betraying Christ, as of the
good will of Christ in sufferyng his passion.

Tyndall. The power wherewith we Tyndall.
do good and evil is of God and the will is of God. As ye power which the
murderer All power that we have to good or evil is of God: But ye crooked and
naughty usage of the same is of our own c^^kerd and corrupt nature.
abuses and wherewith he kills a man unrighteously is of God and the will
wherewith he wills it. But the wickedness of his will and crokednesse or
frowardness wherewith he sleath unrighteously, to aue^ge him self and to
satisfy his own lusts, and the cause why he knows not the law of God and
consents not to it, which law should have informed his will and corrected
the crokednesse thereof and have taught him to use his will and his power right,
is his blindnesses fault only and not Gods. Which blindness the devil has
poisoned him with.

M. Item matrimony is no Sacrament. More. Matrimonye. Tyndall.


Tyndall. Matrimony is a similitude of the kingdom of heaven, as are many
things mo, like as it appears by Christ in the Gospel. But who institute it
to be a Sacrament? Or who at his marriage was taught the signification of it?
Who was ever bound to receive it in the name of a Sacrament. I Matrimony ca^ be
no Sacrament except a doctrine be added thereunto that the people may know the
benefit of Christ that we have by matrimony
would to Christ's blood that ye would make a Sacrament of it unto all men and
women that be married and unto all other, and would at every marriage teach the
people to know the benefit of Christ through the similitude of Matrimony. And
I affirm that in the popes Church there is no Sacrament. For where no
signification is, there is no Sacrament. A sign is no sign unto him that
understands naught thereby: as a spech is no spech unto him that understands
it not. I would to Christ's passion that ye would let them be Sacraments which
Christ institute and ordained for Sacraments. And then if ye make of your own
brains five hundred thereto I would not be so greatly grieved, though I would
not give my consent unto so great a multitude, partly for the bondage, and
specially lest we should in time to come, the significations of them lost, fall
into Idolatry again and make holy works of them, after the example of the
blindness wherein we be now, but I would have the word ever lively preached
out of the plain text.

M. Item that all holy orders be but More. Orders.
men's invention.

Tyndall. The office of an Apostle, Tyndall.
Bishop, Priest, Deacon, and Widow, are of God: But as concerning the shanyng,
the oylyng and diversity of raiment and many degrees sense added thereto, prove
that they be but men's traditions. But and ye will make Sacraments No Sacrament
is without signification.
of the oylyng, shanyng, sheryng, and garments, put their significations unto
them and let the kings grace compel them to keep them and I admit them for
Sacraments, and until that time I hold them for the false signs of
hypocrites.

M. Ite^m that every man and woman More. Consecrate.
is a Priest and may consecrate the body of Christ.

Tyndall. In bodyly service if the officer Tyndall.
appointed be away, every other person not only may, but also is bound to
help at need, even so much as his neighbors dog. How much more then ought
men to assiste one an other in the health of their souls, at al times of need?
if the man be away, the woman may and is bound to Baptize in time of need, by
the law of love, which office pertains unto the priest only. If she be Lady
over the greatest ordained by God, that she may Baptize, why should Women that
are virtuous and discrete may in cases of necessity minister the Sacraments
as well as the Priest.
she not have power also over the less, to minister the ceremonies which the
Pope has added to, as his oil, his salt, his spitell, his candle and
cresomcloth? And why might she not pray all the prayers, except that Idol the
pope be greater then the very God? if women had brought a child to Church and
while the Priest and other men tarried the child were in ieoperdy, might they
not baptize him in the font, if there were no other water by? And if other
water were by, yet if that help better one mite, love requires to baptize him
therein. And then why might not women touch all their other oil? If a woman
learned in Christ were driven unto an I Will where Christ was never preached,
might she not there preach and teach to minister the Sacraments and make
officers? The case is possible, show the^ what should let that she might not?
love thy neighbor as thy self does co^pel. Nay, she may not consecrat. Why?
If the pope loved us as well as Christ, he would find no fault therewith,
though a woman at need ministered that Sacrament if it be so necessary as ye
make it. In bodyly wealth, he that would have me one ace less then himself,
loves me not as well as himself how much more ought we to love one an other
in things pertainyng unto the soul?

M. Item that the host is no sacrifice. More. Sacrifice. Tyndall.


Tyndall. Christ is no more killed. It is therefore the Sacrament sign and
memorial of that sacrifice wherewith Christ offered his body for our sins
and commanded saying, this do in the remembrance of me. We be not help with
any visible deed that the Priest there does, save in that it puts us in
remembrance of Christ's death and passion for our sins. As the garments and
strange holy gestures, help us not, but in that they put us in remembrance
of things that Christ suffered for us in his passion. Even so the showing,
breakyng, and eating of the host, the showing and drinkyng of the cup of
Christ's blood, and the words and the consecration, help us not a pin, nor
are gods service, save only in that they stir up our repentyng faith to call
to mind the death and passion of Christ for our sins. And therefore to call
it a sacrifice, is but abused speech, In ensample.
as when we call one that is new come home to breakfast and set a Capon before
him and say, this is your welcome home, meaning yet by that speech, that it is
but a sign of ye love of mine heart The supper of the Lord is given us to be a
memorial of his death once offered for all.
which reioyseth and is glad that he is come home safe and sound. And even so
is this but the memorial of the very sacrifice of Christ once done for all. And
if ye would no otherwise mean, ye shall have my good will to call it so still,
or if ye can show me a reason of some other meaning. And therefore I would that
it had been called (as it in deed is and as it was commanded to be) Christ's
Christ's memorial Mass.
memorial, though that I doubt not but that it was called Mass of his He brue
word Misach, which signifies a a pension geuyng, because that at every Mass,
me^ gave every man a portion according unto his power unto the in stentation of
the poor. Which offering yet remains. But to a false use and profit of them
that have too much, as all other things are perverted.

Finally it is the same thing that it was when Christ institute it at his last
supper. If it were then the very sacrificing of Christ's body, and had that
same virtue and power with it that his very passion after wrought, why was he
sacrificed so cruelly on the morrow, and not hold excused therwyth, seeing he
was there verily sacrificed?

M. Item that there remains bread More. Bread.
and wine in the sacrament

Tyndall. Improve it. What is that Tyndall.
that is broken, and that the Priest eats with his teeth, air only? if a
child were fed with no other food he should wax happily as long as his father.
Whereof then should his body, his flesh and bones grow? whereof should that come
(with reverence I speak it) that he pisseth and so forth? all by miracle will
they say. O what wonderful miracles must we feign to save Antichrists
doctrine, I might with as The corrupt and vain disputations of men to prove
christ to be really in the Sacrament.
good reason say that the host is neither round nor white, but that as my
mouth is deceived in the taste of bread, even so mine eyes are in the sight of
roundnes, and so is there nothing at all. Which all are but the disputations of
men with corrupt minds, without spirit to judge. Never the later when the
Priest has once rehearsed the testament of our savior thereon. I look not on
bread and wine, but on the body of Christ broken, and blood shed for my sins,
and by that faith am I saved from the damnation of my sins. Neither come I to
Mass for any other purpose then to fet forgeuenes for Christ's deaths sake,
nor for any other purpose say I Confiteor, and knowledge my sins at the
beginning of Mass. And if ye have other doctrine, teach us a reason and lead
us in light, and we will follow. Christ says John. xi. John. (...)
it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing at all, the
words which I speak says he are spirit and life. That is, the fleshely
eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood profit not, as his carnal
presence profited not, by the reason of his presence only, as ye see by Judas
and y^ Phariseis, and the soldiers that touched him, and how his bodily
presence did let the disciples to understand spiritually. But to eat and
drink in the spirit, that is, to harken unto his words, and with a repenting
heart to believe in his death, brings us all that Christ can do for us.

More. Item that the mass avails no More. Mass.
man but the Priest.

Tyndall. If ye speak of the prayers, Tyndall.
his prayers help us as much as ours him. If ye speak of ye sacrament, The
Sacrament of Christ's body when it is faithfully ministered does profit as many
as do believe in Christ's death.
it helps as many as be present as much as him, if moved thereby they be leave
in Christ's death as well as he. If they be absent, the sacrament profits
them as much as a sermon made in the church helps them that be in y^ fields.
And how profits it the souls of the dead tell me, unto whom it is no sign?

If ye mean the carnal eating and drinking, then it profits the Priest
only, for he eats and drinks up all alone, and gives no man part with
him.

More. Item that a man should not be More.
howseled till he lay a dying.

Tynd. That is to shameless a lie. Tyndall.


M. Item that men and women should More. Touch. Tyndall.
not spare to touch it.

Tynd. A perilous case. Why? Because the Pope has not oyled them.
Nevertheless Christ has anointed them with his spirit and with his blood.
But wot ye why? The Pope thinks if they should be too busy in handeling it,
they would believe that there were bread, and for that cause to strength their
faythes, he has imagined little pretty thin manchetes that shine through, and
seem more like to be made of paper or fine Parchement then of wheat flower.
About which was no small question in Oxforde of late days, whether it were
bread or none: some affirming that the flower with long lying in water was
turned to starch, and had lost his nature.

M. Item that the sacrament should not More. Worship.
be worshipped.

Tyndall. It is the Sacrament of Tyndall.
Christ's body and blood. And Christ calls it the new and everlasting
testament in his blood, and commanded that we should so do in the
remembrance of him, that his body was broken and his blood shed for our
sins. And Paul commands thereby to show or preach the Lords death. They
say not pray to it, neither put any faith therein. For I may not believe in the
sacrament, but I must believe The true worshipping of the Sacrament, is to
believe that it is a true sign that Christ suffered death for us.
the Sacrament, that it is a true sign, and it true that is signified thereby
(which is the only worshippyng of the Sacrament, if ye give it other worship
ye plainly dishonor it). As I may not believe in Christ's Church, but believe
Christ's Church, that the doctrine which they preach of Christ is true. If ye
have any other doctrine, teach us a reason and lead us in light, and we will
follow.

More. Item that a Christian is not bound to keep any law made by man or any
More.
at all.

Tynd. You say untruly: a Christian man is bound to obey tyranny: if it be
Tyndall.
not against his faith nor the law of God, until God deliver him thereof. But
he is no Christen man that byndeth him to any thing save that which love and
his neighbors necessity requires of them.

And when a law made, is no longer profitable, Christen rulers ought to break
it. But now a days when tyraunts have gotten the simple people under, they
compel the^ to serve their lusts and wyly tyranny, without respect of any
common wealth. Which wyly tyranny, because the truth rebukes it, is the cause
why they persecute it, least the common people seeing how good they should be,
and feeling how wicked they are, should withdraw their necks from their
unrighteous yooke. As ye have ensample in Herod, in the Scribes and Phariseis,
and in many other.

More. Item that there is no Purgatory. More. Purgatory


Tyndall. Believe in Christ and thou Tyndall.
shall shortly find purgatoryes inow, as ye now make other feel.

M. Item that all souls lie and sleep More. Souls sleep. Tyndall.
till domes day.

Tyndall. And ye in putting them in heaven, hell, and purgatory, destroy ye
arguments wherewith Christ and Paul prove the resurrection. What God does with
them, that shall we know when we come to them. The true faith The souls
departed rest at Gods will and pleasure.
puts the resurrection which we be warned to look for every hour. The
Heathen Philosophers denying that, did put that the souls did ever live. And
the Pope joins the spiritual doctrine of Christ and the fleshly doctrine of
philosophers together, things so contrary that they can not agree, no more then
the spirit and the flesh do in a Christen man. And because the fleshly minded
Pope consents unto heathen doctrine, therefore he corrupts the scripture to
stablish it. Moses says in Deuteronomy. the secret things pertain Deuteronomy. 2^.
unto the Lord, and the things that be opened pertain unto us, that we do all
that is written in the book. Wherefore Sir if we loved the laws of God and
would occupy our selves to fulfill them, and would on the other side be meek
and let God alone with his secrets and suffer him to be wiser then we, we
should make none article of the faith of this or that. And again, if the
souls be in heaven, tell me why they be not in as good case as the Angels be?
And then what cause is there of the resurrection?

M. Item no man shall pray to saints. More. Saints. Tyndall.


Tyndall. When ye speak with saints that be departed, it is not evil to put
them in remembrance to pray for you.

M. Why do they not hear us? More.


Tyndall. If they love you so ferue^tly Tyndall.
and be so great with God, why certify they you not, that they so do?

More. So they do in that we feel our More.
peticions granted.

Tyndall. God saved the old Idolaters Tyndall.
with worldly salvation, and gave them their peticions, which they yet asked of
their Idols, as ye see through out all the old testament. God hears the
crows, fowls, beasts, and worms of the earth, as the text says, men and
beasts does God save, which beasts yet pray not to God.

The Jews and Turks does god save in this world, and gives them their
worldly peticions, which yet worship not God, as his godly nature is to be
worshipped but after their own Saints are not to be called upon, for we have
no promise nor assurance that either they hear us or can profit us.
imagination: not in the spirit with faith, hope, and love, but with bodily
service as the Pope does. As the popish serve S. Appoline for the tooth ache
and are healed: even so the Jews and Turks be healed and pray not to her, but
serve God after an other manner for the same disease. So that God does save in
this world all that keep y^ worldely laws worldely, that is to wete, outward
in the body for bodily reward and not in the heart of love that springs out
of the mercy that God has given us in Christ, which same, though they be
Turks, if they break the worldly laws, he rebukes them, as the Ninevites
and punishes them diversely. And if they knowledge their sin and mende, he
healeeh them again. But and if they harden and sin as beasts, and will not
amend, he destroys them utterly as the Sodomites. And yet all such have no
part in the life to come.

But with his children in whose hearts he writes the faith of his son The
children of god are obedient to his laws.
Jesus and the love of his laws, he goes otherwise to work his laws in
their will: and their peticions are his honor and their neighbors wealth: and
that he will provide them of all things necessary unto this life, and govern
them that their hearts be not overcome of evil. And he hears the^ unto his
honor and their everlasting salvation, and purges them and teaches them
things whereof the popish and all they whose hearts the God of this world has
blinded, to serve God with works, has no feelyng.

And when he says, that the Emperor Images.
and that counsel which decreed that Images for the abuse should be put out of
the church, were heretics. It is much easier so to say, then so to prove.
Understand therefore, that Images were not yet received in the Church in the
time of S. Hierome, at the least way generally, whether in some one Hierome.
place or no, I can not tell. For S. Hierome rehearses of one Epiphanius a
Bishop in the country of Cipres, and that the most perfect of all ye Bishops
of his time, how that the said Epiphanius Images were not allowed in the
primitive church
and the Bishop of Jerusalem went together to Bethell, and by the way they
entered into a Church for to pray and there found a veil ha^gyng before the
door and an image: painted thereon, as it had been of Christ or some Saint.
For the Bishop was so moved therewith because says S. Hierome, that it
Epiphanius cut the Image.
was contrary to the Scripture, that he cut and counseled to bury some dead
there in, and sent an other cloth to ha^g in the stead. And afterward when they
were crept in a little and little: there was no woorshyppyng of them, at the
least way generally until the time of S. Gregory.

In so much that when Cirenus the Bishop of Massilia offended with the
superstitiousnes of the people burnt the^, S. Gregory wrote that he should not
destroy Gregory Cirenus.
the Images, but teach only that the people should not worship them. But when
it was so far come that the people worshypped them with a false faith (as we
now know no other use) and were no longer memorials only, then the Bishops of
Greece and the Emperor A Council gathered in Greece did put down all Images.
gathered them together, to provide a remedy against that mischief and
concluded that they should be put down for the abuse, thinkyng it so most
expedient, having for them, first the example of God whom a man may boldly
follow, which commanded in the beginning of all his precepts, that there
should be no image used to worship or pray before, not for the Image it self,
but for the weakness of his people: and having again before their eyes, that
the people were fallen unto Idolatry and imageseruyng by the reason of them.

Now answer me, by what reason caust thou make an heretic of him, that
concludes naught against God, but works with God and puts that block out
of the way, where at his brother the price of Christ's blood sro^bleth and
loses his soul. They put not down the images for hate of God and of his
Saints, no more then Ezechias brake the brazen Serpent for envy Ezechias.
of the great miracle that was wrought by it, or in spite of God that
commanded it to be kept for a memorial. But to keep the people in the true
faith only. Now seeing we may be all without Images are not to be had in
Churches.
images and to put them down is not against Gods commandment but with it,
namely if they be abused, to the dishonor of God and hurt of our neighbors,
where is charity, if thou which know the truth and caust use thine image
well, wilt not yet forbear thine image and suffer it to be put out of the way,
for thy weak brothers sake who^ thou see perish there through? yea and what
thing makes both the Turk and the Jew abhor our faith so much as our
imageseruice? But the Pope was then glad to find an occasion to pick a
quarrel with the Emperor, to get the Empire into his own hands, which thing
he brought to pass with the sword of France and clame so high that euersence
he has put his own authority instead of Gods word in every general Council
and has concluded what him list, as against all gods word and against all
charity he condemned that blessed deed of that Council and Emperor.

M. They blaspheme our Lady and all More. Our Lady.
Saints.

Tyndall. That is untrue. We honor Tyndall.
our blessed Lady and all holy Saints and follow their faith and living unto
the uttermost of our power and submit our selves to be scholars of the same
schole.

M. They may not abide Salve regina. More. Salve Regina. Tyndall*


Tyndall. For therein is much blasphe mie unto our blessed Lady, because Christ
is our hope and lyse only and not she. And ye in ascribyng unto her that she
is not, dishonor God and worship her not.

M. They say if a woman being alive Mors.
believe in God and love him as much as our Lady, she may help with her prayers
as much as our Lady.

Tyndall. Tell why not. Christ when Tyndall.
it was told him that his mother and his brethren sought him, answered, that
his mother, his sisters and his brethren Math. 12.
were all they that did his fathers will. And unto ye woman that said to
Christ, blessed be the womb that bare the and pappes that gave thee suck,
Christ answered, Nay blessed are they that hear Luke. 1^.
the word of God and keep it. As Paul says. 1. Cor. ix. I have naught to
rejoice though I preach, for necessity lies upon me, and woe is me, if I
preach not. If I do it unwillingly, an office The prayers of all good women are
as well accepted of God as the prayers of our Lady.
is committed unto me, but and if I do it with a good will, then I have a
reward. So now carnal bearyng of Christ and carnal geuyng him suck make not
our Lady great. But our blessed Ladies greatness is her faith and love wherein
she exceeded other. Wherefore if God gave his mercy that an other woman were in
those two points equal with her, why were she not like great and her prayers
as much heard.

M. Item that men should not worship More. Cross. Tyndall.
the holy cross.

Tyndall. With no false worship and superstitious faith, but as I have said, to
have it in reverence for the memorial of him that dyed thereon.

M. Item Luther hates the festes of the More.
cross and of Corpus Christi.

Tyndall. Not for envy of the cross Tyndall.
which sinned not in the death of Christ nor of malice toward the blessed body
of Christ, but for the idolatry used in those festes.

M. Item that no man or woman is bound to keep any vow. More. Vow. Tyndall.


Tyndall. Lawful vows are to be kept until necessity break them. But
unlawful vows are to be broken immediately.

M. Martine appealed unto the next general Council that should be gathered
More. Martine. Tyndall.
in the holy ghost, to seek a long delay.

Tyndall. Of a truth that were a long delay. For should Martine live, till the
Pope would gather a Council in the holy ghost or for any godly purpose, he
were like to be for every here of his head a thousand years old.

Then brings he in the inconstancy of Martine, because he says in his later
Martine.
book, how that he sees further then in his first. Paraduenture, he is kynne
to our Doctors which when with preaching against pluralities All falsehode
is not espied on in one (...).
they have got them three or four benefices, allege the same excuse. But yet
to say the truth the very Apostles of Christ learned not all truth in one day.
For long after the Ascension they wist not that the heathen should be received
unto the faith. How then could Martin (brought up in the blyndnesse of your
sect above xl. years) spy out all your falsehead in one day.

M. Martine offered at Worms before More.
the Emperor and all the Lords of Germany, to abide by his book and to
dispute, which he might well do, since he had his safe conduct that he
should have no bodyly harm.

Tyndal. O mercyful God, how come Tyndall.
ye out your own shame? ye ca^ not dispute except ye have a man in your own
danger to do him bodyly harm, to diote him after your fashion, to torment him
and to murder him. If ye might have had him at your pleasure, ye would have
disputed with him: first with sophistry and corrupting the Scripture:
then with offering him promotions: the^ with the sword. So that ye would have
been sure, to have overcome him with one Argument or other.

M. He would agree on no Judges. More. Martine. Tyndall.


Tyndall. What Judges offered ye him, sane blind Bishops and Cardinals, enemies
of all truth, whose promotions and dignities they fear to be plucked from
them, if the truth came to light, or such Iudases as they had corrupt with
money to maynteine their sect? The Apostles might have admitted as well the
heathen Bishops of Idols to have been their judges as he them. But he offered
you autenticke Scripture and the hearts of the whole world. Which ij. judges,
if ye had good consciences and trust in God, ye would not have refused.

The iiij. Chapter.
THe fourth Chapter is not the first Poetry that he has feigned.

The v. Chapter.
IN the end of the fifth he untruly reports, that Martine says, no man is
bound to keep any vow. Lawful promises are to be kept; and unlawful to he
broken.

The vj. Chapter.
IN the beginning of the vj. he describes Martine after the example of his own
nature, as in other places he describes God after the complexion of Popes,
Cardinals and worldly tyrau^ts.

M. Martin will abide, but by the Scripture More. Martin.
only.

Tyndall. And ye will come at no scripture Tyndall*
only: And as for the old doctors ye will hear as little; save where it
pleases you, for all your crying, old holy fathers. For tell me this, why have
ye in England condemned the union Vn^^n.
of Doctors, but because ye would not have your falshead disclosed by the
doctrine of them.

M. They say, that a Christen man is discharged of all laws spiritual and
temporal More.
save the Gospel.

Tyndall. Ye iuggle, we say that no Tyndall.
Christen man ought to bind his brother violently, unto any law whereof he
could not give a reason out of Christ's doctrine and out of ye law of love. And
on the other side we say, that a How far a Christen man is bound to suffer.
Christen man is called to suffer wrong and tyranny (though no man ought to
bind him) until God rid us thereof: so far yet as the tyranny is not
directly against the law of God and faith of Christ, and no further.

More. Martin was the cause of the destruction of the vplandish people of
Germany. More.


Tyndall. That is false, for then he Tyndall.
could not have escaped himself. Martin was as much the cause of their
confusion, as Christ of the destruction of Jerusalem. The Duke elector of Saxon
came from the war of those vplandishe people and other Dukes with him into
Wittenberge where Martin is, with xv. hundred men of arms, so that Martin if
he had been guilty, could not have gonne quite. And thereto all the Dukes and
Lords that cleave unto the word of God this day, were no less cumbred with
their common people then other men.

Then after the loudest manner he sets out the cruelnes of the Emperors
soldiers which they used at Rome: but he makes no mention of the treason
which holy church wrought secretly, wherewith the men of war were so set on
fire.

The viij. Chapter.
M. What good deed will he do, that More.
believes Martin, how that we have no frewill to do any good with the help of
grace.

Tyndall. O Poet without shame. Tyndall. More.


More. What harm shall he care to forbear, that believes Luther, how god
alone; without our will works all the mischief that they do.

Tyndall. O natural son of the father Tyndall.
of all lies.

More. What shall he care, how long More.
he live in sin that believes Luther, that he shall after this life feel
neither good nor evil in body nor soul until the day of dome?

Tyndall. Christ and his Apostles Tyndall.
taught no other, but warned to look for Christ's coming again every hour.
Which coming again; because ye believe will never be, therefore have ye feigned
that other marchaundise.

M. Martins books be open, if ye will More.
not believe us.

Tyndall. Nay, ye have shut them Tyndall.
up, and therefore be bold to say what ye lust.

M. They live as they teach, and teach More.
as they live.

Tyndall. But neither teach nor live Tyndall.
as other lie on them.

The ix. Chapter.
M. Though the Turk offer pleasures unto the receauers, and death unto More.
the refusers of his sect (as the Pope does) yet he suffers none to break
their promises of chastity dedicate to God (though happily they use no such
vows, and as the Pope will not except it be for money) but Luther teaches to
break holy vows.

Tyndall. Luther teaches that unlaw Tyndall.
full vows grounded on a false faith unto the dishonouring of God are to
Unlawful vows are not to be observed.
be broken and no other. And again, constrained service pleases not God. And
thirdly, your Pope gives license and his blessing to break all lawful vows,
but with the most unlawful of all will ye not dispense.

Then he brings forth the ensample of the heathen, to confirm the Popes
chastity. And no wrong, for the same false imagination that the heathen had in
theirs, has the Pope in his. Understand therefore, if thou vow any indifferent
thing, to please God in his Vows.
own person, he receaueth not thine Idolatry: for his pleasure and honor is,
that thou should be as he has made thee, and should receive all such
things of his hand and use them so farforth as they were needful, and give
him thanks, and be bound to him: and not that thou should be as thou
had made thy self, and that he should receive such things of thee to be
bound to thee, to thank thee and reward thee. And again, thou must give me
a reason of thy vow out of the word of God. Moreover when thou All vows are
to be made with great aduisement.
vowest lawfully, thou may not do it precisely, but always except, if thine
own or thy neighbors necessity required the contrary. As if thou had
vowed never to eat flesh, or drink wine, or strong drink, to tame thy
flesh, and thou afterward fellest in disease so that thy body in that behalf
were to tame, or that there could no other sustinaunce be gotten. Tha^ thou
must interpret such cases except, though thou made no mention of them at
the making of thy vow. Some man would say, other shifte might be made: What
then? If other drink as We m^st use Gods creatures for our nec^e.
hoate as wine and of the same operation, and other meat of the same power and
virtue as flesh is, must be had, why should thou forswear wine or flesh,
seeing it is now no longer for the taming of thy body. And so forth of all
other, as I have above declared.

And when he brings in the Apostles, martyrs, confessors, and xv. hundred
years, it is clean contrary. For they had no such false imagination of
chastity or of any other work: but they used it to serve their neighbor and
to All our abstinence and chastising of our selves, is to our own profit.
avoid trouble in time of persecution, and to be eased of that burden that
was to heavy for their weak shoulders, and not to compel God to thank them
for that liberty for which they be bound to thank him.

The tenth Chapter.
IN the tenth he inueyeth and rayleth against that which neither he nor any
Freewi^t.
fleshly minded Papiste can understand; as they have no power to consent unto
the laws of God, which herein appears, that they compel their brethren
which be as good as they, to do and believe what they lust, and not what God
commands. He affirms that Martin says, how that we do no sin our selves
with our own will, but that More blasphemeth God.
God sins in us, and uses us as a dead instrument, and forces us thereunto
and da^neth us, not for our own deeds but for his, and for his own pleasure,
as he compels unto sin for his pleasure or rather he for his pleasure
sins in us. I say, that a man sins voluntarily, but the power of the will
and of the deed is of God, and every will and deed are good in the nature of
the deed, and the euilnesse is a lack that there is, as the eye, though it be
blind is good in nature, in that it is such a member created for such a good
use: but it is called evil for lack of sight. And so are our deeds evil
because we Our deeds are evil, because we lack know ledge to refer them
unto the glory of God.
lack knowledge and love to refer them unto the glory of God. Which lack
comes of the devil that blyndeth us with lusts and occasions that we can
not see the goodness and righteousness of the law of God and the means how to
fulfill it. For could we see it, and the way to do it, we should love it
naturally as a child does a fair apple. For a child when as a man shows
him a fair apple, and will not give it him weepeth, so should we naturally
mourn when the members would not come forward to fulfill the law according
to the desire of our hearts. For Paul says. ij. Cor. iiij. If our 2. Cor. 4.
Gospel be hid, it is hid unto the^ that perish, among which the God of this
world has blinded the wits of the unbelievers, that the light of the glorious
gospel of Christ should not shine The devil is the blinder and kepee of us
from y^ understanding of gods will.
to them. And Christ says that the birds eat up the seed sown upon the
way, and interprets by the seed the word, and by the fowls, the devil. So
that the devil blinds us with falshead and lies which is our worldly The
devil is the blinde^ and keeper of us from the understanding of Gods will.
wisdom, and therewith stops out the true light of Gods wisdom, which
blindenes is the euilnesse of all our deeds.

And on the other side, that an other man loves the laws of God and uses ye
power that he has of god well, and refers his will and his deeds unto the
honor of God, comes of the mercy of God which has opened his wits, and
showed him light to see the goodness and righteousness of the law of God, and
the way that is in Christ to fulfill it, whereby he loves it naturally and
trusts to do it. Why does God open one man's eyes and not an others? Paul
Romans ix. forbids to ask why. For it is to deep for ma^s We may not be
curious to search gods secrets.
capacity. God we see is honored thereby, and his mercy set out, and the more
seen in the vessels of mercy. But the popish can suffer God to have no secret
hid to himself. They have searched to come to the botome of his botomlesse
wisdom, and because they ca^ not attain to that secret and be to proud to
let it alone, and to grant themselves ignorant with the Apostle that knew no
other then Gods glory A Papisticall opinion.
in the elect, they go and set up freewill with the heathen philosophers, and
say that a man's freewill is the cause why God chooses one and not an other,
contrary unto all the scripture. Paul says it comes not of the will nor of
the deed, but of the mercy of God. And they say that every man has at ye
least way power in his freewill, to deserve that power should be given him of
god to keep the law. But the scripture testifies that Christ has deserved for
y^ elect, even the^ when they hated God, that their eyes should be opened to
see the goodness of the law of God, and the way to fulfill it, and forgeuenes
of all that is passed, whereby they be drawn to love it and to hate sin.

I ask the popish one question whether the will can prevent a man's wit
Wit, reason, and judgment goes before will.
and make the wit see the righteousness of the law, and the way to fulfill
it in Christ? If I must first see the reason why yer I can love, how shall I
with my will do that good thing that I know not of? how shall I thank God for
the mercy that is laid up for me in Christ, yer I believe it. For I must believe
the mercy yer I can love the work. Now faith comes not of our frewill, but
is the grace of God given us by grace yer there be any will in our hearts to do
the law of Faith is the gift of God and comes not by free will.
God. And why God gives it not every man I can give no reckoning of his
judgments. But well I wot, I never deserved it, nor prepared my self unto it,
but ran an other way clean contrary in my blyndnesse, and sought not that
way, but he sought me, and found me out, and showed it me, and therewith drew me
to him. And I bow the knees of mine heart unto god night and day, that he will
show it all other men. And I suffer all that I can to be a servant to open
their eyes.

For well I wot they can not see of themselves before God have prevented them
with his grace. For Paul says Phil. i. he that began a good work in Phil. 1.
you shall continue or bring it unto a full end, so that God must beginue to
work in us. And Phil. ij. God it is Phil. 2.
that works both the willing and also bringing to pass. And it must needs
God is the first worker and bringger to pass of our well doings.
be, for God must open mine eyes, and show me somewhat and make me see the
goodness of it, to draw me to him, yer I can love, consent, or have any
actual will to come.

And when I am willing, he must assiste me and help to tame my flesh, and to
overcome the occasions of the world, and the power of the fendes. God therefore
has a special care for his Math. 24.
elect, in so much that he will shorten ye wicked days for their sakes, in
which no man, if they should continue might endure. And Paul suffers all for
the elect. ij. Timothy. ij. And Gods sure foundation stands says Paul, God
knows his. So that refuse the truth who shall, God will keep a number of his
mercy, and call them out of blindness; to testify the truth unto the rest,
that their damnation may be with out excuse.

The Turk, the Jew and the Popish build upon frewill and ascribe their
justifying unto their works. The Turk when he has sinned, runs to the
purifyinges or ceremonies of Mahomet, and the Jew to the ceremonies of Moses,
and the Pope unto his own ceremonies, to fet forgiveness of their sins. And
the Christen goes The Christians seek help of Christ.
thorough repentance toward the law, unto the faith that is in Christ's blood.

And the Pope says that the ceremonies of Moses justified not, compelled with
the words of Paul. And how then should his justify? Moses Sacraments were
but signs of promises of faith, by which faith the beleuers are justified, and
even so be Christ's also. And now because the Jews have put out the
significations of their Sacraments and put their trust in the works of them,
therefore they be Idolaters, and so is the Pope for like purpose. The Pope says
that Christ dyed O abominable blasphemy.
not for us, but for the Sacraments, to give them power to justify. O
Antichrist.

The xj. Chapter.
HIs xj. chapter is as true as his story Doct. Ferman.
of Vtopia and all his other Poetry. He means Doctor Ferman person of Honey
lane. Who^ after they had handled after their secret manner and disputed with
secretly and had made him swear that he should not utter how he was dealt
with, as they have made many other, then they contrived a manner of disputatio^s
had with him, with such oppositions, aunswearynges and arguments as should
serve only to set forth their purpose. As M. More thoroughout all his book
makes, quoth Master doctor Fermon was a virtuous godly and learned man
he, to dispute and move questions after such a manner as he can soil them or
make them appear soyled, and makes him grant where he lysteth and at the
last to be concluded and lad whether M. More will have him. Wherefore I will not
rehearse all the arguments, for it were to long, and is also not to be believed
that he so made them or so disputed with them, but that they added and pulled
away and feigned as they list as their guise is. But I will declare in light
that which M. More ruffeleth up in darkness, that ye may see their falshead.

First if ye were not false hypocrites, A true note to know hypocrites.
why had ye not disputed openly with him, that the world might have heard and
borne record, that that which ye now say of him were true? what cause is
there that the lay people might not as well have heard his words of his own
mouth, as read them of your writing, except ye were iugglyng spirits that
walk in darkness?

When M. More says, the Church teaches that men should not trust in their
works, it is false if he mean ye Popes Church. For they teach a man to trust
in domme ceremonies and Sacraments, in penance and all manner works that come
them to profit, which yet help not unto repentance nor to faith nor to love
a man's neighbor.

M. More declares the meaning of no sentence, he describes the proper
signification of no word, nor the difference of the significatio^s of any
term, but runs forth confusedly in unknown words and general terms.
And where one word has many significations he makes a man some time believe
that many things are but one thing, and some time he leads from one
signification unto an other and mocketh a man's wits. As he iuggleth M. More
(...) a iuggle^ with terms.
with this term Church, making us in the beginning understand all that believe,
and in the conclusion the Priests only. He tells not the office of the law,
he describes not his penance nor the virtue thereof or use, he declares no
Sacrament, nor what they mean nor the use nor wherein the fruit of confession
stands, nor whence the power of the absolution comes, nor wherein it
rests, nor what justifying means, nor the order nor shows any diversity
of faythes, as though all faiths were one faith and one thing.

Mark therefore, the way toward justifying or forgiveness of sin, is the The
order of justifying.
law. God causes the law to be preached unto us and writes it in our hearts
and makes us by good reasons feel that the law is good and ought to be kept
and that they which keep it not are worthy to be damned. And on the other side
I feel that there is no power in me, to keep the law whereupon it would shortly
follow that I should despair, if I were not shortly ho^pe. But A lively
description of our (...)fication.
God which has begone to cure me and has laid that corosy unto my sores,
goes forth in his cure, and sets his son Jesus before me and all his
passions and death, and says to me: this is my dear son, and he has prayed
for thee and has suffered all this for thee, and for his sake I will forgive
thee all that thou have done against this good law, and I will heal thy flesh
and teach thee to keep this law, if y^ wilt learn. And I will bear with thee
and take all a worth that thou do, till thou caust do better. And in the
mean season, not withstandyng thy weakness, I will yet love thee no less
then I do the angels in heaven, so thou will be diligent to learn. And I will
assiste thee and keep thee and defend thee and be thy shield and care for
thee.

And the heart here begins to mollify and wax soft and to receive health
and believes the mercy of God and in beleuyng is saved from the fear of
everlasting death, and made sure of everlasting life, and then being overcome
The great mercy and kindenes of God moves man to repe^tau^ce.
with this kindness, begins to love again and to submit her self unto
the law of God to learn them and to walk in them.

Note now the order, first God gives me light to see the goodness and
righteousness of the law, and mine own sin and unrighteousness. Out of
which knowledge spryngeth repentance. The right order of our justification.
Now repentance teaches me not that the law is good, and I evil, but a light
that the spirit of God has given me, out of which light repentance
springs.

Then the same spirit woorketh in mine heart trust and confidence to believe the
mercy of God and his truth, that he will do as he has promised. Which
beleffe saves me. And immediately out of that trust spryngeth love toward the
law of God again. And what soever a man works of any other love the^ this it
pleases not God, nor is that love godly.

Now love does not receive this mercy but faith only, out of which faith love
springs, by which love I power out again upon my neighbor that goodness
which I have received of God by faith. Hereof ye see that I ca^ not be
justified without repentance and yet repentance justifies me not. And hereof
ye see that I can not have a faith to be justified and saved, except love
spryng thereof immediately, and yet love justifies me not before God. For my
natural love to God again does not make me first see and feel the kyndnesse
of God in Christ, but faith thorough preaching. For we love not God first, to
compel him to love again: but he loved us first and gave his son for us,
that we might see love and love 1. John. 4.
again, says S. John in his first Epistle. Which love of God to us ward we
receive by Christ thorough faith says Paul.

And this example have I set out for Faith only apprehends our justification.
them in diverse places, but their blind Popish eyes have no power to see it,
covetousness has so blinded them. And when we say faith only justifies us,
that is to say, receaueth the mercy wherewith God justifies us and forgeueth
us, we mean not faith which has no repentance and faith which has no love
unto the laws of God again and unto good works, as wicked hypocrites falsely
belie us.

For how the^ should we suffer as we do all misery, to call the blind and
ignorant unto repentance and good works which now do but consent unto all
evil, and study mischief all day long, for all their preaching their
justifying of good works. Let M. More improve this with his sophistry and
set forth his own doctrine that we may see the reason of it and walk in
light.

Hereof ye see what faith it is that what faith justifies.
justifies us. The faith in Christ's blood of a repentyng heart toward the law
does justify us only and not all manner faythes. Ye must understand therefore,
that ye may see to come out of Mores blind maze, how that there be many faythes
and that all faythes be not one faith, though they be al called with on
general name. There is a story There are diversities of faith, and but one
faith that justifies us.
faith without feelyng in the heart, where with I may believe the whole story of
the Bible and yet not set mine heart earnestly thereto, taking it for the fode
of my soul, to learn to believe and trust God, to love him dread him and fear
him by the doctrine and examples there of, but to seem learned and to know the
story, to dispute and make marchaundise, after as we have examples enough. And
the faith wherewith a man does miracles, is an other gift then the faith of a
repe^tyng heart to be saved through Christ's blood, and the one no kynne to the
other though M. More would have them so appear. Neither is the devils faith
and the Popes faith (wherewith they believe that there is a God and that Christ
is and all the story of the Bible and may yet stond with all wickedness and
full consent to evil) kynne unto the faith of them that hate evil and repent
of their misdeedes and knowledge their sins and be fled with full hope and
trust of mercy unto the blood of Christ.

And when he says, if faith certify our hearts that we be in the fauonr of
God and our sins forgeuen, and become Works.
good yer we do good works, as the tree must be first good yer it bring forth
good fruit, by Christ's doctrine, the^ we make good works but a shadow
wherewith a man is never the better. Nay Sir we make good works, fruits
whereby Out of a lively and iustifiyng faith springs good works.
our neighbor is the better, and whereby God is honored, and our flesh
tamed. And we make of them sure tokens whereby we know that our faith is no
feigned imagination and dead opinion, made with captiuing our wits after the
Popes traditions, but a lively thing wrought by the holy Ghost.

And when he disputes, if they that have faith, have love unto the law, and
purpose to fulfill it, then faith alone justifies not, how will he prove that
argument? Faith alone justifies.
he iuggleth with this word alone: and would make the people believe that we
said, how a bare faith that is without all other company, of repentance, love,
and other virtues, yea and without Gods spirit to, did justify us, so that we
should not care to do good. But the Scripture so takes not alone, nor we so
mean, as M. More knows well enough. When an horse A similitude.
bears a saddell and a man therein, we may well say, that yt horse only and
alone bears the saddell, and is not help of the man in bearing thereof. But
he would make men understand that we meant, the horse bare the saddell empty
and no man therein: let him mark this to see his ignorance, which would God
were not coupled with malice. Every man that has wit, has a will More is
maliciously blind.
to, and then by M. Mores argument, wit only gives not the light of
understanding. Now the conclusion is false and the contrary true. For yt wit
without help of the will gives the light of the understanding, neither does
the will work at all, until the wit have determined this or that to be good
or bad. Now what is faith save a spiritual light of understanding, and an
inward knowledge or feelyng of mercy. Out of which knowledge love does spring.
But love brought me not that knowledge, for I knew it yer I loved. So that love
in the process of nature to dispute from the cause to the An ap^ and proper
exsample of love.
effect helps not at all to the feeling that God is merciful to me no more
than the loving heart and kind behavior of an obedient wife to her husband
makes her see his love and kyndnesse to her, for many such have unkind
husbands. But by his kind deeds to her, does she see his love. Even so my
love and deeds make me not see Gods love to me in the process of nature: but
his kind deeds to me, in that he gave his son for me, makes me see his
love, and to love again.

Our love and good works make not God first love us, and change him from hate
to love, as the Turk, Jew, and vain popish mean, but his love and deeds
make us love, and change us from hate to love. For he Romans 5.
loved us when we were evil, and his enemies, as testifies Paul in diverse
God loved us first, that we
places, and chose us, to make us good and to show us love, and to draw us
should love him again
to him, that we should love again.

The father loves his child, when it has no power to do good, and when it
must be suffered to run after the own lusts without law, and never loves
it better then then, to make it better, and to show it love, to love again. If
ye could see what is written in the first epistle of John, though all the
other scripture were laid a part, he should see all this.

And ye must understand, that we sometime dispute forward, from the cause to
the effect, and sometime backward from the effect to the cause, and must beware
that we be not therwyth beguiled, we say summer is come and therefore all is
grene, and dispute forward. For somme^ is the cause of the
grenesse. We say the trees be grene, and therefore summer is come, and dispute
backward from the effect to the cause. For the grene trees make not summer but
makes somme^ known. So we dispute backward, the man does good He that loves
God loves his neighbor.
deeds and profitable unto his neighbor, he must therefore love God: he
loves God, he must therefore have a true faith and see mercy.

And yet my works make not my love, nor my love my faith, nor my faith Gods
mercy: But contrary, gods Note here the mercy and goodness of God.
mercy makes my faith, and my faith my love, and my love my works. And if the
Pope could see mercy and work of love to his neighbor, and not sell his
works to God for heaven after M. Mores doctrine, we needed not so subtle
disputing of faith.

And when M. More alleges Paul to the Corinthians, to prove that faith may
be without love, he proves nothing, but iuggleth only. He says, it Faith may
be had without love, but it is a barreine and naked faith
is evident by the words of Paul, that a man may have a faith to do miracles
without love, and may give all his good in alms without love, and give his
body to burn for the name of Christ, and al without charity. Well I will not
stick with him: he may so do without charity and without faith thereto. Then a
man may have faith without faith. Ye verily because there be many differences
of faith, as I have said, and not all faithes one faith, as master More
iuggleth. We read in the works of S. Ciprian, that Ciprian.
there were martyrs that suffered martyrdom for the name of Christ all the
Martyrs that suffered all a year long.
year long, and were tormented and healed again, and then brought forth a
fresh. Which martyrs believed as ye do, that the pain of their martyrdom
should be a deserving and merit enough not only to deserve heaven for
themselves, but to make satisfaction for the sins of other men thereto, and
gave pardons of their merits, after the ensample of the Popes doctrine, and
forgave the sins of other men, which had openly denied Christ, and wrote unto
Ciprian, that he should receive those men that had denied Christ into the
congregation again, at the satisfaction of their merits. For which pride
Ciprian wrote to them and called The devils Martyrs.
them the deuilles martyrs and not Gods. Those martyrs had a faith without
faith. For had they believed that all mercy is given for Christ's bloudshedding,
they would have sent other me^ thither, and would have suffered their own
martyrdom for love of their neighbors only, to serve the^ and to testify
the truth of God in our savior Jesus, unto the world, to save at the least way
some, that is to wete, the elect, for whose sake Paul suffers all thing, and
not to win heaven. If I work for a worldly purpose, I We must do good
works of love, and not for reward.
get no reward in heaven: even so if I work for heaven or an hyer place in
heaven, I get there no reward. But I must do my work for yt love of my
neighbor, because he is my brother, and the price of Christ's blood, and
because Christ has deserved it, and desires it of me, and then my reward is
great in heaven.

And all they which believe that their sins be forgeuen them, and they
received as the scripture testifies, unto the enheritaunce of heaven for
Christ's merits, the same love Christ and their brethren for his sake, and do
all thing for their sakes only, not once thinking of heaven when they work,
but on their brethrens need. When they suffer themselves above might, then
they comfort their soul with the remembrance of heaven, that this wretchedness
shall have an end, and we shall have a thousand fold pleasures and rewards
in heaven, not for the merits Our doings can deserve nothing, but Christ
has deserved for us.
of our deseruings, but given us freely for Christ's. And he that has yt love,
has the right faith, and he that has yt faith has the right love. For I ca^
not love my neighbor for Christ's sake, except I first believe that I have
received such mercy of Christ. Nor can I believe that I have received such mercy
of Christ, but that I must love my neighbor for his sake, seeing that he so
instantly desires me.

And when he alleges S. James, James. (...).
it is answered him in the Mammon, and S. Augustine answers him. And S.
James expounds himself. For he says in the first chapter, God which begatte
us of his own will with the word of truth, which word of truth, is his
promises of mercy and forgiveness in our Savior Jesus, by which he begat us,
gave us life and made us a new creature through a fast faith. And James goes
and rebukes the opinion James ^eproueth sel^^ ^^^tes and not a true and lively
says.
and false faith of them that think it enough to be saved by, if they believe
that there is but one god, and that Christ was borne of a virgin, and a
thousand things which a man may believe, and yet not believe in Christ, to be
saved from sin through him. And that James speaks of another faith then at
the beginning appears by his ensample. The devils have faith says he: yea
but the deuilles have no faith that can repent of evil or to believe in Christ
to be saved through him, or that ca^ love God and work his will of love. Now
Paul speaks of a faith that is in Christ's blood to be saved thereby, which
works immediately thorough love of the benefit received. And James at the
beginning speaks of a faith that bydeth trying, saying, the trying of your
faith works or ca^seth patience. But the faith of the deuilles will bide no
trying, for they will not work Gods will because they love him not. And in
like manner is it of the Faith that will not work when opportunity serves ca^
not justify.
faith of them that repent not, or that think themselves without sin. For
except a man feel out of what danger Christ has delivered him, he can not
love the work. And therefore James says right, that no such faith that will
not work can justify a man.

And when Paul says faith only justifies: And James, that a man is
justified by works and not by faith only, there is great difference between
Paul's only and James only. For Paul's only is to be understand, that faith
justifies in the heart and before God, without help of works, yea and yer I
can work. For I must receive life through faith to work wi^h, yer I can work.
But James only is this wise to be understand, that faith does not so justify,
that nothing justifies How works justify.
save faith. For deeds do justify also. But faith justifies in the heart and
before God, and the deeds before the world only, and makes the other seen,
as ye may see by the scripture.

For Paul says Rom iiij. it Abraham Romans 4.
have works, he has whereof to rejoice, but not before god. For if Abraham
had received those promises of deserving, then had it ben Abraha^s praise and
not gods, as thou may see in the text: neither had God showed Abraham mercy
and grace, but had only given him his duty and deseruyng. But in that Abraham
received all the mercy that was showed him, freely through faith, out of the
deservings of the seed that was promised him, as thou may see by Genesis and
by the Gospel of John, John. 8.
where Christ testifies that Abraham saw his day and rejoiced, and of that joy
no doubt wrought, it is gods praise, and the glory of his mercy. And the same
may thou see by James, when he says Abraham offered his son, and so was
the Scripture fulfilled, that Abraham believed, and it was rekened him for
righteousness and he was thereby made Gods friend.

How was it fulfilled? before God? Nay, it was fulfilled before God many years
before, and he was Gods friend many years before, even from the first
appointement that was made between God and him. Abraham received Abraham
believed gods promises and therefore was justified.
promises of all mercy and believed and trusted God and went and wrought out of
that faith. But it was fulfilled before us which can not see the heart, as James
says, I will show thee my faith out of my works, and as the angel said to
Abraham, now I know that thou dreadest God. Not but that he knew it before, but
for us spoke he that, which can see naught in Abraham more then in other men,
save by his works.

And what works meant James? verily the works of mercy. As if a brother or a
sister lack raiment or sustenaunce and ye be not moved to compassion nor feel
their diseases, what faith have ye then? No faith (be sure) He that sees his
neighbor in necessity and has no compassion on him, has no faith.
that feels the mercy that is in Christ. For they that feel that, be
merciful again and thankful. But look on the works of our spiritualitie
which will not only be justified with works before the world, but also
before God. They have had all Christendom to rule this viij. hundred years,
and as they only be anointed in the head, so have they only been King and
Emperor and have had all power in their hands and have been the doers only
and the leders of those shadows that have had the name of Princes, and have
led them whether they would and have brethed into their brains what they
lysted. And they have wrought the world out of peace and unity and every man
out of his welfare and are become alone well at ease, only free, only at
liberty, only have all thing and only do naught therefore, only lay on
other men's backs and bear naught the^ selves. And the good works of them
that wrought out of faith and gave their goods and lands to find the poor,
the^ devour they also alone. And what works preach they? Only that are to
The Papists preach works that are profitable to them selves.
them profitable and wherbey they reign in men's consciences as God: to offer,
to give to be prayed for and to be delivered out of Purgatory and to redeem
your sin of them, and to worship ceremonies and to be shryuen and so forth.

And when M. More is come to him self and says the first faith and the first
justifying is given us without our deseruyng. God be thanked, and I would feign
that he would describe me what he means by the second justifying. I know no
more to do, then when I have received all mercy and all forgiveness of Christ
freely, to go and power out the same upon my neighbor.

M. David lost not his faith, when he More. David. Tyndall.
committed adultery.

Tyndall. No, and therefore he could not continue in sinnne, but repented
as soon as his fault was told him. But was he not reconciled by faith only,
and not by deeds? said he not have mercy on me Lord for thy great mercy and for
the multitude of thy mercies put away Psalm. 51.
my sin. And again, make me hear joy and gladness, that the bones which
thou have broken may rejoice. That is let me hear thy voice that my sin is
forgeuen and then I am safe and will rejoice. And afterward he knowledgeth that
God deliteth not in sacrifices When we have offended God we must return
qui^kly by repentance and call upon God to hear us for Christ our Saviors
sake.
for sins, but that a troubled spirit and a broken heart is that which God
requires. And when the peace was made, he prays boldly and familiarly to
God, that he would be good to Sion and Jerusalem, and says that then last of
all when God has forgeuen us of mercy, and has done us good for our evil, we
shall offer sacrifice of thanks to him again. So that our deeds are but
thankesgeuyng. When we have sinned, we go with a repentyng heart unto Christ's
blood, and there wash it of thorough faith. And our deeds are but thanks
geuyng to God to help our neighbors at their need, for which our neighbors
and each of them owe us as much again at our need. So that the Testament or
forgiveness of sins, is built upon faith in Christ's blood and not on
works. M. More will run to the Pope for forgiveness a poenae and culpae. By
what merits does the Pope that? by Christ's. Poena culpa.
And Christ has promised all his merits to them that repent and believe and
not given them unto the Pope to sell. And in your absolutio^s ye often absolve
without ioynyng of penance. He must have a purpose to do good works will ye
say. That condition is set before As we have received at the hand of God mercy,
so must we show mercy to our neighbors.
him to do, out of ye mercy that he has received and not to receive mercy out
of them. But the Popish can not repent out of the heart. And therefore ca^ not
feel the mercy that faith brings, and therefore can not be merciful to their
neighbors to do their works for their sakes. But they feign them a sorrow
for their sin in which they ever continue and so morn for them in the
morning that they laugh in them yer midday again. And then they imagine them
Popish deeds, to make satisfaction to God and make an Idol of him.

And finally that good works, as to Works of them selves justify not.
give alms and such like, justify not of them selves, is manifest. For as the
good which are taught of God do the^ well, of very love to God and Christ and
of their neighbors for Christ's sake, even so the evil do them of vain
glory and a false faith wickedly, as we have examples in the Phariseis, so
that a man must be good yer he can do good. And so is it of the purpose to do
the^: Ones purpose is good and an others evil: so that we must be good, yer a
good purpose come. How then, to love the law of God and to consent thereto and
to have it written in thine heart and to profess it, so that thou art ready of
thine own accord to do it and without compulsion, is to be righteous: that I
grant and that love may be called righteousness before God passive and the
life and quickenesse of the soul passive. He that loves his neighbor for
Christ's sake the same is righteous.
And so far forth as a man loves the law of God, so far forth he is
righteous, and so much as he lacks of love toward his neighbor after the
example of Christ, so much he lacks of righteousness. And that thing which
makes a man love the law of God, does make a man righteous and justifies him
effectiuely and actually and makes him alive as a woorkeman and cause
efficient. Now what is it that makes a man to love? verily not the deeds, for
they follow and spryng of love, if they be good. Neither the preaching of the
law, for that quickens not the heart Gal. iij. but causes wrath Romans iiij.
and utters the sin only Romans iij. And therefore says Paul that
righteousness spryngeth not out of the deeds of the law into the heart, as the
Jews and the Pope mean: but contrary the deeds of the law spryng out of the
righteousness of the heart if they be good. As when a father pronounces the
law, that the child shall go to schole, it says nay. For that kills his heart
and all his lusts, so that he has no power to love it. But what makes his
heart alive to love it? verily fair promises of love and kyndnesse, that it
shall have a gentle scholemaster and shall play enough and shall have many gaye
things and so forth. All our works if they proceed not of love are nothing.
Even so the preaching of faith does work love in our souls and make them
alive and draw our hearts to God. The mercy that we have in christ does make us
love only and only brings the spirit of life into our souls.

And therefore says Paul, we be justified by faith and by grace without deeds:
that is, yer the deeds come. For faith only brings, the spirit of life and
delivers our souls from fear of damnation, which is in the law and ever
makes peace between God and us, as often as there is any variaunce between us.
And finally when the peace is made between God and us and all forgeuen through
faith in Christ's blood, and we Faith in Christ makes our small works
acceptable.
begin to love the law, we were never the nearer except faith went with us, to
supply out the lack of full love, in that we have promises, that that little we
have is taken a worth and accepted till more come. And again when our
frailty has overthrown us and fear of damnation invaded our consciences, we
were utterly lost, if faith were not bye to help us up again, in that we are
promised that when soever we repent of evil and come to the right way again,
it shall be forgeuen for Christ's sake. For when we be fallen, there is no
Testament made in works to come, that they shall save us. And therefore the
works of repentance or of the Sacraments can never quiet our consciences and
deliver us from fear of damnation.

And last of all in temptation tribulation and adversities, we perished daily
except faith went with us to deliver us, in that we have promises, that god
will assiste us, cloth us, feed us and fight for us and rid us out of the
hands of our enemies. And thus the righteous The righteous lives by ^aith.
lives ever by faith, even from faith to faith, that is, as soon as he is
delivered out of one temptation an other is set before him, to fight against,
and to overcome through faith. The scripture says, blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgeuen and his sins hid, and unto whom the Lord reckons
not unrighteousness. So that the only righteousness of him that ca^ but sin,
and has naught of himself to make amends, is the forgiveness of sin,
which says only brings. And as farforth as we be vn^^ghteous, Faith in
Christ's blood does only justify us.
faith only justifies us actiuely, and else nothing on our party. And as
farforth as we have sinned, be in sin, or do sin, or shall sin, so
farforth must faith in Christ's blood justify us only, and else nothing. To
love, is to be righteous, so farforth as thou love, but not to make
righteous, nor to make peace. To believe in Christ's blood with a repe^ting
heart, is to make righteous, and the only making of peace and satisfaction to
Godwarde. And thus because terms be darcke to them that be not expert and
exercised, we always set out our meaning with clear ensamples, reporting our
selves unto the hearts and consciences of all men.

M. The blasphemous words of Luther seem to signify, that both John Baptiste
More.
and our Lady were sinners.

Tyndall. John Baptiste said to Christ Mat. 3. I had need to be baptized
Tyndall.
of thee, and come thou to me? Whereof did John confess that he had need to
be washed and purged by Christ, of his holiness and good deeds?

When John said, behold ye Lamb of God that takes away the sin of ye John
Baptist and our Lady also were sinners and looked for the redemption in Christ.
world, he was not of that sort, nor had any sins to be taken away at any
time, nor any part in Christ's blood which dyed for sinners only. John came to
restore all thing says Christ. That is, he came to enterprete the law of God
truly, and to prove all flesh sinners, to send the^ to Christ, as Paul does
in the beginning of ye Romans. Which law if M. More could understand how
spiritual it is, and what it requires of us, he would not so dispute. And if
there were no imperfectnesse in our Ladies deeds, why did Christ rebuke her
John. 2. when he ought rather to have honored his mother, and why did he make
her secke him three days. Chrisostomus dare say Chrisostomus.
that our Lady was now and then taken with a little vain glory. She ioked for
the promises of him that should come and bless her, from what? She believed to
be saved by Christ, from what? This I grant, that our Lady, John Baptiste,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, There was never any but Christ that was without sin.
Moses, and many like, did never consent to sin, to follow it: But had the
holy ghost from the beginning. Never the later, while they followed the spirit
and wrought their best, yet chances met them by the way and temptations, that
made their works come sometimes imperfectly to pass, as a potter that has
his craft never so well, meteth a chance now and then, that makes him fashion
a pot a miss. So that I think the perfectest of them all as we have ensamples
of some, were compelled to say with Paul, that good that I would, I do not and
that evil that I would not, that I do. I would not swear on a book that if
our Lady had been let slip as we other were, and as hard apposed with as
present death before her eyes, that she would not have denied somethinges that
she knew true, ye but she was preserved by grace that she was not. No but
though she were kept by grace from ye outward deed, yet if there were such
wickedness in her flesh, she had sin. And the grace was, that she knew it,
and was meek to believe in Christ, to have it forgeuen her, and to be preserved
that it should not bud forth John the Evangelist, when he was as holy as ever
was John the Baptist said, if 1. John. 1.
we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves.

Then he compares faith and deeds together and will that faith should Works
are under the law.
stand in no better service of right then deeds. Yes, for the deeds be
examined by the law, and therefore it is not enough to do them only, or to do
the^ with love: but I must do them with as great love as Christ did for me, and
Faith is under no law.
as I receive a good deed at my need. But faith is under no law, and therefore
be she never so feeble, she shall receive according to the truth of the
promiser.

M. What thing could we ask God More.
of right because we believe him?

Tyndall. Verily all that he promises, Tyndall.
may we be bold to ask of right and duty and by good obligation.

More. Ferman said that all works be More.
good enough in the^ that god has chose^.

Tyndall. I am sure it is untrue, for Tyndall.
their best be not good enough, though God forgeueth them their evil of his
mercy, at ye repentance of their hearts.

Then he ends in his schole doctrine contrary unto all the scripture, that
God remitteth not the sin of his chosen people, because that he has chosen
the^ not of his mercy, but of a towardnes The blind and ^ond reasoning of More.
that is more in one then in an other saying, God saw before that Peter should
repent, and Judas would despair, and therefore chose Peter. If God chose
Peter because he did repent, why chose he not Judas to, which repented as much
as he and knowledged his sin, and brought the money again? O this
blindness, as God had wrought nothing in the repentance of Peter. Said not
Christ before, that Peter Luke. 22.
should fall. And said he not that he had prayed for him that he should be
help up again? Christ prayed a strong prayer for Peter to help him up
again, and suffered a strong death thereto. And before his death he committed
them unto his father saying, I have kept them in thy name and I depart, John.
17.
keep them now from evil. Peter had a good heart to God, and loved his law,
and believed in Christ, and had the spirit of God in him which never left him
for all his fall. Peter sinned of no malice, but of frailty and sudden The
difference between Peter's fall and the fall of Judas.
fear of death. And the goodness of God wrought his repentance and all the
means by which he was brought up again at Christ's request. And Judas was
never good, nor came to Christ for love of his doctrine, but of covetousness,
nor did ever believe in Christ.

Judas was by nature and birth (as Judas.
we all be) heir of the wrath of God, in whom the devil wrought his will and
blinded his heart with ignorance. In which ignorannce and blindness he grew, as
he grew in age and fell deeper and deeper therein, and thereby Judas perished
in desperatio^.
wrought all his wickedness, and the deuilles will and perished therein. From
which ignorance God purged Peter of his mercy, and gave him light, and his
spirit to govern him, and not of any towardness that was in Peter of his
own birth: but for the mercy that we have in the birth of Christ's death.

And how will M. More prove that God chooses not of his goodness but of our
towardnes? What good towardnes can he have and endeavor that is altogether
blind and carried away at the will of the devil, till the devil be cast out?
Are we not robbed of all towardnes By Adam we are all made the children of the
wrath of God.
in Adam, and be by nature made the children of sin, so that we sin
naturally and to sin is our nature? So that as now, though we would do well,
the flesh yet sins naturally, neither cease to sin, but so farforth as
it is kept under with violence: even so once our hearts sinned as naturally
with full lust and consent unto the flesh, the devil possessing our hearts,
and keeping out the light of grace. What good towardness and endeavor can we
have to hate sin, as long as we love it? What good towardnes can we have unto
the will of God while we hate it and be ignorant thereof. Can the will desire
that the wit sees not? Can the will long for and sigh for that the wit
knows not of? Can a man take thought for that loss that he wotteth not of?
what good endeavor can the Turks children, the Jews children, and the Popes
infantes have, when they be taught all falshead only, with like persuasions of
worldly reason, to be all justified with works? It is not therefore as Romans 9.
Paul says of the running or willing, but of the mercy of God, that a man is
called and chosen to grace.

The first grace, the first faith, and the first iustifiyng is given us freely
says M. More, which I would feign wete how it will stand with his other
doctrine, and whether he mean any other thing by chosyng them to have Gods
spirit given me and faith to see the mercy that is laid up for me and to have
my sins forgeuen without all deseruyng and preparyng of my self God did not
see only that the these that was saved at Christ's death, should come thither,
but God works by diverse to make us to call upon and to trust in his mercy.
God chose him to show his mercy unto us that should after believe, and provided
actually and wrought for the bringyng of him thither that day, to make him see
and to receive the mercy that was laid up for him in store, before the world
was made.

The xij. Chapt^.
IN yt xij. in chaffyng himself to heap lie upon lie, he utters his feleable
blindness. For he axeth this question wherefore serves exhortatio^s unto
faith, if the hearers have not liberty of their frewill, by which together
with Gods Frewill.
grace a man may labor to submit the rebellion of reason unto the obedience
of faith and credence of the word of God. Whereof ye see, that besides his
grant that reason rebelleth against faith, contrary to the doctrine of his
first book, he will that the will shall compel the wit to believe. Which is
as much to say as the carte must draw the horses and the son beget the
father, and the authority of the Church is greater the^ Gods word. For the will
can not teach the wit nor lead her, but follows naturally: so that what soever
the wit judges good or evil, that the will loves or hates. If the wit
see and lead straight, the will follows. If the wit be blind and lead
amiss, the will follows clean out of yt way. The wit leads the will.
I can not love Gods word before I believe it, nor hate it, before I judge it
false and vanity.

He might have wiselier spoken on this manner, wherefore serves the preaching of
faith, if the wit have no power to draw the will to love that which the wit
judges true and good. If the will be naught, teach the wit better and the will
shall alter and turn to good immediately. Blindness is the cause of ali evil,
and light the cause of all good: so that where the faith is right there the
heart can not consent unto evil, to follow the lusts of the flesh, as the popes
faith does. And this conclusion has he half a dose^ times in his book, Mores
wits are captiuated.
that the will may compel the wit and captiuate it, to believe what a man
lusts. Verily it is like that his wits be in captivity and for vauntage
tangled with out holy fathers sophistry.

His doctrine is after his own feelyng and as the profession of his heart is.
For the Popish have yielded the^ selves, to follow the lusts of their flesh, and
compel their wit to abstain from looking on ye truth lest she should unquiet
them and draw them out of the podell of their filthy voluptuousness. As a A
pretty example.
carte that is ouerladen going up an hill draws the horses back, and in
a tough mire makes them stand still. And then the carter the devil which
drives the^ is ever by and whistelleth unto them and bids them captiuate
their understanding unto profitable doctrine for which they shall have no
persecution but shall reign and be kings and enjoy the pleasures of the world
at their own will.

The xiij. Chapter.
IN the xiij. he says that the Clergy burns no man. As though the pope had
not first found the law, and as though all his preachers babled not that in
every Sermon, burn these heretics burn them for we have no other argument
to convince them and as though they compelled not both King and Emperor to
swear that they shall so do, yer they crown them.

Then he brings in provisions of King Henry the v. Of whom I ask. M. King
Henry the. v.
More whether he were right heir unto England or held he the land with the
sword as an heathen tyrant, against all right. Whom the Prelates, lest he
should have had leisure to hearken unto the truth, sent into France, to
occupy his mind in war, and led him at their will. And I ask whether King
Henry the 4. was an usurper of ye crown
his father slew not his liege king and true inheritour unto the crown and was
therefore set up of the Bishops a false king to maintain their falshead? And I
ask whether after that wicked deed, followed not the destruction of the
comminaltie and quenchyng of all noble blood.

The xiiij. Chapter.
IN the xiiij. he affirms that Martine Luther says it is not lawful to
resist
the Turk. I wonder that he shameth not so to lie, seeing that Martine has
The Turk is to be resisted.
written a singular treatise for the contrary. Besides that in many other
works he proves it lawful, if he invade us.

The xvi. Chapter.
IN the xvi. he alleges Councels. I ask whether Councels have authority to
make Articles of the faith with out Gods word, yea and of things improued by
Gods word?

He alleges Augustine, Hierome and Cypriane. Let him put their works in The
union of Doctors a good book.
English and S. Prosperus with them. Why damned they the union of Doctors, but
because the Doctors are against them.

And when he alleges Martyrs, let him show one and take the calfe for his
labor.

And in the end he bids beware of the^ that live well in any wise. As though
they which live evil can not teach amiss. And if that be true then they be
of the surest side.

M. When Tyndall was apposed of his More.
doctrine, yer he went over see, he said and swear, he meant no harm.

Tyndall. He swear not neither was there any man that required an oath of
Tyndall swears.
him: but he now swears by him who^ ^e trusts to be saved by, that he
never meant or yet means any other harm then to suffer all that God has
prepared to be leyd on his back, for to bring his brethren unto the light of
our Savior Jesus which the Pope thorough falshead and corruptyng such Poets
as ye are (ready unto all thing for vauntage) leads in the darkness of
death.

M. Tyndall does know how that S. Augustine and S. Hierome do prove with More.
holy Scripture that confession is of necessity unto salvation.

Tyndall. That is false if ye mean eareconfession. Why allege ye not the
Tyndall.
places where? But ye know by S. Hierome and other stories and by the
conversation Ear confession.
with Erasmus, how it came up and that the use was once far other then now.

M. I meruell that Tyndal denies Purgatory, More. Purgatory
except he entend to go to hell.

Tyndall. He entendeth to purge here Tyndall.
unto the uttermost of his power and hops that death will end and finish his
purgation. And if there be any other purging, he will commit it to God and take
it as he finds it, when he comes at it, and in the mean time take no
thought therefore, but for this that is present wherewith all Saints were
purged and were taught so to be. And Tyndall marueleth what secret pills they
take to purge them selves which not only will not purge here with the cross
of Christ, but also bye out their Purgatory thereof the pope, for a groat or vj.
pence.

The xviij. Chapter.
M. The Clergy does nothing unto More.
the heretics but as the holy Doctors did. Clergy.


Tyndall. Yes ye put them in your prisons Tyndall.
and diote them and handle them after your fashion as temporal tyrau^tes, and
dispute with them secretly and will not come at light. And ye slay the^ Note.
for rebukyng you with Gods word, and so did not the old holy Doctors. If a
man slay his father, ye care not. But if any man touch one of you, though he
have never so great an occasion given him, ye curse him, and if he will not
submit him self unto your punishment, ye leave him unto the temporal power
whom ye have hired with ye spoil of his goods to be your hangman, so that he
must lose his life, for geuyng one of you but a blow on the cheke.

M. Saint Paul gave two heretics unto the devil which tormented their More.
flesh which was no small punishment and happily he slew them.

Tyndall. O expounder of the Scripture like Hugo Charensis which exposideth
Tyndall.
haereticum hominem deuita, take the heretic out of his life. We read of no
pain that he had whom the Corinthians Paul did excommunicate, but our Bishops
do burn.
excommunicated and gave to Satan, to slay his flesh, save that he was
ashamed of him self and repented, when he saw his offense so earnestly taken
and so abhorred. But ye because ye have no power to deliver them to Satan to
blind their minds, ye deliver the^ to the fire to destroy their flesh, that
no more is seen of them after then the ashes.

FINIS.
The practice of papisticall Prelates, made by Wylliam Tyndall. In the year of
our Lord. 1530.
William Tyndall to the Christian Reader.
WHen the old Scribes and Phariseis had darckned the Scripture with their
traditions, and false interpretacions, and wicked persuasions of fleshly
wisdom, and shut up the kingdom of heaven (which is Gods word) that the
people could not enter in unto the knowledge of the true way, as Christ
complayneth in the Gospel. Math. x. iij. Then Math. 23.
they sat in the hearts of men with their false doctrine in the stead of God
and his word, and slew the souls of the people to devour their bodies, and to
rob them of their worldly substance. But when Christ and John the Baptiste
had restored the Scripture again unto the true understanding, and had uttered
their falsehead, and improued their tradicions, and confounded their false
interpretations with the clear and evident textes, and with power of the holy
Ghost, and had brought all their iuggling and hypocrisy to light, the^ they
gat them unto the elders of the people and persuaded them saying, this man is
surely of the devil, and his miracles be of the devil no doubt. And these
good works which he An old practice of the Phariseis, newly practiced by the
Pope and his Prelates.
does in healing the people, yea and his preaching against our covetousness are
but a cloak to bring him unto his purpose, that when he has gotten him
disciples ynow, he may rise against the Emperor, and make himself king. And
then shall the Romans come and take our land from us, and carry away our
people, and put other na^ions in our realm: and so shall we lose all that we
have, and the most part of our lives thereto. Take heed therefore betimes while
there is remedy, yer he go so far that ye be not able to resist him.

The elders of the people which were rich Wordly prefermentes are le^^es to
true Christianity.
and welthy, though before they in a manner favored Christ, or at y^ least way
were indifferent, nor greatly caryng whether God or the devil reigned, so that
they might bide in their authority, feared immediately (as Herod did of the
loss of his kingdom, when the wise men asked where the newborn king of
Iewed was) and conspired with the Scribes and Phariseis against Christ, and
took him and braught him unto Pilate, saying: We The Jew^^ (...) accu^ed
Christ.
have ^ounde this fellow perverting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute
unto Caesar, and saying that he is king, and mouyng the people from Galile unto
this place. The Pilate though he likewise was before indifferent, put now in
fear of the loss of his office through such persuasions, slew innocent Christ.
And in very deed as the Scribes and Phariseis were all their lives before
blind guides unto the destruction of their souls, even so were they at their
last end blind Prophets unto the destruction of their bodies. For after that
they had slain Christ and diverse of his Apostles, and persecuted those poor
wretches that believed on him, God to aduenge the poor innocent blood The
c^^ell Jews by persecutyng Christ and his Apostles procured the vengeance of
God to lighten upon them selves
that bare witness unto the truth, poured his wrath among them, that they
themselves rose against the Emperor. And the Romans came (according as they
blyndly prophesied) and slew the most part of them and carried ye rest captive
into all nations, and put other nations in the Realm. But whose fault was that
insurrection against the Emperor and mischief that followed? Christ's and his
Apostles whom they falsely accused before hand? Nay Christ taught that they
should give Caesar that pertayned unto Caesar, and God that which belonged to
God: Eue^ that they should give Caesar lawful their bodily service and God the
heart, and that they should love Gods law and repent of their evil, and come
and receive mercy, and let the wrath of god be taken from of them. And the
Apostles The Apostles(...)all o^.
taught that all souls should obey the hyer powers or temporal rulers: but
their obstinate malice that so hardened their har^s that they could not
repent, and their raylyng upon the open and manifest with which they could
not improve, and resisting the holy Ghost, and sleying of the preachers of
righteousness, brought the wrath of God upon the^, and was cause of their utter
destruction.

Even so our Scribes and Pharisees, now that their hypocrisy is disclosed, and
there falshead so brought to light that it can no longer be hid, get the^ unto
the elders of the people, the Lords, gentlemen, and temporal officers, and to
all that love this world as The practice of our Prelates in these days.
they do, and unto whosoever is great with the king, and unto the kings grace
himself, and after the same ensample, and with the same persuasions cast them
into like fear of losing of their worldly dominions, and rore unto them,
saying: ye be negligent and care nothing ot all, but have a good sport that the
heretics rail on us. But give the^ space a while till they be grown unto a
multitude, and then ye shall see them preach as fast against you, and move the
people against you, and do their best to thruste you down also, and shall cry
havoc, and make The gene^ation of Se^pentes
all common. O generation of serpents, how well declare ye that ye be the
right sons of the father of all lies. For they which ye call heretics
preach nothing save that which our Savior Jesus Christ preached and his
Apostles, adding naught thereto nor plucking ought therfro; as the Scripture
commands, and teach all men repentance to God and his holy law, and faith
unto our Savior Jesus Christ, and the promises of mercy made in him, and
obedience unto all that God commands to obey. Neither teach we so much as to
resist your most cruel tyranny with bodily violence, save with Gods word
only: entending nothing but to drive you out of the temple of Christ, the
hearts, consciences, and souls of me^ (wherein with your falshead ye sit) and
to restore again Jesus our Savior unto his possession and inheritance bought
with his blood, whence ye have driven him out with your manifold wyles and
subtlety.

Take heed therefore wicked Prelates, blind leaders of the blind, indurat
and obstinate A good admunition to all blind guides.
hypocrites take heed. For if the Phariseis for their resisting the holy
Ghost, that is to say, persecuting the open and manifest truth and sleying the
preachers thereof escaped not the wrath and vengeance of god: how shall ye
escape which are far worse the^ the Phariseis. For though the Phariseis had
shut up the Scripture and set up their own professions: yet they kept their
own professions for the most part. But ye will be Our Prelates seek to be
chief and highest.
the chiefest in Christ's flock, and yet will not keep one jot of the right
way of his doctrine. Ye have thereto set up wonderful professions to be more
holy thereby the^ ye think that Christ's doctrine is able to make you, Swarms
of sects set up by the Pope and his Prelates.
and yet keep as little thereof (except it be with dispensations) in so much
that if a man ask you, what your marvelous fashioned playing coats, and your
other popatrye mean, and what your disfigured heads, and all your Apishplay
mean, ye know not: and yet are they but signs of things which ye have
professed. Thyrdly ye will be Papists Our Prelates professethe Pope to be
their Lord but ye^ keep no part of his law.
and hold of the Pope, and yet look in the Popes law and ye keep thereof
almost naught at all but whatsoever sounds to make for your bellyes, and to
maintain your honor, whether in the Scripture or in your own traditions, or
in the Popes law, that ye compel the lay people to observe violently,
threatening them with your excommunications and cursses, that they shall be
damned both body and soul if they keep them not. And if that help you not,
then ye murder The Popes clergy are murderers
them mercilesly with the sword of the temporal powers, whom ye have made so
blind that they be ready to sley whom ye command, and will not yet hear his
cause examined nor give him room to answer for himselse.

And ye elders of the people, fear ye God also. For as the elders of the Jews
which A good admonition to all rulers.
were partakers with the Scribes and Phariseis in resisting the holy Ghost, and
in persecuting the open truth, and sleying the witnesses thereof, and in
provoking the wrath of God, had their part with them also in the day of wrath
and sharp vengeance which shortly after fell upon them, as the nature of the
sin against the holy Ghost is, have her damnation, not only in the world to
come, but also in this life, according unto all the ensamples of the Bible and
autenticke stories since the world began: even likewise ye, if ye will
wincke in so open and clear light and let your selves be led blyndfold, and
have your part with the hypocrites in like sin and mischief, be sure, ye
shall have your part with them in like wrath and vengeance that is like shortly
to fall upon them.

And concerning that the hypocrites put you in fear of the rising of your
commons against The common persuasion used by hypocrites.
you, I answer: if ye fear your co^mo^s, so testify ye against your selves
that ye are tyrauntes. For if your consciences accused you not of evil doing,
what need ye to fear your commons? What commons was ever so evil that they
rose against their heads for well doing? Moreover ye witness against your
selves also that ye have no trust in God. For he has promised the temporal
officers assistence, if they minister their offices truly, and to care for the
keepyng of the^, as much as they care for to keep his laws.

The hypocrites happly bid you take an example of the Vplanoish people of
Almany The Popes clergy are liars.
which (they lie) that Martin Luther styrred up. For first what one sentence in
all the writing of Martin Luther find they that teaches a man to resist his
superior? Moreover if Martin Luther and the preachers had styrred up the
common people of Germany, how happened it that Martin Luther and other like
preachers had not perished likewise with them, which are yet all alive at this
hour? Ye will ask me who styrred the^ up them. I ask you. Who styrred up the
commo^s of the Jews to resist the Emperor, after that the Scribes and
Phariseis with the Elders of the people had slain Christ and The wrath of God
styrreth up the people to destroy the enemie^ and persecutors of the truth.
his Apostles? Verily the wrath of God. And even so here, the wrath of God
styrred them up, partly to destroy the enemies and persecutours of the truth,
and partly to take vengeance on those carnal beasts. which abused the
Gospel of Christ to make a cloak of it to defend their fleshly liberty, and
not to obey it and to save their souls thereby.

If Kings, Lords, and great men therefore fear the loss of this world. Let
them fear God also. For in fearyng God shall God is the defender of kings and
princes.
they prolong their days upon the earth, and not with sightyng against God.
The earth is Gods only, and his favor and mercy does prolong the days of
kings in their estate and not their own power and might.

And let all men (be they never so great) hearke^ unto this and let this be an
answer unto them. Wicked king Achab said unto the Prophet Elias, Art thou he
that troublest Wicked kings and rulers that persecute Gods ministers are the
troublers of themselves and their realm and not the preachers.
Israel? And Elias au^swered, it is not I that trouble Israel, but thou and
thy fathers household, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord
and follow Idols. Even so the preachers of the truth which rebuke sin are not
the troublers of Realms and common wealths, but they that do wickedly, and
namely high Prelates and mighty Princes which walk without the fear of God
and live abhominably, corrupting the common people with their example. They be
they that bring the wrath of God on all Realms and trouble all common
wealths, with war, dearth, poverty, pestilence, evil luck and all
misfortune,

And unto all subjects be it said, if they profess the law of God and faith
of the Lord Jesus, and will be Christ's Disciples: then let them remember that
there was never man so great a subject as Christ was: there was As many as will
be the disciples of Christ must learn of him meekenes and obedience to the
higher powers.
never creature that suffered so great unright so patiently and so mekely, as
he. Therefore what soever they have been in times past, let them now think
that it is their parts to be subject in the lowest kind of subjection and to
suffer all things patiently. If the high powers be cruel unto you with
natural cruelty, then with softness and patience ye shall either win them
or mitigate their fierceness. If they join the^ unto the Pope, and persecute
you for your faith and hope which ye have in ye Lord Jesus: then call to mind
that ye be chosen to suffer here with Ye must suffer with Christ that ye may
joy with him in the life to come.
Christ, that ye may joy with him in the life to come with joy everlasting
that shall infinitely pass this your short pain here. If they command that
God forbids: or forbid that God commands, then answer as the Apostles
did, Acts. v. that God must be obeyed more then man. If they compel you to
suffer unright, then Christ shall help you to bear, and his spirit shall
comfort you. But only see that neither they put you from Gods word, nor ye
resist them with bodily violence. But abide patiently a while till the
hypocrisy of hypocrites be slain with the sword of Gods word, and until the
word be openly published and witnessed unto ye powers of ye world, that their
blyndnesse may be with out excuse. And the^ will god awake as a fierce God will
be revenged upon cruel tyrauntes.
Lion against those cruel Wolves which devour his Lambs, and will play with
the hypocrites, and compass them in their own wyles, and send them a dazing
in the head and a swimming in their brains, and destroy them with their own
counsel. And then those malicious and wilful blind persecuters which
refusing mercy when they were called thereto, chose rather to have their part
with hypocrites in sheddyng of innocent blood, shall be partakers with them also
in having their own blood shed again, God geuyng an occasion that one wicked
shall destroy an other.

And as for wickedness whence it springs, and who is the cause of all
insurrection, In the treatise following is showed who are the cause^s of
insurrection.
and of the fall of Princes, and the shortenyng of their days upon the earth,
thou shall see in the glass following which I have set before thine eyes, not
to resist the hypocrites with violence (which vengeance pertayneth unto God)
but that thou might see their wicked ways and abominable paths, to
withdraw thy self from after them and to come again to Christ, and walk in
his light, and to follow his steps, and to commit the keepyng both of thy
body and soul also unto him, and unto the father thorough him, whose name be
glorious for ever.

Amen.
Prelates appointed to preach Christ, may not leave Gods word, and minister
temporal offices: But ought to teach the lay people the right way, and let
them alone with all temporal business.
Our Savior Jesus Christ answered Pilate, Ioh. 18. that his kindome was not of
John. 18.
this world. And Matthew. x. he says: The Disciple is not Math. 1^*
greater then his master: but it ought to suffice the Disciple that he be as
his master is. Wherefore if Christ's kingdom be not of this world, nor any of
his disciples may be otherwise then he was, then Christ's Vicars which minister
The m^sters of Christ's doctrine may not have any temporal offices.
his kingdom here in his bodily abse^ce, and have ye oversight of his flock,
may be none Emperors, kings, Dukes, Lords, Knights, temporal judges, or any
temporal officer, or under false names have any such dominion, or minister any
such office as requires violence. And Math. 6. No man ca^ serve two masters.
Where Christ concludes Math. 6*
saying: Ye can not serve God and Ma^mon: that is, riches, covetousness,
ambicion and temporal dignities.

And Math. xx. Christ called his disciples unto him, and said: ye know y^
Math. 1^*
the Lords of the heathen people have dommion over them, and they that be
great do exercise power over them: How be it, it shall not be so among you. But
whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister, and he that will be
chief shall be your servant: even as the son of man came not that men should
minister unto him: but for to minister and give his life for the redemption of
many. Wherefore the officers in Christ's The officers in Christ's kingdom may
have no temporal dominion.
kingdom may have no temporal dominion or jurisdiction, nor execute any
temporal authority or law of violence, nor may have any like manner among
them. But clean contrary they must cast themselves down under al, and become
servants unto all, suffer of all, and bear the burden of every man's
infirmities, and go before the^, and fight for them against the world with the
sword of Gods word, eue^ unto ye death, after the ensample of Christ.

And Math. xviij. When the disciples asked who should be greatest in the Math.
1^.
kingdom of heaven, Christ called a young child unto him and set him i^ y^
mids among them saying: Except ye turn back and become as children, ye
shall not enter in the kingdom of heaven. Now young children bear no rule
one over an other, but al is fellowship among them. And he said moreover:
whosoever humbles himself after the ensample of this child, he is greatest
in the kingdom of heaven, that is, to be (as concerning ambition and worldly
desire) so childishe that thou could not heave thy self above thy brother,
is the very bearing of rule, and to be great in Christ's kingdom. And to
describe the very ^ashion of the greatness of his kingdom, he said: He that
receaueth one such child in my name receaueth me. What is yt to receive a
child in Christ's name? Verily to submit, to meek, and to ^o receive a
child in Christ's name what it is.
humble thy self, and to cast thy self under all men, and to consider all
men's infirmities and weaknesses, and to help to heal their diseases with the
word of truth, and to live purely that they see no contrary ensample in thee
to whatsoever thou teach them in Christ, that thou put no stumblinge block
before them, to make them fall while they be yet young and weak in the faith:
But that thou abstain as Paul teaches. 1. These. 5. Ab omni specie (...).
These. 3.
mala, from all that might seem evil or whereof a man might surmise a^iste,
and that thou so love them, that whatsoever gi^t of god in thee is, thou think
the same theirs and their food, and for their sakes given unto thee, as the
truth is, and that all their infirmities be thine, and that thou fe^e the^, and
that thine heart mourn for them, and that with all thy power thou help to
amend them, and cease not to cry to God for the^ neither day nor night: and
that thou let nothing be found in thee that any man may rebuke, but whatsoever
thou teach them, that ^e thou: and that thou be not a Wolf in The Pope is a
Wolf in a lambs skin.
a Lambs skin as our holy ^ather ye Pope is, which comes unto us in a name
of hypocrisy, and in the ^e of curssed Cham or Ham, calling himself Seruus
seruorum, the servant of all servants, and is yet found tyrannus
tyra^norum, of all tyrauntes ye most cruel. This is to receive young children
in Christ's name, and to receive young children in Christ's name, is to bear
rule in the kingdom of Christ. Thus ye see, that Christ's kingdom is all
together spiritual, and the bearing of rule in it is clean contrary unto the
bearing of rule temporally. Wherefore none that bears rule in it may have any
temporal jurisdiction, or minister any temporal office that requires
violence to compel withal.

Peter was not greater then the other Apostles, by any authority given him of
Christ.
THey say that Peter was Why Peter was called chief of the Apostles.
chief of the Apostles, verily as Appe^^^s was called chief of Painters for
his excellent cunninge above other, even so Peter may be called chief of the
Apostles for his actiuitie and boldness above the other: but that Peter had any
authority Peter had no authority above the rest of the Apostles.
or rule over his brethren and fellow Apostles, is false and contrary to ye
scripture. Christ forbad it the last even before his passion, and in diverse
tunes before, and taught always the contrary as I have rehearsed.

Thou will say: thou caust not see how there should be any good order in that
kingdom where none were better then other, and where the superior had not a
law and authority to compel the inferior with violence. The world truly
can see no other way to rule then with violence. For there no man absteineth
from evil but for fear, because the love of righteousness is not written in
their hearts. And therefore The ^opes kingdom is of the world.
the Popes kingdom is of the world. For there one sort are your grace, your
holiness, your fatherhode: An other, my Lord Bishop, my Lord Abbot, my Lord
Pryor: An other, master ^able of the Popes g^e (...) ^e his badge.
Doctor, Father, Bachelar, master Parson, master Vicar, and at the last
comes in simple sir John. And every man reigns over other with might, and
have every ruler his prison, his iayler, his chains, his torments, even so
much as the Friars ob^eruauntes observe that rule, and compel every man other,
with violence above the cruelnesse of the heathen tyrauntes, so that what
comes once in, may never out for fear of telling ta^es out of schole. They
rule over the body with violence, and compel (...) whether the heart will or
not, to observe things of their own making.

But in the kingdom of God it is contrary. For the spirit that brings them
thither, makes them wil^ing, and gives them lust unto the law of The
ministers of the kingdom of God, must govern with all love, mekenes and
patience.
God, and love co^pelleth them to work, and love makes euerty ma^s good and
all that he can do common unto his neighbors need. And as every man is strong
in that kingdom, so love compels him to take the weak by the hand and to
help him, and to take him that can not go upon his shoulders and bear him.
And so to do service unto the weaker, is to bear rule in that kingdom.

And because Peter did excede the other Peter in y^ use of speaking for his
diligence is called (but not in the Scripture) the chief of the Apostles.
Apostles in fervent service toward his brethren, therefore is ^e called, no^
in the Scripture, but in the use of speaking the chiefest of the Apostles and
not that he had any dominion over them. Of which truth thou may see also the
practice in the Acts of the Apostles after the resurrection. For when Peter
had been and preached in the house of Cornelius an heathen man the other that
were Circumcised chode him, because he had been in an uncircumcised man's house
and had eaten with him, for it was forbidden in the law, neither wist they yet
that the heathen should be called. And Peter was feign to give accountes unto
them (which is no token Peter was enforced to render an account to his brethren
of his doings.
of superiority) and to show them how he was warned of the holy ghost so to do
Acts. xj.

And Acts xv. when a Counsel was gathered of the Apostles and disciples about
the Circumcision of the heathen, Peter brought forth, not his commandment and
the authority of his Vicarshyp, Peter showed no part of his a^ ho^e, (...) the
mighty power of (...).
but the miracle that the holy ghost had showed for the heathen, how at y^
preaching of the Gospel the holy ghost had lighted upon them and purified,
their hearts through faith, and therefore proved that they ought not to be
Circumcised.

And Paul and Barnabas brought soorth the miracles also that God had showed by
them among the heathen through preaching of says. And then (...) the Apostles
allege the authority of God in Christ. and no authority of their own.
James brought soorth a prophecy of the old Testament for the said part: And
therewith the adversaries gave over their hold, and they concluded with one
assent by the authority of the scripture and of the holy ghost, that the
heathen should not be Circumcised, and not by the commandment of Peter under
pain of cursing, excommunication (...) interditing and like bugges to make
fools and children afraid withal.

And Acts viij. Peter was sent of Peter was sent by the other Apostles to
preach (...) Samaria.
the other Apostles unto the Samaritanes. which is an evident token that he
had no jurisdiction over them (for then they could not have sent him) But
rather (as the truth is) that the congregation had authority over him and over
all other private persons, to admit them for ministers and send them forth
to preach whether so ever the spirit of God moved them, and as they saw
occasion.

And in the Epistle unto the Galathians Gal.
thou see also how Paul corrected Peter when he walked not the Paul (...)to
his (...).
straight way after the truth of the Gospel. So now thou see that in the
kingdom of Christ and in his Church or congregation and in his counsels the
ruler Scripture is the ch^efest of the Apostles.
is the Scripture approved through the miracles of the holy ghost and men be
servants only, and Christ is the head and we all brethren: And when we call
men our heads, that we do not be cause they be shorn or shaven, or because of
their names: Parson, Vicare, Bishop, Pope: But only because of We ge^e
the(...)(...) reue^^nce, no^ for them ^es b^^ because of the word th^^ ^y
minister*
the word which they preach. If they err from the word, the^ may whosoever
God moves his heart play Paul and correct him. If he will not obey the
Scripture, then have his brethren authority by the Scripture to put him down
and send him out of Christ's Church among the heretics which prefer their
false doctrine above the true word of Christ,

How the Gospel punishes trespassers, and how by the Gospel we ought to go
to law with our adversaries.
THough that they of Christ's congregation be all willing: yet because that the
most part is always weak, and because also that the occasions of the world be
ever many and great, in so much that Christ which wist all thing before hand
says Math. xviij. Woe be unto the world by Math. 18.
reason of occasions of evil, and says also, that it ca^ not be avoided, but
that occasions shall come, therefore it ca^ not be chosen but that many shall
over fall when a weak brother has trespassed, by what law shall he be
punished? verily by the law of love, whose properties thou read in the 1.
Cor. xiij. If O^^ brethren (...) they (...) must b^ reformed by love* a (...)
^y (...)
the love of God which is my profession be written in mine heart, it will not
let me hate my weak brother when he has offended me, no more then natural
love will let a mother hate her child when it trespasseth against her. My weak
brother has offended me, he is fallen, his weakness has overthrown him: it
is not right by the law of love that I should now fall upon him and tread him
down in the mire and destroy him utterly: But it is right by the law of love
that I run to him and help him up again.

By what process we should go to how we may go to the law without trespassers.
law with our trespassers, Christ teaches us Math. xviij. Tell him his fault
between him and thee with all meekness remembering thou art a man and may
fall also: If he repent and thou love him, ye shall soon agree, and then
forgive him. And when thou forgeuest thy neighbor, the^ thou art sure that God
forgeueth thee thy trespasses by his holy promise Math. vj. If he Math. 6.
hear thee not, then take a neighbor or two. If he hear them not, then tell
the congregation where thou art: and let the preacher pronounce Gods law
against him and ^et the sad and discrete men rebuke him and exhort him unto
repentance. If he repent and thou also love him according to thy profession,
ye shall soon agree. If he hear not the congregation, then let him be taken
as an heathen. If he that is offended be weak also, the^ let them that be
strong go between and help them. And Open and (...) offe^d^urs are to be
r^buked openly.
in like manner if any sin against the doctrine of Christ and the profession
of a Christen man, so that he be a dronckard and an whore keeper or what soever
open sin he do, or if he teach false learning: then let such be rebuked
openly before the congregation and by the authority of Scripture. And if they
repent not, let them be put out of the congregation as heathen people. If they
the^ be not ashamed, we have no remedy but pacie^tly to abide what God will do
and to pray in the mean time that God will open their hearts and give the^
repentance. Other law then this, Christ's Gospel knows not, nor the officers
thereof.

It is manifest therefore that the kingdom The kingdom of Christ is spiritual.
of Christ is a spiritual kingdom which no man can minister well and a
te^porall kingdom to, as it is sufficiently proved: because that no man which
puts his hand to the plow, and looks back is apt for the kingdom of
heaven, as Christ answered Luke. ix. unto him yt would have followed him, but
would first have take leave of his household. If a man put his hand to the plow
of Gods word to preach it and look also unto worldly business, his plow will
surely go awry. And therefore says Christ unto an other that Luk^
would likewise follow him but desired first to go and bury his father, Let the
dead bury the dead: but come thou and show or preach the kingdom of God. As
who should say, he that will preach the kingdom of god (which is Christ's
Gospel) truly, must have his heart no where else.

What officers the Apostles ordained in Christ's Church and what their offices
were to do.
Wherefore the Apostles following Officers first ordained in Christ's church
and obeyng the rule doctrine and commandment of our Savior Jesus Christ
their master, ordained in his kingdom and congregation two officers: One
called after the Breeke Bishop.
word Bishop, in English an ouersear: which same was called Priest after the
Greek, Elder in English because of his age discretion and fadnesse: for he was
as nigh as could be always an elderly man: as thou see both in the new and old
Testament also, how the officers of the Jews be called the Elders of the
people, because (as thou may well think) they were over old men as nigh as
could be. For unto age do men naturally obey and unto age does God commau^de
to give honor Honor the aged.
saying Leu^. xix. Rise up before the horehead and reverence the face of the
old man. And also experience of things and coldness, without which it is In
ye aged is experience.
hard to rule well is more in age the^ in youth. And this ouersear did put his
hands unto the plow of Gods word and fed Christ's flock and tended the^
only without lookyng unto any other business in the world.

An other officer they chose and called Deacon.
him Deacon after the Greek, a minister in English, to minister the alms of
the people unto the poor and nedy. For in the congregation of Christ love
makes every man's gift and goods In the primitive Church they chose Deacons to
minister to y^ poor.
common unto the necessity of his neighbor. Wherefore the love of God being
yet hoate in the hearts of men, the rich that had the substance of this
worlds goods brought of their abundance great plenty unto the sustentation
of the poor and delivered it unto the hands of the Deacons. And unto the help
of the Deaco^s were widows of lx. year Widows.
old, holy, virtuous, and destitute of friends, chosen: to tend and wait upon
the sick, and to wash the Saints fete, that came from one congregation unto an
other, whether for any business or for fear of persecution. And Common goods.
those common goods of the Church offered for the succor of the poor grew
in all Churches so excedyngly The ^reat and fervent charity in the primative
church
that in some congregation it was so much that it was sufficient to mayntaine
an host of men. In so much that tyrauntes did often times persecute the Christen
for those common goods, as thou see in the life of S. Laurence the Deacon of
Rome.

And moreover the covetousness of the Prelates was the decay of Christendom,
The covetousness of yt Prelates was the decay of Christendom and ye increasing
of the kingdom of Mahomete
and the increasing of the kingdom of Mahomete. For by the first springing of
the empire of Mahomete, the Emperors, Kings, and great Lords of Christendom
had given their treasure so mightily unto the Church, what after great
victories, and what at their deaths, that their successors were not able to
maintain battle against the Saracenes and Turks (for the world was not yet
in such captivity that they could make their subjects swear on books what
they were worth, and raise up taxes at their pleasure) so that a certain
writer of stories says* The prelates gaped when the lay me^ would take the
war upon them against the Turks, and the lay men looked when the Prelates
would lay out their money to make the war withal, and not to spend it in
worse use, as the most part of them were wont to do, spending the money The
proud clergy how they spent the treasure (...) y^ ^oore.
that was gotten with almose and blood of martyrs upon goodly plate and great
vesseles of gold and silver, without care of things to come, despising God
whom they worshipped for their bellies sake only and also man. Moreover it was
the custom eue^ then, says the auctor, to ask what the Byshopprike was
worth: yea and to leave a worse for a better, or to keep both with a union. And
at the same time Isacius the deputy of the Emperor came to Isacius.
Rome to confirm the Pope in his sea The election was confirmed by the
Emperor.
with the Emperors authority, for ye election of the Pope was the^ nothing
worth except it had been confirmed by the Emperor, and he found so great
treasure in the Church of Saint John Lateran, that for disdain which he had
that they should have such treasure in store, and not to help the Emperor in
his wars against ye Turks, ^ng his soldiars lacked wages, he took it away
with violence against the will Note here the treasure that ye Bishops of Rome
had at this time.
of ye Prelates, of which he exiled some, and paid his own me^ of war with
one part, and took an other part unto him self, and sent the third part unto
the Emperor: which must needs have been a great treasure in one Church.

By what means the Prelates fell from Christ.
THe office of a bishop was a room at the beginning that no man coueted, The
Bishop of Rome in y^ primative Church was a dangerous office.
and that no man durst take upon him, save he only which loved Christ better
the^ his own life. For as Christ says that no man might be his disciple
except that he were ready to forsake life and all: even so might that officer
be sure that it would cost him his life at one time or another for bearing
record unto the truth. But after that the multitude of the Christen were
increased and many great men had received y^ faith, then both lands, and
rentes, as well as other goods were given unto the maintenance as well of the
clergy as of the poor: because they gave then no At the first entry of
Christ's Church, there was no tithes paid to ye ministers.
tithes to the Priests, nor yet now do save in certain countries. For it is
to much to give alms, offeringes, lands, and tithes also. And then the
Bishops made them substitutes under them to help them, which they called
priest, and kept the name of Bishop unto themselves.

But out of the Deacons sprang all the mischief. For through their hands All
corruption of the Church came first out of the Deacons.
went all thing, they ministered unto ye clergy, they ministered unto the poor,
they were in favor with great and small. And when the Bishops office began to
have rest and to be honorable, then the Deacons through favor and Money
purchased preferme^t.
gifts climed up thereunto, as lightly he that has the old Abbotes treasure
succedeth with us. And by ye means of their practice and acquintaunce in ye
world they were more subtle and worldly wise then the old Bishops, and less
learned in Gods word, as our Prelates are, when they come from stuardships in
Gentlemen's houses, and from surueying of great men's lands, Lords secrets,
kings counsels, Embassidourship, from war and ministering all worldly
matters, ye worldly mischief: and yet now they come not thence, but receive
all and bide there still, yea they have enacted by plain parliament that they
must bide in the The Prelates must bide still in the court.
court still, or else they may not have plurality of benefices. And then by
little and little they enhaunsed themselves, and turned all to themselves,
minishing the poor peoples part, and increasing theirs, and joining
acquaintance with great men, and with their power climed up and entitled them
with the choosing and confirming of ye Pope and all Bishops, to flatter and
purchase How the clergy first by riches and the^ by ^attery advanced
themselves.
favor and defenders: trusting more unto their worldly wisdom the^ unto the
doctrine of Christ which is ye wisdom of God, and unto the defense of man then
of God. Then while they that had the plow by the tail looked back, the plow
went awry, faith wax ed feeble and faintie, love waxed cold, the Scripture
waxed darcke, Christ was no more seen: he was in ye mount When the Prelates
waxed rich, then they disputed who should be highest.
with Moses, and therefore the Bishops would have a God upon the earth whom
they might see, and thereupon they began to dispute who should be greatest.

How the Bishop of Rome became greater then other, and called himself Pope.
THen quod worldly wisdom, Jerusalem was y^ first sea^ of ou^ (...) bishop.
Jerusalem must be the greatest, for ytwas Christ's seat, Et factu^ est, so it
came to pass ^or a season. And in conclusion where a great City was and much
riches, there was the Bishop ever greater then his fellows. Alexandre in
Egipte and Antioch in Greece, were greater then their neighbors. Then those
decaying Constantinople and Rome waxed Constantinople. Rome.
great, and strove who should be greater. And Co^sta^tinople said, where the
Emperor is there ought to be the greatest seat and chiefest Bishop. For the
Emperor lay most at Constantinople, because it was (I suppose) nigh the mids
of the Empire, therefore I must be the greatest said the Bishop of
Constantinople. Nay quod ye Bishop H^^ Rome come to be y^ chifest city.
of Rome, though ye Emperor lie nener so much at Constantinople yet he is
called Emperor of Rome, and Rome is the head of the Empire, wherefore of right
I must be the father of all Wate^. Rome the seat and mother of all wickedness.
And thus whether they chale^ged their ^itle by the authority of God or man:
or by Peter or pouling, it was all one, so they might be greatest.

And great intercession was made unto the Emperors of both parties: but in
vain a great ceason, for ye Emperors stopped their ^ares at such ambitious
requests long time, till at ye last there came an Emperor called Phocas which
lay long in Italye, and Phocas.
was a very soft man and a pray for Prelates. In whose time Boniface the iij.
Pope Boniface the third.
was Bishop of Rome, a man ambitious and greedy upon honor, and of a very
subtle wit, nothing in^erior unto Thomas Wolsee Cardinal of Yorcke. This
Boniface was great with the Emperor Phocas, and with his wyly persuasions and
great intercession together obtained of Phocas to be called the chiefest of all
Bishops, and Phocas the Emperor first gave privilege to the Bishop of Rome ^o
be the chief Bishop.
that his Church should be the chief Church. Which authority as soon as he
had purchased, he sent immediately his commandment with the Emperors power
unto all the Bishops of Almany commanding that every bishop should call all
the priests of his diocese, and charge them that every man should put away his
wife under The chastity of Priests how it came up.
pain of excommunication. Which tyranny though great resistaunce was made
against it, he yet brought to pass with the Emperors sword, and his
subtletie together. For the Bishops were rich, and durst not displea^e the
Pope for fear of the Emperor.

As Soon as Nemroth that mighty hunter had caught this pray, that he Note (...)
the climing up of the Pope.
had compelled all Bishops to be under him and to swear obedience unto him,
then he began to be great in the earth, and called himself Papa, with this
interpretation, father of fathers. And when the Pope had exalted his throne
above his fellows, then the unity that ought to be among brethren Division in
the Church.
in Christ's Church brake: and division began between us and ye Greeks, which
Greeks (I suppose) were at yt time the one half of Christendom. And when any
Pope since exhorts them to unity, they answer, that he which will reign
over his brethren with violence, breaks unity and not they, and that they
will not be under The Greeks will not be under the Popes tyranny.
his tyranny whereunto he calls them under a color of unity. And from
henceforth with the help of his Bishops which weresworne to be true ligemen
unto him, when beforetyme they were admitted to their byshopprikes of the
Emperors and Kings, he began to lay a bait to catch the whole Empire into
his hands also.

By what means the Pope invaded the Empire.
AT that same season Mahomete Mahomet and the Pope began at one time.
the auctor of the sect of the Turckes and Saracenes began. And as soon as he
had got much people unto him with wyles and feigned miracles, he invaded the
Empire of Rome in those quarters. And look how busy Mahomete was in those
parries, so busy was the Pope in these quarters to invade the Empire (with the
help of his sworn Bishops which preached all of none other God then the
Pope) while the Emperor was occupied a far of in resisting of Mahomete.

And within few years after, when the kings of Italy now and the^ vexed our
holy fathers for their covetous ambicion, then Gregory the third joined Gregory
The Pope came up by the French me^, and by them he continues his estate still.
amity with the Frenchmen, and called them to help, by whose power they gatte
al they have, and also maintain it unto this day. For if any man since that
time hither displeased the Pope never so little, he immediately curssed him, and
excommunicate him, and proclaimed him no right enheritour, and that it was not
lawful to hold of him, and absolved his Lords and subjects of their
allegeaunce, and sent his blessing unto the French king and remission of sins
to go and conquer his land, the Pope and French king always dividing the spoil
between them, the Bishops and all that served God for the belie preaching the
Popes might, how that he had power so to do, and all things to bind and loose
at his will, wrestyng the Scriptures to serve for their purpose, corruptyng all
the laws both of God and man to prove his Godhead with all.

THen came Pope Zacharias the first Pope Zacharias the first. Hildericus
in whose time Hildericus was K. of France a man that governed his Realm (as
it often chances) by a Debite (as persons preach) one Pipine a Pipinns.
Lord of his own and his sworn subject. This Pipine sent an holy Bishop to
Pope Zacharias that he should help to make him king of France and he would be
his defender in Italy (as the The Pope put down the right French king and set
up Pipine.
manner of scalled horses is the one to claw the other) and Zacharias answered
that he was more worthy to be king that ruled the Realm and took the
labors, then an idle shadow that went up and down and did naught And so upon
that the Lords of France The king of France was made a Monk.
by the persuasions of the Prelates consented unto Pipine and thrust down
their right king unto whom they were sworn, and made a Monk of him. And both
the Lords and also Pipine took dispensations for their oaths of our holy
father and were forsworn. Thus was our holy father the Pope crept up into the
consciences of men with his false interpretation of byndyng and loosyng good.
viij. hundred years agone.

THen came Pope Stephanus the second out of whose hands Estulphus Pope Steven
the second. Estulphus king of Lumbardy
king of Lombardy would feign have scratched somewhat, for he thought that the
holy fathers gathered to taste and had all ready raked to much unto the^. But
the new king Pipine of France warned of his duty and service promised, and
mindful of old frendshyp, and hopyng for part of the pray, came to succor
the Pope. And when he had subdued the king of Lambardy, he gave unto our holy
father or rather to How the Pope was advanced.
S. Peter yt hungry beggar great Provinces and countries in Lombardy and in
Italy, with the I Will Corsica and many great Cities of which some pertayned unto
the Emperor being the^ at Constantinople, and yet the Emperor had sent before
unto king Pipine that he should not give of his towns unto the Pope. But
Pipine answered that he came for the same intent, and to enhaunce our holy
father. And our holy father received them.

And thus the Empire was divided in two parts: the Pope and the French king
partyng the one half between them. And as the Emperor decayed, the pope grew.
And as the pope grew, so the sect of Mahomete grew, for the By what means
Mahomet waxed great.
Emperor (half his empire lost) was not able to defend him self against the
infidels. And the Pope would suffer no help hence to come for two causes: One,
lest the Emperor should recover his Empire again, and an other because the
Prelates of the Greeks would not submit them selves unto his Godhead as the
Prelates of these quarters of the world had done.

AFter Pipine reigned his son the Carolus magnus.
great Charles whom we call Charle main which knew no other God but the pope,
nor any other way to heaven then to do the Pope pleasure. For the Pope served
him for two purposes: One, to dispense with him for whatsoever The Pope become
a great God on y^ earth.
mischief he did: an other, to be stablished in the Empire by his help, for
without his favor he wist it would not be, so great a God was our holy father
become all ready in those days.

This Pope Stephen in his latter days fell at variaunce with Desiderius
Desiderius
king of Lombardy about the Archbishop of Rauen^a.

AFter Stephen succeeded Adria^ y^ first, Pope Adrian the first.
with whom Desiderius the K. of Lo^bardy would feign have made peace but pope
Adrian would not. And shortly upon that the brother of this Charlemayne which
reigned with him in half the dominion of France dyed, whose wife for fear of
Charles fled with her ij. sons unto Desiderius king of Lombardy for succor.
Defiderius was glad of their coming trusting by the means of these two
children to obtain favor among many of the Frenchmen and so to be able to
resist Charles if he would meddle and to bring Italy unto the right Emperor
again, and would have had that pope Adrian should have anointed them kings
in their fathers room. But Adrian refused that to do (for he saw Charles
mighty and mete for his purpose) and was as wyly as Desiderius and thought to
keep out The Pope purposed to be Emperor him self.
the right Emperor and be Emperor of Rome him self, though he gave an other
the name for a season till a more convenient time came.

Then Desiderius warred upon the Popes jurisdiction. And Adrian sent to
Charles. And Charles came with his army and drove out Desiderius and his son,
which son fled unto the right Emperor to Constantinople. And Charles and the
Pope divided the kingdom Charles and the Pope divided the kingdom of Lombardy.
of Lombardy between the^. And Charles came to Rome. And the Pope and he were
sworn together, that who soever should be enemy unto the one, should be enemy
also unto the other.

This Adrian gathered a Council The Pope gathered a Council, and gave unto
Charles the Emp^re of Rome.
immediately of an. C. liij. Bishops, Abbotes, and religious persons and gave
unto Charles and his successors the empire of Rome and ordained that the right
and power to chose the Pope should be his, and that no Bishop should be
consecrate till he had obtained of him both consent and the ornaments of a
Bishop also (which they now bye of the Pope) under pain of cursyng and to be
delivered unto black Satan the devil and loss of goods Did. lxiij.

And Leo the third which succeeded Leo the (...). Pope.
Adrian confirmed the same and crowned Charles Emperor of Rome for like
service done unto him. And then O^ne who^e Empire, the Pope made ^^o.
there was appoyntme^t made between the Emperoures of Constantinople and of
Rome and the places assigned how far the borders of either Empire should
reach. And thus of one Empire was made twain. And therefore the Empire of
Constantinople for lack of help was shortly after subdued of the Turks.

The said Leo also called Charles the Most Christen king.
most Christen king, because of his good service: which title the kings of
France use unto this day though many of them be never so unchristened: As the
last Leo called our king the defender Defender of the faith
of the faith. And as this Pope Clemens calls the Duke of Bu^lder the eldest
son of yt holy sea of Rome, The eldest son of the holy seat.
for no other virtue nor property that any man can know, save that he has
been all his ^yte a pickequar^ll and a cruel and an unrighteous bloudshedder,
as his father that sits in that holy sea is. So now above seven hundred Who
is a Christian king.
years to be a Christian king is to fight for the Pope, and most Christen that
most fights and sleath most men for his pleasure.

This Charles was a great conqueror The life of Charles.
that is to say a great tyrant, and overcame many nations with the sword, and
as the Turk compels us unto his faith, so he compelled the^ with violence
unto the faith of Christ say the stories. But (alas) Christ's faith whereunto
Charles compelled a^ men to the obedience of the pope.
the holy Ghost only draws men's hearts thorough preaching the word of truth
and holy living according thereto, he knew not, but unto the Pope he subdued
them and unto this superstitious Idolatry which we use clean contrary unto
the Scripture.

Moreover, at the request and great desire of his mother, he married the
daughter of Desiderius king of Lombardy, but after one year unto the Practice.
great displeasure of his mother he put her away again: but not without the
false sutiltie of the Pope thou may be sure, neither without his
dispensation. For how could Charles have made war for the Popes pleasure
with Desiderius her father, and have thrust him out of his kingdom, and
banished his son for ever, dividing his kingdom between him and the pope, as
long as she had been his wife?

And therefore the Pope with his authority of bynding and losyng, losed The
Pope is a dispenser a breaker of the bonds of Matrimony.
the bonds of that Matrimony (as he has many other sense, and daily does for
like purposes) to the intent that he would with the sword of the French king
put the kingdom of Lombardy that was somewhat to nigh him, out of the way: by
the reason of whose kings his fatherhode could not raygne alone nor assign or
sell the Byshopprikes of Italy to whom he lusted and at his pleasure.

The said Charles also kept iiij. concubines, Charles a filthy whoremonger.
and lay with two of his own daughters thereto. And though he wist how yt it
was not unknown, yet his lusts being greater the^ great Charles, he would not
wete nor yet refrain.

And beyond all that, the saying is: yt in his old age a whore had so bewitched
him with a ryng and a pearl in it and I wotte not what imagerie graven
therein, that he went a sa^te after her as a dog after a bitche, and the
Charles has his whore ca^^ed with him.
dotehead was beside him self and whole out of his mind: in so much that when
the whore was dead, he could not depart from the dead corpse, but caused it to
be enba^ed and to be carried with him whether soever he went, so that all the
world wondered at him: till at the last his Lords accombred with carrying her
from place to place and ashamed This was an Emperor for the ^^pes own mouth.
that so old a man, so great an Emperor and such a most Christen king, on whom
and whose deeds every man's eyes were set, should dote on a dead whore, took
counsel what should be ye cause. And it was concluded that it must needs be by
enchauntement. The^ they went unto the Cophyne and opened it and sought and
found this ring on her finger: which one of the Lords took of and put it on
his own finger. When the ring was of, he commanded to burye her, regardyng
her no longer. Nevertheless he cast a fantasy unto this Lord and began to
dote as fast on Ido^yng Emperor
him, so that he might never be out of sight: But where our Charles was there
must that Lord also be, and what Charles did, that must he be priuey unto:
until that this Lord perceauyng that it came because of this enchaunted ring,
for very pain and tediousness took and cast it into a well at Acon in
Douchland. And after that the ryng was in the well the Emperor could never
depart from the town, but in the ^ayd place where the ring was cast, though it
were a foul marresse, yet he built a goodly monastery in the worship of our
Lady, and thither brought relics, from whence he could get them, and
pardons to sanctify ye place, and to make it more haunted. And there he lies,
and is a Saint, as right is. For he did for Christ's Vicar as much as the The
Pope made this lecherous Emperor a Saint.
great Turcke for Mahomete: but to save his holiness that he might be canonised
for a Saint, they feign in his life that his abiding there so continually was
for the hot bathes sakes which ^e there.

AFter Charlemayne, Jews ye mylde Jews the mild.
was Emperor, which was a very patient man (another Phocas and another pray
for the Pope) and so meke and soft that scarcely he could be angry at any
thing at all. When our holy fathers had seen his water and spyed what
complexion he was, they chose Steven the 4. of that name Pope, without his Pope
Steven the iiij.
knowledge, and bad him neither good morrow nor good even, nor once God speed
about the matter, against their own grant unto his father for his good
service. And his softnes The Pope elected and set up with out the assent of the
Emperor
was yet somewhat displeased therewith, in as much as the election of the Pope
pertayned unto his right. But the Pope sent Ambassadors and wrote all the
excuses that he could, and came after him self to France to him, and peaced
him, and crowned him there Emperor, and passed the time a season with him, and
they became very familiar together.

After that, they chose Paschalis Pope Pope Paschale.
of the same manner, which Paschalis sent immediately Legates unto the Emperor
soft Jews, excusing himself and saying: that it was not his fault, but that
the clergy and the common people had drawn him thereto with violence against
his will. Then the Emperor was content for that once, and bad they The Pope
how he abused the Emperor
should no more do so, but that the old ordinance ought to be kept. The
softness of this Jews did him much care. For he was after prisoned of his
own son with help of Pope Gregory the fourth.

After this man's days the Popes never regarded the Emperors, nor The Pope
sets no^ by the Emperor.
did the clergy of Rome sue any more to the Emperor, either for the election
or confirmation of the Pope. More over after this Jews there was never
Emperor in Christendom of any power or able of his own might to correct any
Pope, neither was there any king that could correct the outrageous vices of
the spirituality of his own realm after this time. For this Jews left three
sons, among which he divided ye realm of France and all Douchland. Which
same for pride and disdain that one should have more then an other, fell
together (as we say) by the ears, each destroying others power, so that France
was afterward of no might to do any great thing. And the^ the Pope reigned in
Italy alone with ^ne.
out care of any Emperor: in so much that Nicholaus the first, decreed that no
Pope Nicholaus the first.
secular Prince or Emperor should have ought to do or be at the counsels of
the clergy.

And after that Adrian the second was Pope Adrian the second.
chosen Pope, the Emperors deputy being in Rome, and not once spoken to of
the matter.

And when the Emperors ambassadors disdained, they answered who can resist
the rage of the people, and prayed them to be content, and to salute him as
Pope. And Adrian the third Pope Adrian the third.
decreed that they should not abide or tarry for the Emperors confirmation or
authority in choosing the Pope, and that the Pope only should call a general
counsel, and not the Emperor: or if the Emperor would presume yt to do, the
counsel should be of none effect, though all the prelates of Christendom were
there, and though what soever they did were but Gods word. So mighty was the
beast now waxed The virtue of the Pope and power o^ y^ Emperor perished
together.
when he once began to raygne alone. And from this time hitherto perished the
power of the Emperors and the virtue of the Popes, says Platina in ye life of
Popes. For since that time, as there was none Emperor of might, so was there
no Pope of any virtue.

After this Jews, the Empire of France, and of all Douchla^d, was divided
between his three sons, which (as I said) fought one with another and
destroyed the strength of the Empire of France. And from that time The popes
have been only blood shede^^ above. vij. C. peates.
to this, which is above vij. hundred years, thou shall read of few Popes
that have not led their lives in bloudshedding, in so much that if thou
consider the stories well, thou shall easily perceive that there has been
flayne about their cause far above xl. hundred thousand men, besides that
there has been but few Princes in Christendom that has not been busied and
combred a great part of his life about their matter. Either in wars begun
at their setting on, either in ceasing scismes or division that has been among
the clergy, who should be Pope: or striving All Christ^dome has been troubled
with the Popes causes.
of bishops, who should be greatest, as between the Bishop of York and
Canterbury in England, and between the Bishops of England and Wales, whereof all
the chronicles be full, or in reforming Friars or Monks, or in sleying them
that uttered their false hypocrisy with Gods word.

When the Emperor was down, and no man in Christendom of any power to be
feared, then every nation fell upon other, and all lands were at variaunce
between themselves. And then as the Danes came into England and vexed the
Englishmen, and dwelt there in spite of their hearts, even so came strange
nations whose names were scarce heard of before in these quarters (as the
Vandales, Hunnes, Vandales, Hunnes. Goths.
and Goths) and ran thorowout all Christendom by C. thousands together, and
subdued the lands and dwelt therein ma^gre the inhabitours, as thou may see
in Douchland how diverse nations are enclosed in ye mids of the land of a
strange tongue which no Douchmen understand: and that rule continued well
viij. or ix. score or two hundred years. And in The spirituality obe^ed to him
that gat the victory, how wicked soever he was.
all this ceason, whosoever wan the maystrye, him the spirituality received,
and him they crowned king, and to him they claue. And whatsoever any tyrant
had robbed all his life, that or the most part thereof must he deal among them
at his death for fear of Purgatory. The spirituality all that ceason preached
the Pope mightily, Building of Abbeyes
built Abbayes for recreation and quyetnes, shrining them always for saints
Shrining of saints.
which purchased them privileges, or fought for their liberties, or disputed
for the Popes power, howsoever they lived (but after l. year when their lives
were forgotten) and if any resisted the^ whatsoever mischief they went about,
him they noted in the chronicles as a cruel tyrant: ye and whatsoever
misfortune chanced any of his posterity after him, that they noted also, as
though God had plagued them, because their forefather was disobedient unto holy
church, and ever put the stories that uttered their wickedness out This was the
time that false prophets did arise in the church.
of the way, and gathered relics from whence they could get them, and feigned
miracles, and gave themselves only unto Poetry: and shut up the scripture: so
that this was the very time of which Christ speaks Math. xxiiij. in which
false Prophets should arise, and show miracles and wonders, to deceive the
very elect if it had been possible.

FInally in this busy world, the kings of Lumbardy gatte a little might and
came up again, and were diverse times Emperors, though of no great might. And
one Beringarius king of Lumbardy began to meddle Beringarius.
with our holy fathers business. Wherefore ye Poge fled unto Ottho king of ye
Saxons, which by that time had gotten might, and brought him into Italy against
Beringarium, which Ottho Ottho.
overcame Beringarium, and was made Emperor for his labor, and thus came the
Empire first unto Douchlande.

And Ottho received the Empire of one Pope John (say they) with this Pope John
the. xij.
oath: I Ottho do promise and swear unto the Lord John by the father, the The
oath of the Emperor made to the pope.
son, and the holy Ghost, and by this wod of the cross that makes living,
and by these relics of Saints, that if I come to Rome with Gods help, I
will exalte the holy church of Rome and the governor of the same unto my
power: Neither shall thou lose life nor members, or that honor that thou have
by my will, counsel, consent or setting a work. Moreover I will make in Rome
no constitution or ordinance of any thing that pertayneth unto thee or unto
the Romans with out thy counsel. And what so ever of Not^ here the
dissimulation of y^ Pope, in calling his possessions S. Peter's possessions.
the lands of Saint Peter comes unto our hands, I will deliver it thee. And
unto whosoever I shall commit the rule of Italy, I will make him swear that he
shall help thee, to defend the lands of Saint Peter unto his power.

And Gregory the fifth (when they had got at the last that which they long gaped
Pope Gregory the fi^t.
for) made this ordinance of choosing ye Emperor, to stablishe it withal:
that vi. Lords of Almany, iij. of The election of the Emperor apperteyneth to
the Lords of Germany.
the spirituality and iij. of the temporaltie with the king of Bohem the vij.
to be the odd man and Vmpere should ^huse him for ever, and send him to the
Pope to receive his oath, and to be crowned. Nevertheless the Pope to keep
the Emperor a far of, sends him his coronation home to him ofttymes, much
lever than that he should come any nearer, as a meek spryted man, that had
lever live solitary and alone then have his holiness seen.

A proper similitude to describe our holy father.
ANd to se how our holy father came up, mark the example of an Iuytree: first
it springs out of y^ earth, and The Iuytree springs.
then a while crepeth along by yt ground till it find a great tree: then it
joins it self be neath allow unto the body of the tree and creeps up a
little and a little fair and softly. And at the beginning while it is yet thynne
and small The manner how y^ pope did spring up to his great authority.
that the burden is not perceived, it seems glorious to garnishe the tree in
the wyntre and to bear of the tempests of the weather. But in the mean
season it thrusts his roots into yt barck of the tree to hold fast with all
and ceasseth not to clyme up till it be at the top and above all. And then it
sends his branches a long by the branches of the tree and ouergroweth all
and waxes great, heavy and thick and sucketh the moisture so sore out of the
tree and his branches, that it choketh and stif^eth them. And then the foul
stinckyng Iuye waxes mighty in the sto^pe of the tree and becomes a sete and
a nest for all unclean birds and for blind Oules which hawk in the dark
and dare not come at the light.

Even so the Bishop of Rome now called Pope at the beginning crope a long upon
the earth, and every man trod upon him in this world. But as soon as there
came a Christen Emperor he joined him self unto his feet and kissed them,
and crope up a little with beggyng now this privilege now that, now this City
now that, to find poor people with all and the necessary Ministers of Gods
word. And The choosing of the Pope and all Bishops perteyned unto the Emperor
and kings once.
he entitled the Emperor with chosing the Pope and other Bishops, and
promoted in the spiritualty, not whom virtue and learning but whom the favor
of great men commended: to flater to get friends and defenders with all,

And the alms of the congregation which was the fode and patrimony of The
alms given unto the poor is become S. Peter's patrimony.
the poor and necessary preachers, that he called S. Peter's patrimony, S.
Peter's reutes, S. Peter's lands, S. Peter's right: to cast a vain fear and an
heathenish superstitiousnesse into the hearts of me^, that no man should dare
meddle with what soever came once in to their hands for fear of Saint Peter,
though they ministered it never so evil: and that they which should think it
none alms to give them any more (because they had to much already) should yet
give S. Peter somewhat (as Nabucodonesser gave his GOD Beel) to purchasse an
advocate and an Dani. xiiij.
intercessor of S. Peter, and that S. Peter should at the first knock let the^
in.

And thus with flateryng and fayning and vain superstition under the name of
S. Peter he crept up and fastened The Pope first gat above all the Bishops, and
then above the Emperor.
his roots in the heart of the Emperor, and with his sword clame up above all
his fellow bishops and brought them under his feet. And as he subdued the^ with
the Emperors sword, even so by sutiltie and help of them (after that they
were sworn saythfull) he clame above the Emperor, and subdued him also, and
made s^oupe unto his feet, and kiss the^ an other while. Yea pope Coelestinus
crowned the Emperor Henry the fifth holdyng ye crown O Lucifer.
between his feet. And when he had put the crown on, he smote it of with Note
this deuilish and ^nable pride.
his feet again saying: that he had might to make Emperors and put them
down again.

And he made a constitution that no ^e ^e by the Pope.
lay man should meddle with their matters nor be in their Councels or wit what
they did, and that the pope only should call the Council, and the Emperor
should but defend the Pope, provided allway that the Council should be in one
of the Popes Towns, and where the Popes power was greater then the Emperors:
then under a pretense The Pope creates his shauelyngs into dignities.
of condemnyng some heresy he called a general Council, where he made one a
Patriarcke, an other Cardinal, an other Legate, an other Primate, an other
Archbishop, an other Bishop, another Deane, another Arch deacon, and so forth
as we now see.

And as the Pope played with the Qualis pater talis filius, good natural
children.
Emperor, so did his branches and his members the Bishops play in every
Kingdom, Dukedom, and Lordshyp: in so much that the very heirs of them by
whom they came up, hold now their lands of them and take the^ for their chief
Lords. And as the Emperor is sworn to the Pope, even so every king is sworn
to the Bishops and Prelates of his Realm: and they are the chiefest in all
Parlamentes: yea they and their money and they that be sworn to them and come
up by them rule all together.

And thus the Pope the father of all The popes order compared with Christ's.
hypocrites has with falsehode and guile perverted the order of the world and
turned the roots of the trees upward and has put down the kingdom of
Christ, and set up the kingdom of the devil whose Vicare he is, and has put
down the Ministers of Christ, and has set up the Ministers of Satan,
disguised yet in names and garments like unto the angels of light and
ministers of righteousness. For Christ's kingdom is not of the world John.
xviij. and the Popes kingdom is all the world.

And Christ is neither judge nor diuider in this world Luke. xij. But the
Christ and the Pope compared together.
Pope judges and deuideth all the world and takes the Empire and all
kingdoms and gives them to whom he lusts.

Christ says Math. v. Blessed are the poor in spirit: so that the first step
in the kingdom of Christ is humbleness or humility, that thou can find in
thine heart to do service unto all me^ and to suffer that all men tread thee.

The Pope says. Blessed be the proud and high minded that can clyme and
subdue all under them and mayntaine their right and such as will suffer of no
man: so that he which was yesterday taken from the dongehill and promoted this
day by his Prince, shall tomorow for the Popes pleasure curse him and
excommunicate him and interdite his Realm.

Christ says. Blessed be the meke or soft that be harmless as Doves.

The Pope blesses them that can set all the world together by the ears and
fight and s^ea mafully for his sake, that he may come haote from bloudsheddyng
to a Byshopricke as our Cardinal did, and as S. Thomas of Canterbury did,
which was made Bishop in the field in complete harness on his horse back and
his spear bloody in his hand.

Christ has neither holes for Foxes nor nestes for birds nor yet whereon to
lay his head, nor promised ought in this world unto his Disciples nor took any
to his Disciple but him that had forsaken all.

The Iuytree the Pope has under his roots thoroughout all Christendom in
every village holes for Foxes and nestes for unclean birds in all his
branches, and promises unto his Disciples all the promotions of the world.
Christ brings a man low, but the Pope lifts up a high.


The nearer unto Christ a man comes, the lower he must descend and the
poorer he must wax: But the nearer unto the Pope ye come, the higher ye must
clyme and the more riches ye must gather whence soever ye can get them, to pay
for your Bulls, and to purchase a glorions name and license to wear a mitre
and a cross and a palle and goodly ornaments.

How the Pope receaueth his kingdom of the devil and how he distributeth it
again.
SHortly, the kingdoms of the earth The Pope receaueth his riches and
kingdoms of the devil.
and the glory of them (which Christ refused (Math. iiij. did the devil profer
unto the Pope, and he immediately fell from Christ and worshipped the devil,
and received them. For by falsehead (as he maynteineth them) came he thereto,
and by falsehead do all his disciples come thereto. Who of an hundred one is
pope, Bishop or any great Prelate, but either by Nicromancy or Symonie or
waytyng on great men's pleasures and with corruptyng of Gods word and fashioning
it after their lusts.

And the Pope after he had received The Pope distributeth his fathers king dome.
the kingdom of the world of the devil and was become the deuilles Vicare,
took up in like manner all Christendom an high and brought them from the
meekness of Christ unto the high hill of the pride of Lucifer and showed them
all the kingdoms of the earth, saying: fall down and worship me, and I will
give you these. Unto the spiritualitie he says: fall from Christ and preach me
and take thou that Car dinalship thou that Byshopricke, thou that Abbotshyp,
and so forth: thou as many benefices as thou will and a dispensation for what
thou will. And to Monks and Friars in like manner, ^ake thou that hole, and
thou that nest with what privileges ye will desire and dispensations of your
rules, if ye will preach me.

And unto the temporalitie he says: First to the Emperor, if thou will fall
down and kiss my feet and swear to hold of me and to defend me I give thee
the Empire.

And to all kings in like manner, if they will swear to defend his liberties,
and to hold of him, he crowns them. And eue^ so all temporal Lords from the
highest unto the lowest and all officers and all manner subjects, if they will
enjoy lands, rentes, offices, goods and their very lives they must ^me the
same way.

The very whores (Gods honor unregarded) as long as they despise not him and
his ordinances, they shall neste in his rentes and among his Prelates. And the
thieves and murderers shall have dens in his sanctuaries, whatsoever they do
against God, so long as they hang on him.

The Apostles chose Priests to The popes order compared with the order of the
Apostles.
preach Christ only all other things laid a part, and chose none but
learned and virtuous.

The Pope shaueth whosoever comes, lever out of the stues then from study,
and when they be sworn, he The popes Priests.
sends them unto all great men's houses to preach his godhed, to be stuardes,
surueyers, receauers and counselors of all manner mischief: to corrupt wife,
daughter and maid, and to betray their own master, as often as it needs to
promote their falshead withal. For thereto are they sworn together. And when
they have done all mischief, there shall no man were whence it comes.

The Apostles chose Deacons to minister the almose of the rich unto the poor.
And to help the Deacons they The popes widows.
chose widows of lx. year old, holy and destitute of friends to tend the
sick. And the Pope in stead of such widows, makes whosoever comes whether
she be young or old, but none save them that be rich and able to pay xx. xxx.
or xl. pound for their profession, to whom for as much more he will give a
dispensation on the morrow to mary again. And in stead of such Dea The popes
Deacons.
cons, he makes both Deacons and subdeacons, which do nothing at all but are
vain names without office, except it be that on some holy day in stead of
ministering ye goods of the church unto the poor they sing an epistle or
gospel to beg more from the poor.

And as his Deacons minister the goods of the Church unto the poor: even so
do his Priests preach Christ's Gospel unto the flock.

And the almose that was given to How the Pope deuideth the poor peoples alms.
the sustentation of the poor, which thou shall read in stories that it was
in some cities above xx. xxx. xl. yea an hundred thousand pound, and all the
lands given for the same purpose, they have stolen from them and have divided
it among themselves. And therewith did they at the beginning corrupt the great
men of the world, and clam up to this heith where they now be. And for that
have they strouen among themselves this viij. hundred years. And to maintain
that which they have falsely gotten, has the pope sturred up a sword of war
in all Christendom this viij. hundred years, and has taken peace clean out
of the world.

When the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons were fallen, and had received of the
Pope the kingdom that pertayned unto the poor people, and had robbed them and
parted their patrimony among themselves: then sprang the orders of Monks.
Whose profefsion was, to abstain from sleshe all Monks.
their lives, to wear vile raiment, to eat but once in the day, and that but
butter, chese, eggs, fruits, roots, and such things that were not costly,
and might every where be found. And they wrote books, and wrought diverse
things to get their lining withal. When the lay men saw that the priests
were fallen into such covetousness, and that the Monks were so holy: they
thought, these be meet me^ to minister our almose unto the poor people. For
their profession is so holy that they can not deceive us as ye priests Monks
made ministers to the poor,
do, and made the Monks tutors and ministers unto the poor, and gave great
lands and riches into their hands to deal it unto the poor. When the Monks
saw such abundaunce, they fell after the ensample of the Priests, and took
dispensations of the Pope for their rules, and strait profession, which now is
as wide as their coules, and divided all among them and robbed Monks rob the
poor*
the poor once more. And out of the Abbayes took he the most part of
byshopprikes and cathedral churches, and the most part of all the lands he
has, besides that there remain yet so many mighty Abbayes and Nunries thereto.

As Soon as the Monks were fallen, then sprang these begging Friars out of
hell, the last kind of Caterpillars, Begging friars.
in a more vile apparel, and a more strait religion, that (if ought of
relief were left among the lay men for the poor people) these horseleches
might suck that also. Which dronebees as soon as they had learued their
craft, and had buylt them goodly and costly nestes, and their limiters had
denided all countries among them to beg in, and had prepared liuinges of a
certain tie, though with begging, then they also took dispeusations of the
Pope for to live as largely and as lewdly as the Monks.

And yet unto the lay men whom they have thus falsely robbed, and from which
they have divided themselves, The charge of the ^ay people.
and made them a several kingdom among themselnes, they leave the pay ing of
toll, custom, and tribute (for unto all yt charges of the realms will they
not pay one mite, and the finding of all the poor, the finding of scholars for
the most part, the finding of these foresaid horseleches, and caterpillars, the
begging Friars, the repayring of the hye ways, and bridges, the building and
reparations of their Abbaies and Cathedral Churches, Chapels, Coledges, for
which they send out their pardons daily by heaps, and gather a thousand
pound for every hundred that they bestow truly.

If the lay people have war or what soever charge it be, they will not bear
a mite. If the war be theirs (as the one part almost of all war is to
desende them) they will with falshead make the^ bear the greatest part,
besides that they must leave their wines and children and go fight for them and
lose their lives. And likewise in all their charges they have a cast to poule
the lay people. The Scotts cast down a castle of ye Bishop of Durhams on the
Scottishe bancke called Norant castle. And he gat a pardon from Rome for the
bulding of it again, wherewith I doubt not but he gat for every penny that he
bestowed three.

And what do they with their store that they have in so great plenty every How
the spirituality bestow their treasure.
where: so that the very begging Friars in short space to make a Cardinal or a
Pope of their sect, or to do what feate it were for their profit, would not
stick to bring above a kings rau^som? verily make goodly places and parkes of
pleasure, and gaye shrynes, and painted posts, and purchase pardons, wherewyth
they yet still poule and pluck away that little wherewith the poor which
perish for need, and fall into great inconveniences might be somewhat helped
and releued. And lay up in store to have always to pay for the defending of
their faith, and for to oppress the truth.

How the Pope made him a law, and why.
AFter that the Pope with tyranny was clom up above his brethren, and had made
all the spirituality his subjects, and had made of them and him a several
kingdom among themselves, and had separated them from the lay in all things,
and had got privileges, that whatsoever they did no man should meddle with
them: and after also he had received the kingdoms of the earth of Satan, and
was become his Vicar to distribute the^: and after that the Emperor was fallen
in like manner at his feet and had worshipped him as God to receive his Empire
of him, and all kings had done likewise to be anointed of him and to be
crowned of him, and after that the world both great and small had submitted
them selves to receive the beasts badge: then because yt Christ's doctrine was
contrary unto all such kingdoms, and therefore had no law therein how to rule
it, he went and made him a several law of his own making, which The Pope
makes laws.
passed in cruelty and tyranny ye laws of all heathen Princes.

And in his law he thrust in feigned gifts of old Emperors that were out of
memory, saying yt the Emperor Constantinus had given up the Empire What
subtlety the Pope uses to stablishe his kingdom.
of Rome unto Saint Siluester which is proved a false lie for diverse causes:
One that Saint Siluester being so holy a man as he was would not have received
it contrary to his masters commandments and doctrine: Another that the
Emperors reigned in Rome many years after, and all Bishops sued unto the
Emperor, and The Pope has feined the gift of Constantine.
not to the pope, which was but bishop of Rome only, and not called father of
fathers. Moreover that no autentike story makes meution that any Emperor gave
them their patrimony, but that Pipine which falsely and with strength invaded
the Empire gave it unto him. Then put he in the grant of Phocas, then the gift
of Pipine confirmed by the great Charles: then a feigned release of the election
of the Pope given up again unto Pope Paschale by the Emperor Jews. For they
the^ selves had granted unto Charlemaine and his successors, for ever the
election or denomination of the Pope and Bishops to flatter him withal, and to
make him a faithful defender, and that in a general counsel which (as they
say) cannot err. Nevertheless Pope Paschall though he believed the counsel
could not err, yet he thought them somewhat over seen to make so long a
grannt, and therefore he purchased a release of gentle Jews as they pretend.
But verily it is more likely that they feigned that grant to excuse their
tyranny after they had taken the election into their hands again with
violence, when the Emperors were weak and not able to resist them: as they
feigned the gift of Constantine, after they had invaded the Empire with
subtlety and falsehead. And last of all they brought in the oath of Ottho with
the order that now is used to choose the Emperor.

How the Pope corrupts the Scripture and why.
Moreover lest these his lies should be spyed and lest happly the Emperors The
Pope corrupts the scripture, and why?
following might say, our predecessors had no power to bind us nor to minish
our might: And lest kings following should say after the same manner, that the
sword and full power to punish evil doers indifferently is given of God to every
king for his time, and therefore that their predecessor could not bind them
contrary unto the ordinance of God: but rather yt it was unto their damnation
to make such grauntes and that they did not execute their office. And therefore
thefoule and misshapen monster gate him to the Scripture and corrupted it with
false expositions, to prove that such authority was given him of God, and
challenged it by the authority of Peter, say Peter (says the Pope) was the
head of Christ's church.
ing that Peter was the head of Christ's Church, and that Christ had made him
Lord over ye Apostles his fellows in that he bade him feed his sheep and
lambs: John the last, as who should say that Paul* which came long after, was
not commanded to feed as specially as Peter, which yet would take none
authority over the bodies or over the faythes of them which he fed, but was
their servant for Christ's sake, Christ ever the lord and head: And as though
the other Apostles were not likewise All ministers have as great a charge given
them of God as Peter had
as specially commanded as Peter: And as though we now and all that here after
shall love Christ were not commanded to feed Christ's flock, every man in his
measure, as well as Peter. Are not we commanded to love our neighbors as our
selves as well as Peter? Why then are we not commanded to care for his flock
as well as Peter?

Moreover if to feed Christ's sheep is to be greatest (as no doubt to feed
Christ's flock is to be great and most to feed, is to be greatest, in which
office though Peter was great, yet Paul Peter preached but the Pope preached
not.
was greater) how comes it that the pope by that authority chale^geth to be
greatest, and yet this viij. hundred years fedeth not at all: but poysoneth
their pasture with the venomous leven of his traditions and with wrestyng the
text unto a contrary sense?

Then came he to this text Math. xvj. Thou art Peter and upon this rock I
will build my congregation or Church. Lo says Antichrist the carnal beast,
Peter is the rock whereon the Church of Christ is built, and I am his
successor, and therefore: the head of Christ's Church. When Christ meant by the
rock the confession that Peter had confessed saying: Thou art Christ the son
of the lyning God which art come into this world. This faith is Faith is the
rock whercon Christ's Church is built.
the rock whereon Christ's Church is built. For who is of Christ's Church but
he only: that believes that Christ is Gods son come into this world to save
sinners? This faith is it, against which hell gates ca^ not prevail. This
faith is it, which saves the congregation of Christ, and not Peter.

The^ he goes forth unto that which follows: Unto thee I will give the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and what soever thou byndest in earth, it shall be
bound in heaven. etc. Lo says Bindyng and losyng how it is to be understand.
he, in that he says what soever thou bindest in earth, he excepteth nothing,
therefore I may make laws and bind both King and Emperor. When Christ as he
had no worldly kingdom, even so he spoke of no worldly bindyng, but of bindyng
of sinners. Christ gave his Disciples the keye of the knowledge The keys
of the law of God to bind all sinners, and the keye of the promises to loose
all that repent and to let them into the mercy that is laid up for us in Christ.

Then comes he unto an other text which Christ rehearses Matthew last saying:
All power is given me in heaven and earth go ye therefore and teach all nations
Baptising them in the name of the father and the son and of the hely ghost,
teaching them to keep all that I commanded you: And behold, I am Behold here
Antichrist, how he wresteth the Scriptures.
with you unto the worlds end: Loc says the Pope, Christ has all power in
heaven and earth without exception, and I am Christ's Vicare, wherefore all
power is mine and I am above all kings and Emperors in temporal jurisdiction
and they but my servants to kiss not my feet only but my. N. also if I
list not to have them stoop so low. When Christ as I said, because he had no
temporal kingdom, even Christ's power is (...) save sinners.
so he meant of no temporal power: but of power to save sinners, which the
process of ye text declares by that he says, go ye therefore and teach and
Baptize: that is, preach this power to al nations, and wash of their sins
through faith in the promises made in my blood.

Then he comes unto an other Of this manner iuggleth ^ee with all textes.
text. Heb. vij. which is. The priesthode being translated, the law must needs
be translated also. Now says the pope, the Priesthode is translated unto me,
wherefore it pertayneth unto me to make laws and to bind every man. And y^
Epistle means no such thing, but proves evidently that the ceremonies of
Moses must cease. For the Priests of the old Testament must needs have been
of the tribe of Le^i as Aaron was, whose duty for ever was ye offering of
sacrifices. Wherefore when that Priesthode ceased the sacrifices and ceremonies
ceased also. Now yt Priesthode At the sufferyng of Christ, the offering of
sacrifices and ceremonies* ceased: for Christ offered him self once for all.
ceased in Christ, which was a Priest of ye order of Melchisedeke and not of
the order of Aaron: for then he must have been of the tribe of Le^i, and that
he was not, but of the tribe of Judah and of the seed of David. Wherefore they
that are under Christ's Priesthode are under no sacrifices or ceremonies. And
of this manner iuggle they with all the Scripture, which falshed lest the lay
men should perceive with reading the process of the text, is all their fear
what soever they pretend.

Moreover that thou may perceive the Popes falshed, mark, Christ said unto
Peter I will give and not I give, neither said he I will give unto the only.
Therefore look in the. xx. chapter Christ gave all his Apostles like authority.
of John where he gave them the keys after his resurrection, and thou shall
see that he gave them unto all indifferently saying: As my father sent me so
send I you. Whether sent he the^? into all the world, and unto all nations.
What to do? to preach the law that the people might repent, and the promises
that they might believe in Christ for the remission of sins saying: receive
the holy ghost, who soeuers sin ye forgive they shall be forgeuen. By which
holy ghost he gave them understanding of the Scripture and of all that they
should preach: as thou may see Luke last, where he opened their wits to
understand the Scripture and said, that repentauce and forgiveness of sins
must be preached in his name to all nations, and that they were witnesses to
preach it. Whereby thou see that to To bind and lose is to preach.
bind and to lose is but to preach and to tell the people their faults, and
to preach mercy in Christ to all that repent.

And when he says all power is given me: he says not, go thou Peter and
Christ sent out all his Apostles and not Peter ^^^n^.
preach: but says unto all indifferently, go ye and preach this power given me
of my father to save all that repent and to damn them that repent not, but
follow the lusts of their flesh with full desire to live beastly being enemies
unto the law of God.

And Math. xviij. Peter asked Christ how often he should forgive his brethren,
Note,
whether seven times. And Christ said, seventy times seven times. As who
should say, as ost as he repents and asks forgiveness.

Now though this were spoken unto Peter only, because Peter only moved the
question, yet pertains it not unto us all as well as unto Peter? Are We are
bound to forgive our neighbors as well as Peter was.
not we as much bound to forgive our neighbors that repent and ask
forgiveness, as Peter? Yes verily. But because Peter only asked the question,
therefore did Christ teach us by Peter. If an other had asked, he would have
taught us by that other. And in like manner when Christ asked who say ye that I
am: if any other of the Apostles which believed it as well as Peter, had Christ
builded his Church upon the confession of Peter, and not upon Peter.
said as Peter did, thou art Christ the son of the living God which art come
into the world of sinners, to save them: unto him would Christ have au^swered
as he did to Peter, that upon the rock of that his confession he would have
built his church, and would have promised him keys as well as he did Peter.
Yea and in the xviij. chapter of Matthew Christ says to all the Apostles, yea
and to all congregatio^s where sinners be* that what soever they bound should
be bound, and whatsoever they loosed should be loosed.

Moreover every man and woman A woman has power to bynd.
that know Christ and his doctrine, have the keys and power to bind and
loose: man order, and in their measure, as time place and occasion gives, and
privately. May not a wife, if her husband sin against God and her, and take
an other woman, tell him his fault between him and her secretly, and in good
manner humbly, and bind his conscience with the law of God? And if he repent
How(...)man may bind and lose.
may she not forgive him and loose him as well as the Pope? Yea, and better to,
as long as the sin is secret, in as much as he sins specially against her
and not against the Pope.

And so may the son do to his father, and a servant to his master, and every
man to his neighbor, as thou see in the said. xviij. chapter of Matthew.
Howbeit to bind and lose in the conscience by open preaching pertains To
bind the conscience, and to reprove open sinners pertains to the
congregation.
unto the officers that are appointed thereto. And to bind and lose open
sinners, and them that will not repent till they be complained on unto the
congregation, pertains unto the congregation.

Finally, there were many that preached Reasons that Peter was not y^ greatest
by authority given him of Christ.
Christ at Rome yer Peter came thither, if he came ever thither: as Paul and
many other. Had they not authority to bind and lose? Or else how did they
convert the people? Peter also was an Apostle and went srom place to place as
Paul did, and as Paul ordained Bishops in every place to teach the people,
so no doubt did Peter. Why then might not those Bishops challenge authority by
Peter as well as they of Rome? They say Peter had first his seat at Antioche.
also in their own Legendes that Peter had his seat at Antioch first. Did he
run to Rome leaving no man behind him to teach the people at Antioch? God
forbid. Why then might not that Bishop challenge Peter's authority? They will
happily say sooner the^ prove it, that Peter dyed at Rome, and therefore his
authority is greatest there. Then by that rule Christ's power is no where so
full as at Jerusalem. But what has Christ's invisible kyngdo^e to do with
places? Where Christ's power is in the Gospel
Christ's Gospel is, there is his power full and all his authority as well in
one place as in an other.

Finally to get authority whence so ever they ca^ snatch it, they join Paul
with Peter in their own laws Distinctio. xxij. saying, By the authority Paul
is called to help
of Peter and Paul. Which is clean against themselves. For they say in their
own law in the presence of the superior the power of the inferior cease and
is none at all. Now if Peter In the presence of the greater the power of the
lesser does (...).
be greater then Paul, then by that rule where Peter is present there Paul is
but a subject and without authority: And where Christ is present bodily and
preaches himself, there the Apostles give up their authority, and hold
their peace and sit down at his feet, and become scholars and harke^ to.

Wherefore in that they join Paul with Peter, and challenge their superiority
as well by the authority of Paul as of Peter, there they make Paul fellow
and equal with Peter. And thus it is false that Peter was Paul is made equal
fellow with Peter.
greater then his fellows. But yt blind owls care not what they houle, seeing
it is night and the day light of Gods word shut up that no man can spy them.

Moreover with this term Peter's seat they iuggle a pase (as with infinite
other) saying that Peter's seat is the chief seat, but what Peter's seat is,
that they tell you not. For wist ye that, ye should soon perceive that they
lie. Peter's seat is no stool or chair (for what has the kingdom of Christ
to do with such baggage) but it is a spiritual thing. Christ says in the
Gospel Math. xxiij. The Scribes and Phariseis Peter's seat what it is.
sit on Moses seat. What was Moses seat there, a chair, or the temple, or the
ch^rches, or sinagoge of the land? Nay verily, for Moses came never there. But
Moses seat was Moses law and doctrine. Eue^ so Peter's Peter's seat Peter's
doctrine and Peter's keys are all but one thing.
seat is Peter's doctrine, the Gospel of Christ which Peter taught. And the
same doctrine is Peter's keys: so that Peter's seat, Peter's keys and Peter's
doctrine is all one thing. Now is Peter's doctrine Paul's doctrine, and the
doctrine of all the xij. Apostles indifferently, for they taught all one thing.
Wherefore it follows that Peter's keys and Peter's seat be the keys and seat
of Paul also and of all the other xij. Apostles, and are nothing save the
gospel of Christ. And thus as Peter's doctrine is no better then Paul's but one
thing: Even so Peter's seat is no greater nor hyer nor holier the^ the seat of
the other xij. Peter's seat now is Peter's seat is Christ's Gospel.
Christ's seat, Christ's gospel on which all the Apostles sat, and on which this
day sits al they only ye preach christ truly. Wherefore as Antichrist
preaches not Peter's doctrine (which is Christ's Gospel) so he sits not on
Peter's seat, but on the seat of Satan, The Pope sits in the devils seat,
whose Vicare he is.
whose vicar he is and on the seat of his own laws and ceremonies and false
doctrine whereunto he compels all men with violence of sword.

Then he clame to Purgatory with the ladder of the said text, whatsoever
Purgatory
thou bindest in earth. etc. Purgatory says he is in earth: wherefore I am
Lord there to. Nevertheless as he can The Pope says that Purgatory ^s in
^arth.
prove no purgatory, so ca^ he not prove that if there were any, it should be
in the earth. It might well be in the element or spear of fire under the Moon
as well as in the earth. But to bind and lose is as I have above said, to
preach and to feed, and with Christ's doctrine to purge souls. And they that
be dead be not of the flock which Christ bad Peter feed, but they that live
only.

The^ clame he up with the same ladder still over all vows and professio^s
Vows.
of all religious persons, and over oaths Oaths.
made between man and man to dispense Testame^ts
with them, and over all men's testamentes to alter them. For what The Pope
alters men's wills and testame^ts at his pleasure.
thou make an hospital, that will he shortly make a college of Priests, or
a place of religion, or what he lusts. The^ all manner Monks and Friars and
like draffe took dispensations of him for the ordinances of their old
fou^ders. And because, as they thought they had prayed and distributed for
their souls enough to bring them out of purgatory, they thrust the^ out of
their beadrolles, and took daily more and more.

But ever since they took dispensations of the Pope, both for their rules and
to divide all among them, they received in the name, not of the poor, The
popes marchaundise.
but of purgatory, to quench the raging fire thereof, which is as hot as their
bellyes can feign it, and fools be out of their wits to believe it: promising
a Mass daily for xl. shillinges by the year, of which foundations when they
have gotten twenty, they will yet with an union purchased of the Pope make
Union.
but one chauntry. For if they should do all that they have promised from y^
first founder unto this day. v. hundred Monks were not enough in many
cloisters.

Think thou that men were ever so mad to make the fashions that are now
among them? to give the Sel^rar such a sum, and the Priour or suppriour and
the other officers so much for their parts as they have yearly, and to exempt
the Abbot from his brethren, The great and shameful abuse of ^bbeyes
and to send him out of the Abbay into such parkes and places of pleasures, and
give him a thousand, fiftene hundred, two thousand or three thousand pound
yearly to sport himself with all? Nay but when through hypocrisy they had
gotten land enough, the^ they turned unto the Pope and took Dispe^sations
purchased of the Pope.
dispe^sations both for their rules which were to hard for such abundance,
and for the wills of their founders, and served a great sort of founders under
one per dominum, and divided among few, that which was enough for a great
multitude.

It was the Pope that devised all these fashions to corrupt the Prelates with
abundance of worldly pleasures, of which he wist that the worste would be
most greedy, and for which he wist also that he should find Iudasses inow that
would forsake Christ and betray ye truth and be sworn false unto him and his
Godhed. He makes of many chauntryes one, of an Abbay a Cathedral church, and
out of the Abbayes plucked he the Byshopprikes. And as Bishops pay for their
bulls, Choppyng and chaungyng used by the pope
even so do an infinite number of Abbottes in Christendom, in all lands some,
which Abbottes be Bishops within themselves, and immediately under the Pope.
And other Abbots and Priours send after the same example daily unto Rome to
purchase license to wear a nutre and a cross and gay ornaments, to be as
glorious as the best. etc. And where before God no man is a Priest but he that
is appointed to preach christ's Gospel unto the people, and the people ought
not to give ought unto the spirituality but for the maintenau^ce of the
preaching of Gods word, the The wicked bestowing of benefices by the Pope.
Pope takes vi. or vij. yea ten. xx. and as many benefices as he lists, and
gives them unto one that preaches not at all, as he does all other dignityes
of the spirituality. He that will purchase and pay and be sworn shall have
what he will.

How they prove all their general counselles.
WHen the Bishops and Abbottes and other great Prelates had forsaken Christ and
his living, and were fallen down before the beast the vicar of Satan to
receive their kingdom of him, then the Pope called together diverse counseles
of such holy Apostles and there concluded and made of every opinion that seemed
profitable, an article of the faith. If thou ask where the scripture is to
prove it? They answer we be the church and can not err. and therefore say
they, what we conclude, The church can ^ot err.
though there be no scripture to prove it, it is as true as the Scripture and
of equal authority with the Scripture and must be believed as well as the
scripture under pain of damnation. For say they our truth depends not of the
truth of the scripture, that is, we be not true in our doing because the
scripture testifies unto us that we do truly: but contrary, the truth of the
scripture (say they) depends of us: that is, the scripture The Pope says
that the Scripture is true not of it self, but because he allows (...)
approves it.
is true because that we admit it, and tell thee that it is true. For how
could thou know that it were the scripture except we told thee so? and
therefore we need no witness of the scripture, for that we do it is enough
that we so say of our own head, for we can not err.

Which reason is like as though young Monks newly professed should A
similitude.
come by the rules of their order and ordinances of their old founders, and
would go about to keep them: and the old cankerd Monks should call them back
unto the corrupt and false manner that now is used saying: ye err. Do only as
we teach you, for your profession is to obey your elders. According unto the
rules of our order and ordinances of our founder shall they say. We can teach
you no other shall the old Monks say, nor can lie unto you: ye ought therefore
to believe us and to do as we bid you. The young Monks shall answer we see
that ye lie clean contrary unto all that is written in our rules and
ordinances. The old Monks shall say ye can not This doctrine the papists
used in those days.
understand them except we expound them unto you, neither yet know that they
be your rules except that ye believe that we ca^ not lie unto you. For how can
ye know that these be your rules and ordinances, but as we your elders tell
you so? Now when we tell you that these be your rules and ordinances, how can
ye be sure undoubtedly that it is so, except ye believe undoubtedly that we can
not lie. Wherefore if ye will be sure that they be your rules and ordinances,
then ye must first believe that we can not lie. Leave such imaginations and
disputations therefore and lay your rules and ordinances out of your hands
and look no more on them, for they make you err. And come and do as we tell
you and captiuate your wits and believe that we can not lie unto you and that
ye can not understand your rules and ordinances. Even so if thou say it is
contrary unto the Scripture: they answer that thou understand it not, and
The c^^mon and (...) and ^ching of ^he Papists.
that thou must captive thy wit and believe that though it seem never so
contrary, yet it is not contrary: no if they determine that Christ is not rise^
again and though the Scripture testify that he is risen again yet (say they)
they be not contrary, if they be wisely understand. Thou must believe say they
that there is some other meaning in the Scripture and that no man understands
it: but that we say, whether with out Scripture, or against it, that must thou
believe that it is true.

And thus because that the Scripture would not agree with them they thrust it
out of the way first and shut up the kingdom of heaven which is Christ's
Gospel, with false expositio^s and with such sophistry and with false
principles of natural wisdom. And the Abbottes took the Scripture from The
Abbotes keep the monks in ignorance and the bisshops ye priests.
their Monks, lest some should ever bark against the Abbottes lyning, and set
up such long service and singyng to weary them with all that they should have no
laysure to read in the Scripture but with their lips, and made them good
cheer to fill their belyes and to stop their mouths. And the Bishops in
like manner to occupy their Priests with all that they should not study ye
Scripture for barkyng against them, set up long service wondrous intricate, so
that in a dosen years thou could scarce learn to turn a right unto it:
long Matens, long Eue^songs, long Masses, long Diriges with vau^tage yet to
mitigate the tediousness, quia leuis est labor cum lucro, for lucre ^alne
joined with pain makes ^^yne nothing,
(say they) makes the labor light: ever noselyng them in ceremonies and in
their own constitutions, decrees, ordinances and laws of holy Church.

And the promises and Testament which the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood
did preach daily unto the people, that they put out of knowledge and say now
that it is a sacrifice for the souls of Purgatory, that they might the better
sell their Mass. And in the Universities they have ordained that no man shall
look on the Scripture until he be noseled in heathen learning viij. or nine
year and armed with false The use of universities*
principles, with which he is clean shut out of the understanding of the
Scripture. And at his first coming unto University he is sworn that he shall
not defame the University what soever he sees. And when he takes first
degree he is sworn that he shall hold none opinion condemned by the Church,
but what such opinions be that he shall not know. And they when they be
admitted to study Diuinitye, because ye Scripture is locked up with such false
expositions and with false principles of natural Philosophy that they can not
enter in, they go about the out side and dispute all their lives about words
and vain opinions pertaining as much unto the healyng of a man's hele as health
of his soul. Provided yet all way, lest god give his singular grace Prouiso.
unto any person, that none may preach except he be admitted of the Bishops.
Then came Thomas de Aquino and he made the Pope a God with his sophistry, S.
Tho. de Aquino.
and the Pope made him a Saint for his labor and called him Doctor Sanctus,
for whose holiness no man may deny what so ever he says save in certain
places where among so many lies he said now and then true. And in like manner
who soever defends his Saints.
traditions, decrees and privileges him he made a Saint also for his labor
were his living never so contrary unto the Scripture, as Thomas of Canterbury
with many other like whose life was like Thomas Cardinals, but not Christ's,
neither is Thomas Cardinals life any thing save a counterfaytyng of saint
Thomas of Canterbury. Thomas Becket was first seen in marchaundise temporal
and then to learn Thomas of Canterbury.
spiritual marchaundise he gat him to Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury which
sent him diverse times to Rome about business of holy Church. And when
Theobald had spyed his actiuitie he shore him Deacon lest he should go back
and made him Archdeacon of Canterbury and upon that presented him to the king.
And the king made him Tho. ^e^ket and Tho. Wolsey copared together.
his Chaunceller in which office he passed the pomp and pride of Thomas
Cardinal as far as the ones shrine passes the others tomb in glory and
riches. And after that, he was a man of war and captayne^ over five or six
thousand men in full harness as bright as S. George and his spear in his hand
and encountered who soever came against him and overthrew the iolyest rutter
that was in all the host of France. And out of the si^ld hoate from blood
shedyng was he made Bishop of Canterbury, and did put of his helm and put on
his mitre, put of his harness and on with his robes, and laid down his
spear and took his cross, yer his hands were cold, and so came with a lusty
courage of a man of war to fight an other while against his Prince for the
Pope. Where his Princes causes were with the law of God and the Popes clean
contrary. And the pomp of his consecration was after his old worldly fashion.
Howbeit yet he is made a Saint The Pope rewards his servants highly when they
be dead.
for his worshyppyng of the holy seat of saint Peter, not that seat of Peter
which is Christ's Gospel, but an other lied to be Peter's and is in deed
Cathedra pestilentiae, a chair of false do ctrine. And because he could no
skill of our Lords Gospel, he said of Matene with our Lady. Such as
understand the Latin, read his life and compare it unto the Scripture, and the^
he shall see such holiness as were here to long to be rehearsed. And every
Abbay and every Cathedral Church did shrine them one God or other, and myngled
the lives of the very Saints with stark lies, to move me^ to offer which
thing they call devotion.

And though in all their doings they oppress the temporaltie and their common
wealth, and be grievous unto the rich, and paynfull to the poor: yet they be so
many and so exercised in wyles and so sutill, and so knit and sworn together
that they compass the temporalitie and make them bear the^ whether they will
or will not (as the Oak does the Iuye) partly with iugglyng and beside that
with worldly policy. For every Abbot will make him that may do Policy.
most in the shyre or with the king, the stuard of his lands and give him a
feeyearely, and will lend unto some, and feast other, that by such means they
do what they will. And little master The practice of little master parson.
Parso^ after the same manner, if he come into an house and the wife be
snoutefaire he will root him self there by one craft or other: either by
using such pastime as the good man does, or in being beneficial by one way or
other, or he will lend him, and so bring him into his danger, that he can not
thrust him out when he would, but must be compelled to bear him and to let him
be homely whether he will or no.

An example of practice out of our own Chronicles.
TAke an example of their practice out K. Herold.
of our own stories. King Herold exiled or banished Robert Archbishop Robert
of Canterbury
of Canterbury. For what cause the English Polychronico^ specifieth not. But if
the cause were not somewhat suspect, I think they would not have passed it over
with silence. This Robert gat him immediately unto king William the co^querour
then Duke of Normandy. And the pope Alexander sent Duke William a baner to go
and conquer England Remission of sins to conquer England.
and clean remission unto who soever would follow the baner and go with king
William. Here mark how straight the Pope followed Christ's steps and his
Apostles: they preached forgiveness of sins to all that repented thorough
Christ's blood shedyng: yt pope preaches forgiveness of sins to all Note
here how well Christ and the pope agree Christ bids save, and the pope
bids kill.
that will s^ea their brethren ^ought with Christ's blood, to subdue them unto
his tyranny. What soever other cause Duke William had against K. Herold, thou
may be sure yt the pope would not have meddled if Herold had not troubled his
kingdom: neither should Duke William have been able to co^quere the land at
that time except the spirituality had wrought on his side. What blood did that
conquest cost England, through which almost all the Lords of the English blood
were slain, and the Normandes became rulers, and all the laws were changed
into French? But what cares the holy father for sheding of lay men's blood?
It were better that ten hundred thousand lay The pope is a cruel and
merciless tyrant.
knaves lost their lives, then that holy Church should lose one inch of her
honor, or Saint Peter's seat one jot of her right.

And Anselmus that was Bishop in short time after, never left striumge with
that mighty prince king William Anselmus a chapleine of ye popes.
the second until he had compelled him maugre his teeth, to deliver up the
inuestiture or election of Bishops unto Saint Peter's vicar, which inuestiture
was of old time the kings duty.

And again, when the said king William would have had the tribute that
Priests gave yearly unto their Bishops for their whores, paid to him, did
not Ra^fe Bishop of Chichester forbid Gods service (as they call The pope is
well pleased to admit priests to have whores. but not wives.
it) and stop up the Church doors with thorns thoroughout all his diocese,
until the king had yielded him up his tribute again? For when the holy father
had forbode Priests their wives, the Bishop permitted them whores of their
own for a yearly tribute, and do still yet in all lands save in England
where they may not have any other save men's wives only.

And again, for the election of Steue^ Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, what
mysery and wretchedness was in the realm a long season? Then was ye land
interdited many years. And when that help not, then Ireland rebelled against
king John immediately, and not Note here the pride and wickedness of the Pope.
without the secret workinge of our Prelates I dare well say. But finally,
when neither the interditing, neither that secret subtlety help, and when
John would in no means consent that Saint Peter's vicar should reign alone
over the spirituality, and over all that pertayned unto them, and yt they
should sin and do all mischief unpunished, the Pope sent remission of
Remission of sins to co^quere England.
sins to the king of France, for to go and conquer his land. Whereof king
John was so sore afraid that he yielded up his crown unto the Pope, and swear
to hold the land of him, and that his successors should do so likewise.

And again, in king Richardes days Thomas Arundell.
the second, Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury and Chauncellar was
exiled with the Earl of Darby. The outward pretense of the variau^ce between
the king and his Lords was for the deliverance of the town of Breast in
Britayne. But our prelates had an other secret mystery a bruyng. They could
not at their own lust slay the poor wretches which at that time were
converted unto repentance and to yt true faith, to put their trust in Christ's
death and blood sheding for the remission of their sins by the preaching of
John Wiclefe. As soon as the Archbishop Practice of Prelates.
was out of the realm, the Irishmen began to rebel against king Richard, as
before against king John: But not hardly without the invisible inspiration of
the^ that rule both in the court and also in the consciences of all men. They
be one kingdom sworn together one to help an other scatered abroad in all
realines.

And howbeit, that they strive among themselves who shall be greatest, yet
against the temporal power they be always at one; though they dissemble it,
and feign as though one held against The popes clergy are secret and subtle
conspirators.
the other, to know their enemies secrets, to betray them withal. They can
enspyre privily into the breasts of the people what mischief they list, and
no man shall know whence it comes. Their letters go secretly from one to an
other thoroughout all kingdoms. Saint Peter's vicar shall have word in xv. or
xvj. days from the uttermost
part of Christendom. The Bishops of England at their need can write unto
the Bishops of Ireland, Scotland, Denmark, Douchland, France and Spain,
promising them as good a turn an other time, putting the^ (...) remembrance
that they be all one holy Church, and that the cause of yt tone is the cause of
the the other, saying: if our iugglinge break out, youres can not belong hid. And
the other shall serve their turn and bring the game unto their hands, and no
man shall know how it comes about.

As Soon as king Richard was gone to Ireland to subdue these rebellions, A
traiterous practice.
the Bishop came in again and prevented the king, and took up his power
against him, and took him prisoner, and put him down, and to death most
cruelly, and crowned the Earl of Darbye King. O merciful Christ what blood
has that coronacion cost England? but what care they? their causes must be
avenged. He is not worthy to be king that will not avenge their quarrels. For
do not the kings receive their kingdom of the beast, and swear to worship
him, and maintain his throne? And the^ when the Earl of Darbye which was king
Henry the fourth, was crowned, the prelates took his The Papists are styrers
up of wars and sheders of blood.
sword, and his sons Henry the fifth after him (as all the kings swords
since) and abused them to shed Christian blood at their pleasure. And they
coupled their cause unto the kings cause (as now) and made it treason to
believe in Christ as the scripture teaches, and to resist the Bishops (as now)
and thrust them in the kings prisons (as now) so that it is no new invention
that they now do, but even an old practice, though they have done their busy
cure to hide their science, that their conueyaunce should not be espied.

And in king Henry the sixth days how raged they as fierce Lio^s against good
Duke Humfrey of Gloucester the kings uncle and protector of the Duke Hu^frey.
realm in the kings youth and childhod, because that for him they might not
slay whom they would, and make what cheuysaunce they lusted. Would not the
Bishop of winchester have Papists are cruel.
fallen upon him and oppressed him openly with might and power in the city of
London, had not the Citizens come to his help.

But at the last they found yt means to contriue a drift to bring their
matters to pass, and made a Parlyament far from the Cityzens of London, A
Parliament kept at Bury.
where was slain the good Duke and only wealth of the realm, and the mighty
shylde that so long before that kept it from sorrow which shortly after his
death fell thereon by heaps. But The death of Homfrey Duke of Gloucester
protector of the Realm of England.
the chronicles can not tell wherefore he dyed, nor by what means. No marvel
verily. For he had need of other eyes then such as ye world sees withal
that should spy out their privy paths. Nevertheless the chronicles testify
that he was a virtuous man, a godly and good to the common wealth. Moreover the
proctour of purgatory This is Sir Tho. More.
says in his Dialoge, quod I, and quod he, and quod your friend, how that the
foresaid Duke of Gloucester was a noble man and a great clarcke, and so wise
that he could spy false miracles and disclose them, and judge them from the
true, which is an hateful science unto our spirituality, and more abhorred
amongst them then Necromancye or The Clergy cannot abide them that can judge
talse miracles.
witchcrafte, and a thing wherefore a man by their law I dare well say, is
worthy to dye, and that secretly if it be possible. Now to be good to the
common wealth, and to see false miracles, and thyrdly to withstand that France
then brought under the foot of the Englishmen, should not be set up again, by
whose power the Pope holds down the Emperor, and raygneth in his stead, be
causes why he might die though by what means be not known.

For to be good to the common wealth Three causes why the Duke of Gloucester was
murdered
is to be hurtful to the spirituality, seeing the one is the others pray, as
the Lamb is the Wolves. Secondaryly, if a man be so clear eyed that he can
spy false miracles, how can iugglers get their living and be in price where
such a fellow is? Thyrdly to keep down the kingdom of France is to pull
Saint Peter's Vicar out of his seat.

Now, if the great baude the whore The Pope is the whore of Babylon.
of Babylon were destroyed, the^ would the bordell and stues of our Prelates
shortly perish. If Abadon that destroyer king of the grasshoppers which devour
all that is green, were destroyed, then were the kingdom of our caterpillars
at an end.

By what craft the Pope keeps the Emperor down.
Mark an other practice of our most An other practice of Prelates.
holy prelates. When the Empire was translated unto the Germaynes, though ye
Emperor was fallen down and had kyssed the Popes feet, and was become his
sworn servant: yet there was much strife and open war ofttymes between the
popes and the Emperors. And the popes have put down many good Emperors by
help of the Bishops, which every where secretly persuaded the Lords to
forsake the Emperors and to take dispensations of yt pope for their oaths.

And contrariwise the Emperors have now and then deposed diverse Popes have
deposed Emperors, and likewise Emperors have deposed Popes.
popes at request of the Cardinals and other great prelates, by whose help
only they were able to do it. For else verily though all kings christened had
sworn to depose one pope out of his seat, if they had not the favor of other
prelates thereto, they might happily by the secret practice of them, to be put
out of their own seats in the mean time.

The pope therefore, to be sure of him self, and out of the fear and danger
of the Emperor were he never so mighty, and that ye Emperor should not see
his daily open pastimes, made friendship and amity with the Venecians on the
one side of him, and let the^ come into certain cities of the Emperors in
Italy: and with the French king on the other side, and let him also up into
certain cities and possessions of the Emperors: and he himself in the
mids: and shut out the Emperor from coming any more to Rome, and ever sent
him his coronation home to him. And then he made a No man may rebuke the Pope
for any mischief that he does.
law that no man should rebuke the Pope for what soever mischief he did,
saying, that the Pope was above all and judge over all and none over him, and
therefore forbad in his law. Distinctio. xl. Si Papa, saying: though the pope be
proved negligent about him self and also the soul health of his brethren and
slack in his works and speachlesse as concerning any good, and draw with him by
his example innumerable people to hell to be punished with him with diverse
torments everlasting: yet see that no mortal man presume once to rebuke his
faults here. For he shall judge all men and no man him. O Antichrist. Is he
not Antichrist that will not have his life tried by Gods word?

If the Venetians ketch any of our holy fathers Towns or possessions,
Venetians.
whether by war, or that they have bought it, or that it be laid to morgage
The Pope may give and take again at his will and pleasure.
unto the^, or that the old Pope has given it with the marriage of some
daughter, unto the Duke of Venice: then the holy father that succedeth, when he
sees his season sends for it again saying that it is not lawful for lay
men to withhold S. Peter's patrimony. If they allege that they bought it and
so forth: his fatherhode answers that the old Pope had none authority to
make any such cheuisau^ce with S. Peter's inheritance: he could have but the
use of it his life long, and after it must needs return unto his successor
again. And upon that he interditeth them and curses the^ as black as coals
down to the pit of hell.

But the Venicians knowing more of our holy fathers practice for their nyenesse
then we which dwell a far of, and wiser then we of cold countries, perceauyng
also that their color changes, not with his cursing, and that they The
Venetians ^a^e not for the popes cursing nor blessing.
sincke not, and that their meat digesteth as well as before, and that (as
Erasmus says) they shyte as easily as before (with reverence of the holy
course I speak it) and therefore fear not his interdiction nor excommunication.

Then our holy father rayseth up all the power that he is able to make in Italy
against them and sends for the^ Sochenars to come and help. If he be not yet
strong enough, then he sends unto the bishops of France warning them that if
his seat decay, theirs can not long prosper, and therefore, that they put their
king in remembrance how that he is called ^ost Christian king, and that they
desire him to do somewhat for his title, against this disobedient rebellions
unto the most holy sea of Rome our mother holy Church.

If an other time the Frenchmen come to our holy father, as they be ever
Frenchmen.
gaping for Italy, to bring the Empire home again to France. Then y^ most
holy Vicare brings his whole power against them with the power of the
Venicians, and with his old fre^des the Sochenars. If he be not yet strong
enough, the^ he sends to the Bishops of England, to help their God and to
Englismen
move* their king to do somewhat for holy Church, puttyng him in remembrance
of whom he holds his crown and of his oath, and how many cappes of
mainteinaunce have been ever sent The practice of the pope with all kings and
princes.
unto his forefathers and what honor it was unto them and that he may easily
get as great honor as they, and happly a more excellent title, if he will take
our holy fathers part, besides that he shall purchase remission of all his
sins.

Then must the peace and all the appointementes made between us and The pope a
breaker of peace.
France be broken, and the king must take a dispe^sation for his oath. For the
king of France will attempt nothing in Italy, until he have sent his
ambassadors and have made a perpetual peace with our king, the Sacrament of
the body of our Savior broke between them to confirm the appointment. But I
suppose that the breaking signifies that the appointement shall not long The
abuse of the sacrament.
endure, for a great deal of flower would not make so many hosts as they
call the^ or singyng loves, as has been broken in our days between Christen
Princes (as they will be called) to confirm promises that have not long been
kept. Other use of that blessed sacrament will the Princes none know: but
Christ ordained it to be a perpetual memory that his body was broken for our
sins upon the cross, and that all that repent should receive as often as they
eat of it forgiveness of their misdedes through faith. If the kings of the
earth when they break that Sacrament between the^, do say on this wise: The
body of our Savior (which was broken on the cross for the sin of all that
repent and have good hearts and How y^ sacrament should be broken between
kings and princes.
would feign keep his law) be broke unto my danmation if I break this oath:
then is it a terrible oath and they had need to take heed how they make it: and
if it be lawfully made, not to break it at all. But as they care for their
oath, which they make in wedlock, so they care for this.

What soever need the Pope has, he will not send to the Emperor to come and
help him in Italy, for fear lest he would take to him self what soever he
conquered of the Frenchmen and The Pope would not have the Emperor to strong
wax to strong and minish our holy fathers power and become our holy fathers
Vicare, as he is S. Peter's. Nevertheless if we Englishmen will hyre the
Emperor to come and fight against France for the right of the Church in
these quarters that be next unto us, his fatherhode is content to admit his
service.

When our king has granted to take our holy fathers part, then the pretense
and cloak outward must be, that the king will challenge his right in France.
And to aid the king in his right must the commons be milked till they blede
again. The^ to do the king service the Lords sell or lay their lands to
morgage. Then is clean remission given to flea French dogs. He that dies in
the quarrel shall never see Purgatory, Remission of sins, and clean
deliverance out of pu^gato^ye.
but fly to heaven straight, eue^ with a thought.

WHen the Pope has what he desires in Italy, then must we make peace with the
Frenchmen again immediately, that France be not all to gether trodden under the
foot: but that it remain always in a mean state, strong enough to match the
Emperor and to keep him down, but not to mighty for oppressing the Pope. And
then our Prelates to bring the peace about, send immediately a Friar Forest A
friar Forest or a vicar of Croiden.
or a Vicare of Croyden to preach before the King and his Lords, which
preacher roareth and cries unto them as though he hallowed his hounds and
makes exclamations saying: Alas what will ye do? spare Christen blood: will ye
sea your own souls? Be not Popish practices.
the Frenchmen as well Christen as ye? Moreover ye slay poor innoce^tes that
never offended. Make peace for the passion of Christ. Kill not one an other as
though Christ had not dyed for you: but fight rather against the Turks.

Then come in the Ambassadors of France and money a few Prelates and certain
other the kings playfelowes that be sworn with them to betray both the king
and the Realm to: And then is peace concluded. But outwardly Dissembled ^ruce.
there is nothing save a truce taken for half an year, till our soldiers be
at home again, for fear lest they would not be content. Then comes the whole
host home beggarde both great and small. And the poor that can not suddenly get
work fall to stealyng and be hanged at home. This could More tell in his
Vtopia before he was the Cardinals sworn Secretary and fallen at his foot to
betray the truth, for to get promotion.

Take an example: the Bishops sent Henry. v.
king Henry the fifte out to conquer France. The cause was says the
Chronicles, that the king went about to take their temporalities from them. And
therefore to bring the king into an other imagination they monyed him and sent
him into France.

When they had sent out the king, he conquered more then was their will K.
Henry. v. conquered more then the prelates thought he would do.
and more then they supposed possible for him in so short space and brought
France clean under the foot: so that our Prelates had much secret business
to set it up again, but what is impossible unto so great Gods.

In king Henryes days the vi. our Henry. vi.
holy father of Rome made the Bishop of winchester a Cardinal, which went
shortly after into France to treat of a truce between England and France.
And him met a Legate of Rome a Cardinal also: after which meatyng
Englishemen had ever the worse in France, and their chiefest friend the The
crafty practice of the popes legate.
Duke of Burgaine forsook them. For when Cardinals and Bishops mete together
they have their secret counsel by them selves, wherein they conclude neither
what is good for England nor yet for France, but what is best for our holy
fathers profit to keep him in his state.

When king Henry was of age there was a marriage made between him and the Earl
of Arminackes daughter in Gyan with the which should have been given many
Castles and Towns in Gyan and a great sum of money thereto. But that marriage
was broken, not without the secret working of our Prelates and dispensation of
our holy father thou may be sure. And a marriage The marriage of king Henry vi.
was made between him and the kings daughter of Cecile for which England gave up
the whole Dukedom of Gya^ and Earldom of Main whereby we lost all Normandy
whereof they were the kaye. And beside that the commons gave a fiftene and an
half to fette her in with pomp. And then was the good Duke of Gloucester
traitorously The Duke of Gloucester traitorously murdered.
murdered, partly because he could judge false miracles, and partly because
of the deliverance of these two countries. For he being a live they durst not
do it.

And when king Edward had put down king Harry, a marriage was made and
concluded between him and the king of Spain, this queen's mother that now is.
But yet the Ambassadors were come home, our Prelates had bewitched king
Edward by their apostle Friar Bongaye, and married Friar Bongaye.
him unto a wydow that was a knights wife, least if Spain and England had
been joined together, king Edward should have recovered France again. But
what followed after the breaking of the marriage between Cruel war between k.
Henry, and the earl of Warwike.
king Edward and the Earl of Warwick, and what came of his children? yea and
what came on king Henry of Windsores children also? But what care our prelates
what ve^geau^ce or mischief fall on Princes or on their realms, so their
kingdom prosper.

In king Henryes days the vij. the Cardinal Murton, and Bishop Fox of
Winchester delivered unto yt kings grace the confessions of as many Lords as
his grace lusted. Who so ever Confession in the ear was a wicked invention.
was mistrusted, if he shroue himself at the Charter houses, Sion, Grenewich,
at Saint John's or wheresoever it was, the confessor was commanded by the
authority of the Pope to deliver his confession written, and sworn that it
was all. And Cardinal Murton had a license of the Pope for xiiij. to License
of the Pope for xiiij. to study Nicromancy.
to study Necroma^cy, of which he him self was one, and other I have heard
named, which at this time I pass over with silence. And how the holy Friars
obseruauntes carried feigned letters to try who was true, I pass over with
silence also. Howbeit such temptations and feigned profers were enough to move
the^ that never would have thought amysse: yea and in confession, me^ will
shrine the^ selves of thoughts which they never went about in the outward
deed.

When any great man is put to death how his confessor entreats him, and what
penance is enjoined him, concerning what he shall say when he comes unto the
place of execution, I could guess at a practice yt might make men's ears glow.

And did not the subtle counsel of A subtle practice of Prelates.
the said two prelates feign the siege of Bolen to make a pretense to gather
in afiftene, when there was no more war between the king of France and of
England, tha^ is between a ma^s head that has lust to sleep and his pyllow?
Which siege yet cost many a man their lives, yea and some great men thereto
which knew not of that fayning. The kings grace went over with a ten thousand
men to conquer all France, and spent happily an hundred thousand pound, of
which he saved the fourth part in the dandy prats, and gathered at home v. or
vi. hundred or more. And two other such feigned viages could I happily rehearse,
which I pass over for diverse causes, where many an English man lost his
life. But what care they for men's lives?

And did not our Cardinal with like He means Cardinal Wol^ey.
policy think ye, to gather that which he thought would not well be paid,
except the commons saw some cause, bring a great multitude of Scots unto the
English pale, either by some Bishops of Scotland, or by some great man whom
he corrupted with some yearly pension? against which the poor Northen men
must go on their own cost to keep them out. And general procession was
commanded at London thrice in the week and thoroughout all the land, while
the kings receauers gathered the tax of the common people. Which plague and
such like after the threatening of God Leuit. xxvj. and Deuteronomy. xxviij. and xxix.
I am sure will fall on all Christendom Leut. 2^. Deuteronomy. 28. 29.
without cease until they either defy yt name of Christ with the Turckes, or
if they will be called christen, they turn and look on his doctrine.

Yea and what fained the Cardinal at that great love to beguile his own
Priests to make them swear what they were worth, and the better wyllyng to
pay, for the common priests be not so obedient unto their ordinaryes that they
will pay money except they know why. Now it is not expedient that every rascal
should know y^ secrets of the very true cause, for many considerations. And
therefore another pretense must be made and another A practice of the Prelates
with their poor Priests.
cause alleged. And therefore the priests were charged by their ordinaryes to
appear before the gentlemen of the country and temporal officers, and swear
what every man was worth. Now the priests had lever be slain and dye martyrs
after the ensample of Saint Thomas of Caunterbury, then to swear before a lay
judge, for they think it greater sin then to slay their own fathers, and
that then the libertyes of the Church were clean lost, and they no better the^
the vile lay people. And when they were in that perplexity that they must
either swear or run into the kings danger and lose their gods (I would say
their goods) the^ my Lord Cardinal sent down his gracious power yt they
should swear unto their ordinaries only. And then the Priests for joy that
they were rid out of the lay men's hands, were so glad and joyous that they
wist not what thanks to give my Lord Cardinal, and so were obedient to swear
and to lend, or else for all the cursses that my Lord Cardinal has and the
Pope to, they would neither have sworn or paid a penny.

The practice of our time.
WHen the kings grace came first to the right of the crown and unto Thomas
Wolffe.
the governance of the realm young and inexpert, Thomas Wolfsee a man of lust
and courage and bodily strength to do and to suffer great things, and to
endure in all manner of voluptuousnes, expert and exercised in the course of the
world, as he which had heard, read, and seen much policy, and had done many
things himself, and had been of the secret counsel of weighty matters, as
subtle as Sinon that betrayed Troy, veterly appointed to se^ble The description
of Cardinal Wolsey.
and dissemble, to have one thing in the heart and an other in the mouth, being
thereto as eloquent, as subtle, and able to persuade what he lusted to the^
that were inexpert: so desirous and gredy of honor, that he cared not but for
the next and most compendious way thereto, whether godly or ungodly: this wyly
Wolf I say, and raging sea, and shipwreck of all England, though he showed
himself pleasant and c^e at the first (as whores do unto their lovers) came
unto the kings grace, and waited upon him, and was no man so obsequyous and
serviceable, and in all games and sportes the first and next at hand, and as a
captain to courage The kings birth calked by the Cardinal.
other, and a gaye sinder out of new pastymes to obtain favor withal.

And thereto as the secret communication went, which by many tokens thou may
well conjecture and gather to be true, he calked the kings nativity Bishops
talk kings natiuities.
and birth, which is a common practice among Prelates in all lands, whereby he
saw whereunto the kings grace should be inclined all his life, and what should
be like to chance him at all times.

And as I heard it spoken of diverse, he made by craft of Necromancy, graven
imagery to bear upon him, wherewith he bewitched the Kings mind, and made
the king to dote upon King Henry the viij. had Cardinal Wolsey in great
estimation.
him more then ever he did on any Lady or gentlewoman, so that now y^ kings
grace followed him as he before followed the king. And then what he said, that
was wisdom, what he praised, that was honorable only. More over in the mean
time he spyed out ye natures and dispositions of yt kings play fellows, and of
all that were great, and whom he spyed meet for his purpose, him he slattered,
and him he made faithful with great promises, and to him he swear, and of him he
took an oath again, that the one should help the other, for without a secret
oath he admitted no man unto any part of his priuities.

And ever as he grew in promotions and dignity, so gathered he unto him of the
most subtle witted, and of them that were drunk in the desire of honor most
like unto himself. And after The manner and practice of Cardinal Wolsey.
they were sworn he promoted the^ and with great promises made the^ in
falsehead faithful, and of them ever presented unto the kings grace, and put
them into his service, saying, this is a man meet for your grace. And by these
spies (if ought were done or spoken in the court against the Cardinal) The king
is betrayed
of that he had word within an hour or two. And then came the Cardinal to
court with all his magic to persuade to ye contrary. If any in the court had
spoken against the Cardinal, and the same not great in the kings favor, the
Cardinal bad him walcke a vilayne, and thrust him out of ye court hedlong. If
he were in conceit with the kings grace, then he flattered and persuaded, and
corrupt some with gifts, and sent some Ambassadors, and some he made captain
at Calice, Ha^mes, Gynes, Iarnsie and Gernsie, or sent them to Ireland, and
into the North, and so occupied them till the king had forgot them, and other
were in their rowmes, or till he had sped what he intended.

And in like manner played he with The queen is betraye^
the Ladies and gentlewemen. Whosoever of them was great, with her was he
familiar and to her gave he gifts. Yea: and where Saint Thomas of Canterbury
was wont to come after, Thomas Cardinal went often before preventing his Prince,
and perverted the order of y^ holy man. If any were suttill witted and mete for
his purpose, Note this deuilish practice.
her made he sworn to betray the Queen likewise and to tell him what she said
or did. I know one that departed ye Court for no other cause the^ that she
would no longer betray her mastresse.

And after the same example he furnished the Court with Chaplains of his own
sworn Disciples and children of his own bringing up to be always present and
to dispute of vanities and to water what soever the Cardinal had planted. If
among those cormorau^tes any yet began to be to much in favor with the king,
and to be somewhat busy in the Court and to draw any other way then as my
Lord Cardinal had appointed that the plowe should go, anon he was sent to
Italy or to Spain: or some quarrel was picked against him and so was thrust out
of the Court, as Stokesly was.

He promoted the Bishop of Lyncolne The Bishop of Lyncolne.
that now is, his most faithful trend and old companion and made him
confessor: to whom of what soever the kings grace shroue him self, think ye
not that he spoke so loud that the Cardinal heard it? and not unright: for
as Gods creatures ought to obey God and serve his honor, so ought the Popes
creatures to obey the pope and serve his Majesty.

Finally Thomas Wolfsey became Cardinal Wolsey ruled altogether.
what he would, even porter of heaven, so that no man could enter into
promotion but through him.

The cause of all that we have suffered this xx. years.
ABout the beginning of the kings grace that now is, France was mighty, so
that I suppose it was not mightyer this v. hundred years. King Jews of
France had won Naples K. Jews.
and had taken Bonony from S. Peter's see. Wherefore Pope July was Pope Iulye.
wroth and cast how to bring the Frenchmen down, yet soberly lest while he
brought him lower he should give an occasion to lift up y^ Emperor higher. Our
first viage into Spain was to bring the Frenchmen lower. For our meynye were
set in the forefront and borders of Spain toward Gascoyne: partly to keep
those parties and partly This is a true story.
to fear the Gascoynes and to keep them at home while in the mean time the
Spanyardes wanne Nauerne. When Nauerne was won our men came to house, as many
as dyed not there, and brought al their money with them home again save that
they spent there. Howbeit for all the loss of Nauerne, the Frenchmen were yet
able enough, to match. Spain, the Venetians, and the Pope, with all the
souchenars that he could make: so that there was yet no remedy but we must set
on the Frenchmen also, if they should be brought out of Italy.

Then pope Iulie wrote unto his dear son Thomas Wolfse, that he would be as
good, as loving, and as helping to holy church, as any Thomas ever was, seeing
he was as able. Then the new Thomas as glorious The new Thomas.
as the old, took the matter in hand, and persuaded the kings grace. And then
the kings grace took a dispensation for his oath made upon the appointment of
peace between him, and the french king, and promised to help the holy seat,
wherein Pope Peter never sat. But the Emperor Maximilian might in no wise
stand still, least the Frenchmen Maximilian the Emperor was K. Henry. (...)
his soldier
should money him, and get aid of him, since the Almaines refuse not money whence
soever it be proffered: then quod Thomas Wolfse, Oh and like your grace, what
an honor should it be unto your grace, if the Emperor were your soldier? so
great honor never chanced any King christened: it should be spoken of while
the world stood: the glory and honor shall hyde and darken the cost that it
shall never be seen, though it should cost half your Realm. Dixit, and
factum est. It was even so. And then a Parliament: and then pay: and then upon
the French dogs, with clean remission of all his sins, that slew one of
them, or if he Remission of sins.
be slain (for y^ pardons have no strength to save in this life, but in y^ life
to come only) then to heaven straight without feeling of the pains of
purgatory.

Then came our king with all his might by sea and by land, and the Emperor
with a strong army, and the Spaniardes, and the Pope, and the Venecians al at
once against king Jews of France. Assoue as the Pope had that he desired in
Italy, then peace immediately. And Frenchmen were christen Note here the
subtletie and craft of the pope.
men: and pity yea and great sin also were it to shed their blood: and the
French King was the most Christen king again. And thus was peace concluded,
and our Englishmen or rather sheep, came home against winter, and Now King
Henry. 8. with a^ his army was abused.
left their flecces behind them. Wherefore no small number of them while they
sought them better raiment at home, were hanged for their labor.

Why the kings sister was turned unto France.
WHen this peace was made, our holy Cardinals and Bisshops (as their old
guise is to calke and cast xl. l. yea, an hundred year before, what is like to
chance unto their kingdom) considered how the Emperor that now is, was most
like to be chose^ emperor after his graundfather Maximilian: for Maximilian
had already obtained of diverse of the Electours, that it should so be.

They considered also how mighty The Prelates see ever beforehand what is like
to follow.
he should be: first king of Spain with all that perteyneth thereto, which was
wont to be v. vj. or vij. kingdoms: then duke ot Burgaine, earl of Flaunders,
of Hollonde, Zelande, and Braband, with all that pertain thereto: the^
Emperor: and his brother Duke of Austrie: and his sister Queen of Hungry.
Wherefore thought our prelates, if we take not heed betimes, our kingdom is
like to be troubled, and we to be brought under yt feet: for this man shall be
so mighty, that he shall with power take out of the French kings hands, out
of the hands of the Venetians, and from the pope also, whatsoever pertains
unto the Empire, and whatsoever belongs unto his other kingdoms and
dominions thereto: and then will he come to Rome, and be crowned there: and so
shall he ouerlooke our holy father, and see what he does: and then shall the
old heretics Papists are great forecasters of perils.
rise up again and say that the pope is Antichrist, and stir up again and
bring to light that we have hid and brought a sleep with much cost, pain, and
bloudshedding more then this hundred year long. Considered also that his Aunte
is Queen of England, and his wife the King of Englands sister: considered the
old amity between the house of Burgaine, and the old kings of England, so
that they could never do ought in France without their help: and last of al
considered the course of merchandise that England has in those parties, and
also the natural hate that Englishmen bear to Frenchmen: Wherefore if we
shall use our old practice, and set the French king against him: then he shall
lightly obtain the favor of the King of England, by the means of his aunt
and his wife, and aid with men and money: Wherefore we must take heed betimes
and break this amitye: Which thing we may by this our old Practice.
craft easily bring to pass. Let us take a dispensation, and break this
marriage, and turn the Kings sister unto the French King: If the French King
get a male of her, then we shall lightly make our king protector of France:
and so shall England and France be coupled together: and as for the Queen of
England, we shall trim her well enough, and occupy the king with strainge love,
and keep her that she shall bear no rule. And as the gods had spoken, so it
came to pass. Our fair young daughter was sent to The kings sister (...) to
France.
the old pocky king of France, y^ year before our mortal enemy and a
miscreant, worse them a Turk, and disobedient unto our holy father, and no
more obedient, then he was compelled to be against his will.

The cause of the iorny to Callice.
IN short space thereafter Thomas Wolfse now cardinal and Legate a latere,
and greatly desirous to be pope also, thought it exceeding expedient for his
many secret purposes, to bring our king, and the king of France that now is,
together: both to make a perpetual peace and amity between them, and that
while the two Kings and their lords dalied together, the great Cardinales and
Bisshops of both parties Traitorous Prelates.
might betray them both, and the Emperor and all christen kings thereto.

Then he made a journey of gentlemen arrayed altogether in silk, so much as
their very shoes, and lining of their boots, more like their mothers, then men
of war: yea I am sure that many of their mothers would have been ashamed of
so nice and wanton array: Howbeit they went not to make war but peace for ever
and a day longer. But to speak of the pompous apparel of The pomp and
apparel of the Cardinal and his chap^aines passed the xij. Apostles.
my Lord himself, and of his chaplains, it passes y^ xij. Apostles. I dare
swear that if Peter and Paul had seen them suddenly and at a blush, they would
have been harder in belief that they or any such should be their successoures,
then Thomas Didimus was to believe that Christ was risen again from death.

When all was concluded between the King of France, and ours, that Thomas
Wolfse had devised: and when the Prelates of both parties had cast their
peniworthes against all chau^ces, and devised remedies for all mischeifs. The^
the right reverend father in God Thomas Cardinal and Legate would go see the
young Emperor newly chosen to the room, and have a certain secreat
communication with some of his prelates also. And gatte him to Bridges Prelates.
in Flaunders, where he was received with great solemnity as belongs unto so
mighty a pillar of Christ's church, and was saluted at the entering into the
town of a merry fellow which said, Salve rex Regis tui, atque regni sui. Hayle
both king of thy king, Salutatio^
and also of his Realm. And though there were never so great striffe bewene
the Emperor, and the French king, yet my lord Cardinal iugled him favor of
them both: and finally brought the Emperor to Cales to the kings grace, where
was great triumph and great love and amity showed on both Cardinal Wolsey was
a sub^ worker
parties, insomuch that a certain man marueiling at it, asked the old Bishop
of Deram. How it might be that we were so great with the Emperor so shortly
upon so strong and everlasting a peace made between us and the frenchmen, the
Emperor and the King of France being so mortal enemies. My lord answered
that it might be well enough if he wist all: but there was a A certain secreat.
certain secret (said he) whereof all men knew not. Yea verily, they have had
secrets this vi^. hundred years, which though all the lay men have felt them,
yet few have spyed them, save a few Iudases which for lucre have been
confederate with them to betray their own kings and all other.

Then were we indifferent, and stood still: and the Emperor and the French
king wrasled together: and Ferdina^dus the Emperors brother wan Millane Milane.
of the frenchmen: and the Emperor Turnay our great conquest, which Turnay.
yet after so great cost in building a castle, we delivered up again unto the
Frenchmen, in earnest and hope of a marriage between the Dolphine, and our
Princess.

How the Emperor came through England.
AFter that the Emperor would The Emperor came thorough England.
into Spain, and came through England, where he was received with great honor
and with all that partaineth to love and amity. The kings grace lent him money,
and promised him more: and the Emperor should tarry a certain years and mary
our princess: not that the Cardinal intended that, thou may be sure, for it
was not profitable for their kingdom: but his mind was to daly with the
Emperor, and to keep him without a wife that (insomuch as he was young and
lusty) he might have been nozeled and entangled with hores, (which is their
nurturing of kings) and Nurturing of kings.
made so effeminate and beastly, that he should never have been able to lift up
his heart to any goodness or virtue: that Cardinals and Bishops might have
administered his dominions in the mean time, unto our holy fathers profit.

The king of France hearing the favor Pract^^e.
that was showed unto the Emperor, sent imediatly a defiaunce unto our king,
not without our Cardinals and Bishops counsel thou may well The french king
sends a defiance to K. Henry vi^.
wite. For frenchmen are not so folish to have done it so unadvisedly and so
rashly, seeing they had to many in their tops already. Then our king spoke
many great words, that he would drive the frenchking out of his realm, or
else the frenchking should drive him out of his. But had he added as the legate
Pandulph taught king John, with the Popes license, his words had sou^ded much
better. For there can no vow stand in effect, except the holy father confirmed
it.

We sent out our soldiers two summers Armies see into stance.
against the Frenchmen, unto whose cheef Captains the Cardinal had appointed
how far they should go and what they should do: and therefore the French king
was nothing afraid, but brought all his power against the Emperor in other
places: and so was the Emperor ever betrayed. And thus the Cardinal was the
Emperors The Cardinal was the Emperors fre^d openly, and the french kings
secreatly.
friend openly, and the french kings secreatly. For at the meeting with the
french king beside Cales he utterly betrayed the Emperor, yet for no love that
he had to France, but to help the Pope, and to have been Pope happly, and to
save their kingdom. Which treason though all the world smelled it, yet it
brake not out openly to the eye, till the seege of Pauia. And the Cardinal The
sege of Pauie.
lent the Emperor much money openly, and gave the French king more secretly. He
played with both hands to serve their secreat that all men know not, as y^
Bishop of Durham said. But whatsoever the frenchmen did, they had ever the
worse notwithstanding the secreat working of our holy prelates on their side.

Finally unto the sege of Pauie, came the French king personally with lx. Pauie.
thousand men of war, of which xij. thousand were horsemen, and with money
enough. And the Emperors host was under xx. thousand, of which were but iij.
thousand horsemen, with no money at all. For he trusted unto the pope for aid of
men, and unto our Cardinal for money. But the pope kept back A false pope and
lewd Cardinal.
his men till the Frenchmen had given them a feeld: and our Cardinal kept back
his money for the same purpose. And thus was the sely Emperor betrayed, as all
his predecessoures have been this viij. hundred years. Howbeit there be that
say, that the Emperors soldiers so threatened Pace the kings graces
Ambassador, that he was feign to make che^isaunce with Pace, the (...). of
Englands Ambassador.
merchants for money in the kings name, to pay the soldiers withal.
Wherefore the Cardinal took from him all his promotions, and played
tormentours with him, when he came home, because he presumed to do one jot
more then was in his commission. But howsoever it was, the Emperors men in
tarying for help had spent out all their vitayles. Whereupon Burbon Burbon.
the chief captain of the Emperor, said unto his under captains: ye see,
help comes not, and yt our vitayles are spent: wherefore there is no remedy
but to fight, though we be unequally matched. If we win we shall find meat
enough: if we lose we shall lose no more then we must lose with hunger though
we fight not. And so they concluded to set upon the Frenchmen by night. The
king of France, and his lords supposing that the Moon would sooner have fallen
out of the sky, then that the Emperors host durst have fought with them,
were somewhat negligent, The Emperor sets upon y^ french king by night.
and went the same night a mumming that Burbon set upon them. The Emperors
host therefore with their sudden coming upon them, amassed the frenchmen, and
drove them upon heaps together one on another, so that they never could come
in array again, and took the king, and diverse of his lords, and slew many,
and wanne the field. And there came out all the Cardinals preuy treason: for in
the French Kings tent (say men) were letters found, and beside that in the
french kings treasure, and in all the host among the soldiers were english
ships found These ships were english Angels of gold
innumerable, which had come sailing a thousand miles by land. But what wonder?
ships be made to sail over y^ sea, and wings to fly into far countries, and
to mount to the top of hye hills.

When the French king was taken, we sang, Te Deum. But for all that singing At
the taking of the french king Te Deum, was song, and great triumph made in
England.
we made peace with frenchmen. And the Pope, the Venetians, France and England
were knit together, least the Emperors army should do any hurt in France.
Whereby ye may conjecture of what mind the Pope and the Cardinal were toward
the Emperor and with what heart our spirituality with their invisible secrets,
sang, Te Deum. And from that time hitherto, the Emperor and our Cardinal have
been twain.

After that when the king of France was delivered home again, and his sons
left in pledge, many ways were sought to bring home the sons also: but in
vain except the Frenchking would make good that which he had promised the
Emperor. For the bringing home of those children no man more busied his wits
then the Cardinal. He would in any wise the Emperor should have sent them
home, and it had been but for our kings pleasure for y^ great kindness that he
showed him in times past. He would have married the Subtle practices of the
Cardinal.
kings daughter our princess unto the Dolphin again, or as y^ voice went
among many, unto the second brother, and he should have been Prince in
England, and king in time to come: so that he sought all ways to pluck us from
the Emperor, and to join us unto France to make France strong enough to
match the Emperor, and to keep him down, that the Pope might reign a god
alone, and do what pleases him, without controlling of any ouersear. And for
the same purpose he left nothing unprovided to bring the mart The mart should
have been at Cales.
from Antwarpe to Cales.

But at that time, the Pope taking part with the French king had war with the
Emperor: and at the last the Pope was taken, which when the Cardinal heard,
he wrote unto the Emperor that he should make him pope. And when he had gotten
an answer that pleased him not, but according unto his deseruinges toward the
Emperor, then he waxed furious mad, and sought all means to displease the
Emperor, and imagined the diuorcement between the King and the Queen, and
wrote sharply unto the Emperor with manacing letters, that if he would not
make him Pope, he would make such ruffling between A ruffelar.
Christen princes as was not this him dred year, to make the Emperor repent:
yea, though it should cost the whole realm of England.

The Lord Jesus be our shield, what a fierce wrath of God is this upon us, The
pride and arrogancy of Cardinal Wolsey.
that a misshapen monster should spring out of a dunghill into such an height,
that the dread of God and man laid a part, he should be so malepart, not only
to defye utterly the majesty of so mighty an Emperor, whose authority both
Christ, and all his Apostles obeyed, and taught all other to obey, threatening
damnation to them that would not: But should also set so little by the whole
realm of England which has bestowed so great cost, and shed so much blood to
exalt and maintain such proud, churlish, and unthankful hypocrites, that he
should not care to destroy it utterly, for the satisfying of his vilanous
lusts.

The putting down of Cardinal Wolsey.
COncerning the Cardinals putting Cardinal Wolsey a great traitor.
down, I consider many things. First that I never heard, or read, that any
man being so great a traitor was so easily put to death. Then the natural
disposition and inclination of the man, how yt his chief study, yea and all his
felicity and inward joy has ever been to exercise that angels wit of his (as
my lord of Lincoln was wone to praise him) in driving of such dristes to
beguile all men and to bind the whole world with all. Wherefore I can none
otherwise indge by an C. tokens evident unto whomsoever has a natural wit, but
that this is also nothing save a cast of his old practice: so that when God
had wrapped him in his own wiles that he wist not which way out, (for the
Emperor prevailed for all the Cardinals treason: and the french children might
not come home: and he had learned also of his necromancie, that this would be a
iopardous year for him) what for the treason that he had Cardinal Wolsey
committed treason against the Emperor.
wrought against the Emperor, and what for yt money which he had borrowed of the
Commons, least any rising should be against him, then he thought to undo his
desteny with his policies and went and put down himself under a color (which
the process of the tragedy well declares) and set up in his room to minister
forth, and to fight against God as he had begun, the chiefest of all his
Secretaries, one nothing inferior unto his master in lying, faining, and
bearing two faces in one hode, a whelpe that goes not out of kind from his
sire, the chiefest stale wherewith the Cardinal caught the kings grace, whom
he called unto the confirmation of all that he intended to persuade, saying: If
it like your grace, More is a learned man, and knows it: and is also a lay
man, wherefore he Cardinal Wolsey preferred More to he Chauncelour.
will not say otherwise then it is, for any parcialitie to vswarde. Which
secretary, yet must first deserve it with writing against Martin, and against
the Obedience, and Mammon, and be come the proctour of Purgatory, to write
against y^ supplication of beggars.

And then to blind the world withal, many quarrels were picked: the Treason
laid to the Cardinal charge.
Cardinal might not speak with the kings grace, the broad seal was fette
away, high treason was laid to his charge. i. that he breathed (heard I say) in
the kings face, when he had the french pockes, (O hypocrices) but the very
treason that he had wrought, was not spoke of at all, nor ought worthy of a
traitor done to him at all.

Then they called a Parliament (as though the golden world should come again)
wherein the hypocri^s to bleare men's eyes withal, made a reformation of
mortuaries and probates Mortunries, probate of Testamentes.
of testamentes, the root yet left behind whence all that they have for a time
weeded out, will spring again by little and little as before, if they as their
hope is, may stop this light of Gods word that is now abroad. They made a
reformation also of pluralities of benefices, Plurality of benefices.
ordayning that henceforth no man may come by plurality of benifices with
virtue and conning, but with serving for the^ in y^ court. Which what other
thing is it save plain symony? O blind busserdes and shameless hypocrites.
What care they to do, whether against God or their own laws, to flatter great
men withal, and to blind the^. But hark here. The tithes were Tithes.
ordained at the beginning to find the preachers, and the poor people which
now go a begging: so that the church wardens ought to take the benefices The
Churchewardens have been accustomed to gather the tithes, and to give the Pa^^o
his reasonable stipend, and to give the re^ to the poor.
into their hands in the name of the parish, and deliver the preacher of Gods
word there dwelling and present a sufficient living, and divide the rest among
ye poor people. And the king is bound to maintain that order, and not to
resist them except he will be an open tyrant. Now I appele the consciences of
the kings grace and of his lords. What answer will they give when they come
before Christ in ye last judgment, for their robbing of so many souls in so
many parishes, of Gods word, with holding every man so many chaplaynes in their
houses with pluralities of benefices, and for the robbing Princes have herein
much to answer.
of so many poor and needy of their due and daily food, whose need for lack
of succor cries to God continually for vengeance against them, which we see
daily by a thousand misfortunes fall on them, and on their wives and children.
Let them read Exodus and Deutronomie, and see what they find there. Yea and
what shall so many chaplains do? First slay their souls, and then defile
their wives, their daughters, and their maidens, and last of all betray them.

When this reformation the color and cloak of their hipocrisy was made, then
the spirituality came douking before the kings grace, and forgave him The
loan first forgeuen by the Clergy.
yt money which they had le^t their pope, to bring in the temporalty, and to
make the^ after their example to do likewise, as loving subjects, and no less
kind unto their Prince the^ the spiritualty. For their arses were upon thorns
til y^ lone was forgeuen, for fear of afterclaps. The loan forgiven by the
temporalitie.
whereupon the te^porality forgave their part also in hope of yt thy obtained
not. For as soon as the lone was forgiven the parliament brake up, because our
prelates, and their co^federat friends had found y^ they sought, and caught ye
fish for which they laid the bayt of all those faces of reformations, and for
which the Cardinal, to bring yt world into a fools paradise, was compelled
eue^ with his own good will to resign his chauncellorshyp, and that to who^
he listed him self. And as for the bishoprike of Durham, The Byshoprieke of
Durha^.
to say the very truth, he could not of good congruitie but reward his old
chaplain, and one of the chief of al his secretaries with all, still Saturn,
that so seldom speaks, but walks up and down all day musing and imagining
mischief, a douking hypocrite made to dissemble.

Which for what service done in christ's Gospel came he to the bishoprike of
London? Or what such service did he therein? He burnt the new Testament,
Tunstall Bishop of Durham brent the new Testament.
calling it, Doctrinam perigrinam, strainge learning. Yea verily: Look how
strange his living in whose blood that testament was made, was from the living
of the pope: even so strainge is that doctrine from the popes law, in which
only, and in the practice thereof is Tunstal learned. Which also for what cause
left he the bishoprike of London? Even for the same cause he took it after
that he had long served for it, covetousness and ambition. Neither is it
possible naturally that there should be any good Bishop, so long as the
bisshoprickes be nothing save worldly A Bishopric is a superfluous honor,
and a lew de liberty.
pomp and honor, superfluous abundance of all manner riches and liberty to do
what a man lists unpunished: things which only the evil desire, and all
good men abhor.

And as soon as the Parliament was The Carnal clearly discharged.
ended, the Cardinal had his charter, and gat him home: and all Bisshops gat
them every fox to his hole, leuing yet their attournies behind them: to come
again themselves as soon as the constellation is somewhat ouerrunne, whereof
they be afraid.

What the cause of all this mischief is.
WHence comes all this mischief^ Verily it is the hand of God to avenge the
wantonness of great men, which will walk without the fear of God, following
ye steps of the hye Prelates, contrary unto their profession, and to avenge
also yt wrongs, the blasphemies and subtle persecuting of his word.

For when Martin Luther had uttered the abominations of the Pope, and his
clergy with Gods word, and diverse books were come into England: our Cardinal
thought to find a remedy against that well enough, and sent to Rome for this
vain title, Defender of the faith: which the Vicar of Defe^der of the faith.
Croydon preached, that the Kings grace would not lose for all London, and xx.
mile round about it. Neither is it marvel, for it has cost more then London
and xl. mile about it is able to make (I think) at this hour, beside the
effusion of innocent blood that was offered unto the idol, and daily is offered
thereto. When this glorious name was come from our holy father, the The title of
the defe^dour of the faith came from Rome.
Cardinal brought it unto the Kings grace at Greenwich. And though the king
had it already and had read it, yet against the morning, were all the lords
and gentlemen that could in so short space be gathered together, sent for, to
come and receive it in with honor. And in the morning after, the Cardinal gat
him through the backside into the friar obseruantes. And part of the The
Popish and vain glorious manner of Cardinal Wolsey.
gentiles went round about, and welcomed him from Rome, as representing the
Popes person: part met him half way: part at the court gate: and last of all
the kings grace him self met him in the hall, and brought him up in to a great
chamber, where was a seat prepared on hye for the Kings grace and the
Cardinal, while the Bull was read: in so much that not the wise only, but men
of mean understanding laughed the vain pomp to scorn, not far unlike to the
receiving of the Cardinals hatte. Which when a ruffian had brought unto him to
Westminster under his cloak, he clothed the messenger The Cardinals hat.
in rich array, and sent him back to Dover again, and appointed the Bishop of
Canterbury to meet him, and then an other company of lords and gentles I
wotte not how often, ere it came The falsest and vainest Cardinal that ever was.
to Westminster, where it was set on a cupborde and tapers about, so that the
greatest Duke in the land must make courtesy thereto: yea and to his empty
seat he being away.

And shortly for lack of authority of Gods word Martin must be condemned by
the authority of the king. And the kings grace to claw the Pope again must
make a book, in which to prove all that they would have stablished, for lack
of scripture, yea and contrary to the open scripture, is made this mighty
reason: Such prelates are the The chirch erreth. if y^ pope and bishops be the
chirch.
church, and the church cannot err, and therefore all that they do is right,
and we ought to believe them without any scripture, yea and though the
scripture be contrary. Wherefore God offended with such blasphemy, to make his
enemies feel that they would not see in the open scripture, nor in the
practice of their livings and doings clean contrary unto the scripture, and
unto the living of Christ and his Apostles, this viij. hundred years, has
poured his wrath upon us, and has snared the wise of the world with the
subtlety of their own wits.

Moreover when Marten Luther had Marten Luther submitted him self to king Henry
viij.
submitted himself in an epistle, let his grace consider what answer he gave
again. Where is the glory of yt great praise become that his grace gave the
Cardinal for his goodly acts and benefits which all the common wealth of the
whole realm should feel?

And More among his other blasphemies More is proved a liar.
in his Dialogue says, that none of us dare abide by our faith unto the death:
but shortly thereafter, God to prove More, that he has ever been a false liar,
gave strength unto his servant Sir Thomas Hitton, to confess, Sir Thomas
Hitto^
and that unto the death, the faith of his holy son Jesus, which Thomas, the
Bisshops of Canterbury and Rochester, after they had dieted and tormented him
secreatly, murdered at Maydstone most cruelly.

I beseech the kings most noble grace therefore to consider all the ways by
which the Cardinal and our holy Bishops have lead him, since he was first
king, and to see whereunto all the pride, pomp, and vain boast of the Cardinal
is come, and how God has resisted him and our Prelates in all their wiles. We
having nothing to do at all, have meddled yet in all matters, and have spent for
our prelates causes more then all Christendom, even unto the utter beggering of
our selves, and have gotten nothing but rebuke and shame and hate among all
nations, and a mock and a scorn thereto of them whom we have most helped.

For the Frenchmen (as the saying is) of late days made a play or a disguising
at Paris, in which the Emperor daunsed with the Pope, and the A dance in
Paris.
French king, and weried them, the K. of England sitting on a hye bentch, and
looking on. And when it was asked, why he daunsed not, it was answered, that
he sat there, but to pay the ministrels their wages only.

As who should say, we paid for all men's daunsing. We monyed the Emperor
openly, and gave the French men double and treble secretly, and to the Pope
also. Yea and though Fardinandus had money sent him openly to blind the world
withal: yet the saying is throughout all Douchland, that we sent money to the
king of Pole, and to the Turk also, and that by help of our money Fardinandus
was driven out of Hungary. Which thing though it were not true, yet it will
breed us a ^cab at the last, and get us with our meddling, more hate then we
shall be able to bear, if a chance come: unless that we wax wiser betime.

And I beseech his grace also to have mercy of his own soul, and not to suffer
Here Tindal prays for y^ ceasing of persecution.
Christ, and his holy Testament to be persecuted under his name any longer,
that the sword of the wrath of god may be put up again, which for that cause
no doubt is most chiefly drawn.

And I beseech his grace to have compassion on his poor subjects, which have
ever been unto his grace both obediente, loving, and kind: that the realm
utterly perish not, with the wicked counsel of our pestilent prelates. For if
his grace which is but a man, should dye, the lords and commons not knowing
who has most right to enjoy the crown: the realm could not but stand in
great danger.

And I exhort the lords temporal of the realm, that they come and fall
before the kings grace, and humblye desire his majesty to suffer it to be
tried, who of right ought to succed, and if he or she fail who next, yea and
who third. And let it be proclaimed openly. Tindall pro^eth the understanding of
such as of right should succeed to the crown.
And let all the lords temporal be sworn thereto, and all the knights, and
squires, and gentlemen, and the commons above xviij. years old, that there be
no strife for the succession. For if they try it by the sword, I promise
them, I see none other likelyhode, but that as the Cardinal has prophesied it
will cost the realm of England.

And all that be sworn unto the cardinal, I warn them yet once again to
break their oaths, as I did in the obedience. And all my lord Cardinals
Tindall warns all the Cardinals secretaries to repent and turn to God.
privy secretaries and spies, by whom he works yet I warn the^ to beware
betime. My lord Cardinal though he have the name of all, yet he wrought not
all of his own brain: but of all wilye and exercised in mischief, he called
unto him the most expert, and of their counsel and practice, gathered that
most seemed to serve his wicked purpose.

And all that be confederate with the Cardinal, and with the Bishops upon any
secret appointment be they never so great, I read the^ to break their bonds, A
general exhortation to all kinds of people.
and to follow right by the plain and open way, and to be content, and not too
ambitious: for it is now evil climing, the boughs be brittle. And let them
look well on the practice of Bishops, how they have served all other men in
tunes past, and into what troubles they have brought them that were quiet. Many
a man both great and small have they brought to death in England, even in my
days (beside in times past) whose blood God will seek once. Let them learn at
the last that it is but the cast of the Bishops to receive Popish bisshops make
no account of perjury.
the sacrament with one man secretly upon one purpose, and with an other man as
secreatly upon the contrary to deceive al parties. For of perjury they make as
much conscience, as a dog of a bone: for they have power to dispense with all
thing, think they.

At the beginning of the war between the Frenchking and the Emperor, the
prognostication said year by year, that there should be great labor for
peace: but it shall not come to pass, for there is Bicorporeu^, or Corpus
neutrum, that comes between and lets it: that is to say, a body that is
neither The spirituality are neither of y^ (...) side nor of the other for
there is no truth in them more then shall serve their turn.
another, or holds on neither part: and that body is the spirituality, which
hold but of themselves only. For when any Ambassadors go between to entreat
of peace, the bishops are ever the chief, which though they make a goodly
oration for the peace openly to deceive the lay men, yet secreatly by the
bisshops of the same country, they cast a bone in the way, and there can be no
peace, until the peace be for their profit, let it cost in the mean season
what blood it will.

And as for them which for luker, as Judas, betraye the truth, and write
against their consciences, and which for honor as Balaam, enforce to curse the
people of God: I would feign (if their hearts were not to hard) that they did
repent. And as feign I would that our prelates did repent, if it were possible
for them to prefer Gods honor before their own.

And unto all subjects I say, that they repent. For the cause of evil rulers
is the sin of the subjects, testifyeth the Scripture. And the cause of An
admonition to all subjects.
false preachers is, that the people have no love unto the truth, says Paul.
2. These. 2. We be all sinners an hundred times greater then all that we suffer.
Let us therefore each forgive other, remembering the greater sinners the more
welcome, if we repent, according to the similitude of the riotous son. Luc.
15. For Christ dyed for sinners and Luke 15.
is their savior, and his blood their treasure to pay sor their sins. He is
that fatted calf which is slain to make them good cheer withal, if they will
repent, and come to their father again. And his merits is that goodlye
raiment, to cover the naked deformities of our sins.

These be sufficient at this time, although I could say more, and though other
have deserved that I more said: yea, and I could more deeply have entered into
the practice of our Cardinal, but I spare for diverse considerations, and
namely for his sake, which never spared me, nor any faithful friend of his
own, nor any that told him truth, nor spares to persecute the blood of Christ
in as clear light as ever was, and under as subtle color of hypocrisy as
ever was any persecution since the creation of the world. Nether have I said
for hate of any person or persons, Here Tindall shows himself to be void of
malice to any private person.
God I take to record: but of their wickedness only, and to call them to
repentance, knowledging that I am a sinner also, and that a grievous. Howbeit
it is a deuilish thing and a merciles, to defend wickedness against the open
truth, and not to have power to repent. And therefore I doubt not, if men will
not be warned hereby, but that God will utter more practice by whom he will,
and not cease until he have broken the bond of wily hypocrites which
persecute so subtelly.

And finally if the persecution of the God is merciful to the ignorant, but
he pleases the malicious and wilful offe^der.
kings grace, and of other temporal persons conspiring with the spirituality
be of ignorance, I doubt not but that their eyes shall be opened shortly and
they shall see and repent and God shall show them mercy. But and if it be of a
set malice against the truth, and of a grounded hate against the law of God by
the reason of a full consent they have to sin, and to walk in their old
ways of ignorauncie, whereunto (being now past all repentance) they have
utterly yielded themselves to follow with full lust without bridle or snaffle,
which is the sin against the holy Ghost: then ye shall see even shortly that
God shall turn the point of the swoorde wherewith they now shed Christ's
blood, homeward to shed their own again after the ensamples of the bible.

And let them remember that I well The obedience of (...) Christen man written
three years before this book.
toward iij. years agone to prevent al occasions and all carnal beasts that
seek fleshly liberty, sent forth the true obedience of a christen man which
yet they condemned, but after they had condemned the New Testament, as right
was whence the Obedience has his authority. Now then if when the light is
come abroad, in which their wickedness ca^ not be hid, they find no such
obedience in the people unto their old tyranny, whose fault is it? This is a
sure conclusion: none obedience that is not of love can not long endure: and in
your deeds can no man see any cause of love: and the knowledge of Christ, for
whose sake only a man would love you though ye were never so evil, ye
persecute. Now the^ if any disobedience rise ye are the cause of it your selves.

Say not but that ye be warned.

A Pathway into the holy Scripture, made by William Tyndall.
I Do marvel greatly, derely beloved in christ, that ever any man should
repugne or speak against the Scripture to be had in every language and that of
every man. For I thought Scriptures should be translated into ^^^ry language.
that no man had been so blind to ask why light should be showed to the^ yt
walk in darkness, where they ca^ not but stomble, and where to stomble, is the
danger of eternal damnation: other so despightfull that he would envy any
man (I speak not his brother) so necessary a thing: or so Bedlem mad to
affirm that good is yt natural cause of evil, and darkness to proceed out of
light, that lying should be grounded in truth and verity, and not rather clean
contrary, that light destroys darkness and verity reproves all manner lying.

Nevertheless seeing that it has pleased God to send unto our English men,
even to as many as unfeignedly desire it, the Scripture in their mother tou^g,
considering that there be in every place false teachers and blind leaders, that
ye should be deceived of no man, I supposed it very necessary to prepare The
cause of the edition of this Pathway.
this Pathway into the Scripture for you, that ye might walk surely and ever
know the true from the false. And above all to put you in remembrance of
certain points, which are: that ye well understand what these words mean.
The old Testament. The new Testament. The law. The Gospel. Moses, Christ,
Nature, Grace. Workyng and believing. Deeds and faith. Lest we ascribe, to the
one that which belongs to the other, and make of Christ, Moses, of the
Gospel the Law, despise grace and rob faith: and fall from meke learning into
idle despitions, brawlyng and scoldyng about words.

The old Testament is a book, What are contained in the old Testament.
wherein is written the law of God, and the deeds of them which fulfill them,
and of them also which fulfill them not.

The new Testament is a book, wherein are contained the promises of The
contents of the new Testament.
God and the deeds of them which believe them or believe them not.

Euangelion (that we call the Gospel) is a Break word, and signifies good,
merry, glad and joyful tydinges, that The Etymology of this word Euangelio^
makes a man's heart glad, and makes him sing, dance and leap for joy. As
when David had killed Goliath the gyaunt, came glad tydinges unto the Jews,
that their fearful and cruel enemy was slain, and they delivered out of all
danger: for gladness whereof, they song, daunced, and were joyful. In like manner
is the Euangelion of God (which we call Gospel, and the new Testament) joyful
tydinges and as some say: a good hearing published by the Apostles throughout
all the world, of Christ the right David how that he has fought with sin,
with death, and the devil, and overcome them. whereby all men that were in
bondage to sin wounded with death, overcome of the devil, are without their
own merits or deseruinges, losed, justified restored to life and saved,
brought to liberty and reconciled unto the favor of God and set at one with
him again: which tydinges as many as believe laud, praise, and thank God,
are glad, sing and dance for joy.

This Euangelion or Gospel (that is Euangelio^ is called the new Testament.
to say, such joyful tydinges) is called y^ new Testament. Because that as a
man when he shall dye appoints his goods to be dealt and distributed after
his death among them which he names to be his heirs. Even so Christ before
his death commanded and appointed that such Euangelion, Gospel, or tidings
should be declared throughout all the world, and therewith to give unto all
that repent and believe all his goods: that is to say, his life wherewith he
swalowed and devoured up death: his righteousness, wherewith he banished sin:
his salvation, wherewith he overcame eternal damnation. Now ca^ the No greater
comfort can happen to a sinner being penitent the^ the promises of the Gospel.
wretched man (that knows him self to be wrapped in sin, and in danger to
death and hell) hear no more joyous a thing, them such glad and comfortable
tydinges of Christ. So that he can not but be glad and laugh from the low
bottom of his heart, if he believe that the tydinges are true. The Gospel was
promised of God in the old Testament by the Prophets.


To strength such says with all, God promised this his Euangelion in the old
Testament by the Prophets (as Paul says Romans 1.) How that he was chose^ out
to preach Gods Eua^gelio^, which he before had promised by the Prophets in the
Scriptures that treat of his son which was borne of the sede of David. In
the Gene. iij. God says to the Serpent: I will put hatred between thee and the
woman, between thy seed and her sede, that self sede shall tread thy head
under foot. Christ is this Christ has over* thrown ye devil, and all his
power.
womans seed, he it is that has trodden under foot the devils head, that is
to say, sin, death, hell, and all his power. For without this seed can no
man anoyde sin, death, hell, and everlasting damnation.

Again Gene. xxij. God promised Abraham saying: in thy seed shall all the
generations of the earth be blessed. Christ is that seed of Abraham says S.
Paul Gala. iij. He has blessed all the world through the Gospel. For where
Christ is not, there remains the curse that fell on Adam as soon as he had
sinned, so that they are in bondage under the damnation of sin, death, and
hell. Against this curse blesses now the Gospel all the world, in as much as
it cries openly, unto all that knowledge their sins and repent saying: who
soever believes on the sede of Abraham shall be blessed, that is, he shall be
delivered from sin, death and hell, and shall hence forth continue righteous,
and saved for ever, as Christ him self says (in the xj. of John.) He that
believes on me shall never more dye.

The law (says John. i.) was given by Moses: but grace and verity by Jesus The
(...) was given by Moses, grace and truth by Jesus Christ.
Christ. The law (whose minister is Moses) was given to bring us unto the
knowledge of our selves, that we might thereby feel and perceive what we are
of nature. The law condemns us and all our deeds, and is called of Paul (in
the ij. Cor. iij.) the ministration of death. For it kills our consciences
and drives us to desperation, The law requires of us that which is
impossible for our nature to do.
in as much as it requires of us that which is impossible for our nature to
do. It requires of us the deeds of an whole man. It requires perfect love
from the low bottom and ground of the heart, as well in all things which we
suffer, as in the things which we do. But says John in the same place, grace
and verity is given us in Christ. So that when the law has passed upon When
the law has condemned us, Christ grants us free pardon.
us, and condemned us to death (which is his nature to do) then have we in
Christ grace, that is to say favor, promises of life, of mercy, of pardon,
freely by ye merits of Christ, and in Christ have we verity and truth, in
that God for his sake fulfilleth all his promises to them that believe. Therefore
is y^ Gospel the ministration of life. Paul calls it in the fore rehearsed
place of the Cor. ij. the ministration of the spirit and of righteousness. In
the Gospel when we believe the promises, we receive the spirit of life, and
are justified in the blood of Christ from all things whereof the law condemned
us. And we receive love unto the law and power to fulfill it, and grow therein
daily. Of Christ it is written in the fore rehearsed Ioh. i. this is he of
whose abundance or fulness, all we have received, grace for grace, or favor
for favor. That is to say, for the favor that God has to his son Christ,
he gives unto us his favor and good will and al gifts of his grace as a
father to his sons. As affirms Paul saying: which loved us in his beloved
before the creation of y^ world. So y^ Christ brings the love of God unto us
and not our own holy works. Christ is made Christ is Gods mercy stool, so
that no mercy comes from God, but through Christ.
Lord over all, and is called in Scripture Gods mercy stole, who soever
therefore flies to Christ, can neither hear nor receive of God any other thing
save mercy.

In the old Testament are many promises, which are nothing else but the
Eua^gelion or Gospel, to save those yt believed the^ from yt vengeance of the
law. And in the new Testament is often made mention of the law, to condemn them,
which believe not the promises. Moreover the law and Gospel may never be
separate: for the Gospel and promises serve but for troubled consciences, which
are brought to desperation and feel the pains of hell and death under the
law, and are in captivity and bondage under the law. In all my deeds I must
have the law before me to condemn mine imperfectness. For all that I do (be I
never so perfect) is yet damnable sin, when it is compared to the law, which
requires the ground and bottom of mine heart. I must therefore have always
the law in my sight, that I may be meke in the The law must ever be in sight to
make us humble spirited: and the gospel also before our ^yes to comfort us.
spirit, and give God all the laud and praise, ascribyng to him all
righteousness, and to my self al unrighteousness and sin. I must also have the
promises before mine eyes, that I despair not, in which promises I see the
mercy, favor, and good will of God upon me in the blood of his son Christ,
which has made satisfaction for mine imperfectness, and fulfilled for me, that
which I could not do.

Here may ye perceive that two manner of people are sore deceived. First Two
manner of people deceived, those which justify themselves by thse works: and
those that through their blind opinion of faith utterly per^ert the lively
faith.
they which justify them selves with outward deeds, in that they abstain
outwardly from that which the law forbids, and do outwardly that which the
law commands. They compare them selves to open sinners and in respect of
them justify them selves condemning the open sinners. They set a veil on
Moses face and see not how the law requires love from the bottom of the heart
and that love only is the fulfilling of the law. If they did they would not
condemn their neighbors. Love hydeth the multitude of sins, says S. Peter
in his first Epistle. For whom I love from the deep bottom and ground of
mine heart him condemn I not, neither reckon his sins, but suffer his
weakness and infirmity, as a mother the weakness of her son, until he grow
up into a perfect man.

Those also are deceived which with out all fear of God give them selves unto
all manner vices with full consent, and full delectation, having no respect to
the law of God (under whose vengeance they are locked up in captiuitic) but
say: God is merciful and Christ dyed for us, supposing that such dreaming and
imagination is that faith which is so greatly commended in holy Scripture. Nay
that is not faith, but rather a folish blind opinion springing of their own
corrupt nature, and is not given them of the spirit of God but rather of the
spirit of the devil, whose faith, now a days, the Popish compare and make
equal unto the best trust, confidence and belefe that a repenting soul can
have in the blood of our Savior Jesus, unto their own confusion, shame and
vtteryng what they are with in. But true faith is (as says the Apostle Paul)
the gift of God and is given to sinners after the law has passed upon them
and has brought their consciences unto the brim of desperation, and sorrows of
hell.

They that have this right faith, consent to the law that it is righteous, and
good, and justify God which made the He that has a right faith deliteth in
the law although his weakness can not fulfill the same.
law, and have delectation in the law (notwithstanding that they ca^ not
fulfill it as they would for their weakness) and they abhor what soever the
law forbids, though they can not all ways avoid it. And their great sorrow
is, because they can not fulfill the will of God in the law, and the spirit
that is in them cries to God night and day for strength and help with tears
(as says Paul) that can not be expressed with tongue. Of which things the
belefe of our Popish or of their father, whom they so magnify for his strong
faith has none experience at all.

The first, that is to say, he which justifies him self with his outward He
that justifies him self rejects yt law and priuises.
deeds, consents not to the law inward, neither has delectation therein, ye,
he would rather that no such law were. So justifies he not God, but hates him
as a tyrant, neither cares he for the promises, but will with his own
strength be savior of him self: no wise glorifieth he God, though he seem
outward to do.

The second, that is to say, the sensual person, as a voluptuous swyne, The
voluptuous person.
neither fears God in his law, neither is thankful to him for his promises
and mercy, which is set forth in Christ to all them that believe.

The right Christen man consents to the law that it is righteous, and
justifies A true christian.
God in the law, for he affirms that God is righteous and just, which is
author of the law, he believes the promises of God, and justifies God, iudgyng
him true and beleuyng that he will fulfill his promises: with the law he
condemns him self and all his deeds, and gives all the praise to God. He
believes the promises, and ascribes all truth to God: thus every where
justifies he God, and prayseth God.

By nature through the fall of Adam are we the children of wrath, heirs of the
vengeance of God by birth, yea and from our conceptio^. And we have our
fellowship with the damned devils under the power of darkness and rule of
Satan, while we are yet in our mothers wombes, and though we show not forth
the fruits of sin, as soon as we be borne, yet are we full of the natural
poison whereof all sinful deeds spryng, and can not but sin outwardes (be
we never so young) as soon as we be able to work if occasion be given, for
our nature is to do sin as is the nature of a Serpent to stynge. And as
Serpent yet young, or yet vnbrought forth is full of poison, A proper
similitude.
and can not afterward (when the time is come and occasion given) but bring
forth the fruits thereof. And as an adder, a tode, or a snake is hated of man
(not for the evil that it has done, but for the poison that is in it and hurt
which it can not but do) so are we hated of God for that natural poison which
is conceived and borne with us, before we do any outward evil. And as the
evil, which a venomous worm does, makes it not a Serpent: but because it is a
venomous worm, does it evil and poysoneth, and as the fruit makes not the
tree evil: but because it is an evil tree, therefore brings it forth evil
fruit, when the season of fruit is. Even so do not our evil deeds make vsfirst
evil though ignorance and blindness through evil workyng hardens us in evil
and makes us worse and worse: but because that of nature we are evil,
therefore we both think and do evil, and are under vengeance under the law,
convict to eternal damnation by the law, and are contrary to the will of God in
all our will, and in all things consent to the will of the tend.

By grace (that is to say by favor) We are plucked from Adam, and graffed in
Christ by grace.
we are plucked out of Ada^ the ground of all evil, and graffed in Christ the
root of all goodness. In Christ God loved us his elect and chosen, before the
world began, and reserved us unto the knowledge of his son and of his holy
Gospel, and when the Gospel is preached to us opens our hearts, and gives
us grace to believe and puts the spirit of Christ in us, and we know him as
our father most merciful, and consent to the law, and lone it inwardly in our
heart, and desire to fulfill it, and sorrow because we can not: which will
(sin we of frailty never so much) is sufficient till more strength be given
us; the blood of Christ has made satisfaction for the rest: the blood of
Christ has obtained The blood of Jesus has obtained al things for us of God.
all things for us of God. Christ is our satisfaction, redemer, deliverer,
savior from vengeance and wrath. Observe and mark in Paul's, Peter's and
John's Epistles and in the Gospel what Christ is unto us.

By faith are we saved only in beleuyng the promises. And though faith be
never without love and good works, yet is our saving imputed neither to love
nor unto good works but unto faith only. For love and works are under the
law which requires perfection, and the ground and fountain of the heart, and
damneth all imperfectnes. Now is faith under the promises, which damn not: but
give pardon grace, mercy, favor, and what soever is contained in the promises.
Sundry sorts of righteousness.


Righteousness is diverse: for blind reason imaguieth many manner of
righteousnesses. There is the righteousness of works (as I said before) when
the heart is a way and is not felt how the law is spiritual and can not be
fulfilled, but from the bottom of the heart. As the just ministration* of all
manner of laws, and the obseruyng of them, for a worldly purpose and for our
own profit and not of love unto our neighbor without all other respect, and
moral virtues wherein Philosophers put their felicity and blessedness, which
all are nothing in the sight of God in respect of the life to come. There is in
like manner the justifying of ceremonies which some imagine their own selves,
some counterfaite other, saying, in their blind reason: such holy persons did
thus and thus, and they were holy men, therefore if I do so likewise I shall
please God: but they have none answer of God, that, that pleases. The Jews
seek righteousness in their ceremonies which god gave unto them not for to
justify: but to describe and paynt Christ unto the^, of which Jews testifies
Paul saying: how that they have affection to god: but not after knowledge, for
they go about to stablish their own justice, and are not obedient to the
justice or righteousness that comes of God, which is the forgiveness of
sin in Christ's blood unto all that repent and believe. The cause is verily,
that Ma^s sensual reason can not perceive the virtue of Christ's blood.
except a man cast away his own imagination and reason, he can not perceive
God, and understand the virtue and power of the blood of Christ. There is a
full righteousness, when the law is fulfilled from the ground of the heart. This
had neither Peter nor Paul in this life perfectly: unto the uttermost, that
they could not be perfecter but sighed after it. They were so farreforth
blessed in Christ, that they hungered and thyrsted after it. Paul had this
thyrst, he consented to the law of God, that it ought so to be, but he found an
other lust in his members contrary to the lust and desire of his mind that
let him, and therefore cried out saying: Oh wretched man that I am: who
shall deliver me from this body of death? thanks be to God through Jesus
Christ. The righteousness that before God is of value, is to believe the promises
of God, after the law has confounded the conscience. As when the temporal law
ofttymes condenmeth the thief or murderer and brings him to execution, so
that he sees nothing before him but present death, and then comes good
tydinges, a charter from the king and delivers him. Likewise when Gods law
has brought the sinner into knowledge of himself, and has confounded his
conscience, and opened unto him the wrath and vengeance of God, then comes
good tydinges, the Euangelion shows unto him the promises of God in Christ,
and how that Christ has purchased pardon for him, has satisfied the law for
him and peased the wrath of God. And the poor sinner believes, laudeth and
tha^keth God, through Christ, and breaks out into exceedyng inward joy and
gladness, for that he has escaped so great wrath, so heavy vengeance, so
fearful and so everlasting a death. And he henceforth is an hu^gred and a
thurst after more righteousness, that he might fulfill the law, and mourns
continually commendyng his weakness unto God in the blood of our Savior Christ
Jesus.

Here shall ye see compendiously and plainly set out the order and practice of
every thing before rehearsed.

The fall of Adam has made us Adams fall brought us in bondage to the devil.
heirs of the vengeance and wrath of God and heirs of eternal damnation.
And has brought us into captivity and bondage under the devil. And the
devil is our Lord, and our ruler, our head, our governor, our Prince, yea and
our God. And our will is locked and knit faster unto the will of the devil,
then could an hundred thousand chains bind a man unto a post. Unto the devils
will consent we, with all our hearts, with all our minds, with all our might,
power, strength, will and lust: so that the law and will of the devil is
written as well in our hearts as in our members, and we run headlong after the
devil with full seal, and the whole swyng of all the power we have: as a
stone cast up into the air comes down naturally of his own self with all
the violence and swyng of his own wayght. With what poison deadly, and
venomous hate, hates The natural corruption of the minds of Adams heirs
plainly s^^ forth.
a man his enemy? With how great malice of mind inwardly do we slay and
murder? With what violence and rage, yea and with how fervent lust commit we
aduoutrie, fornication, and such like uncleanness? with what pleasure and
delectation inwardly serves a glotton his belly? With what diligence deceive
we? How busily seek we the things of this world? What soever we do, think,
or imaginne, is abominable in the sight of God. For we can refer nothing
unto the honor of God: neither is his law or will written in our members or in
our hearts: neither is there any more power in us to follow the will of God then
in a stone to ascend upward of his own self. And beside that we are as it
were a sleep in so deep blindness, that we ca^ neither see, nor feel in what
misery, thraldom, and wretchedness we are in, till Moses come and wake us, and
publish the law. When we hear the law truly preached, how that we ought to
love and honor God with all our strength and might, from the low bottom of
the heart: because he has created us, and both heaven and earth for our sakes
and made us Lord thereof: and our neighbors (yea our enemies) as our selves
inwardly from the ground of the heart, because God has made them after the
likeness of his own image, and they are his sons as well as we, and Christ
has bought them with his blood and made them heirs of everlasting life as
well as us: And how we ought to do what soever God bids, and abstain from
what soever God forbids, with all love and mekenes, with a fervent and a
burning lust from the center of the heart, then begins the conscience to rage
against the law, and against God. No sea, be it never so great a tempest, is so
unquiet. For it is not possible for a natural man to consent to the law, that
it should be good, or that God should be righteous, which makes the law: in as
much as it is contrary unto his nature and damneth him and all that he ca^ do,
and neither shows him where to fetch help nor preaches any mercy, but only
sets man at variaunce with God, as witnesses Paul Romans iiij. and provoke
him and styrreth him to rail on God and to blaspheme him as a cruel tyrant.
For it is not possible Man before his regeneration, can not think well of God.
for a man, till he be borne again, to think that God is righteous to make
him of so poison a nature, either for his own pleasure or for the sin of an
other man, and to give him a law that is impossible for him to do or to consent
to: his wit, reason, and will being so fast glued, yea nailed and chayned
unto the will of the devil. Neither can any creature louse the bonds, save
the blood of Christ only.

This is captivity and bondage whence Christ delivered us, redeemed, and loused
us. His blood, his death, his patience, in suffering rebukes and wrongs, his
prayers and fastings his mekenes and fulfillyng of the uttermost point of the
law, peased the wrath of God, brought the favor of God to us again, obtained
that God should love us first, and be our father, and that a merciful father,
that will consider our infirmities and weakness, and will give us his spirit
again (which was taken away in the fall of Adam) to rule, govern, and strength
us, and to break the bonds of Satan, wherein we were so strait bound. When
Christ is thus wise preached, and the promises rehearsed which are contained in
the Prophets, in the Psalms, and in diverse places of the five books of
Moses: which preaching is called the Gospel or glad tydinges: The hearts of the
elect^ do eue^ melt at the preaching of Gods mercy, and Christ's kyndnes.
then the hearts of them which are elect and chose^, begin to wax soft and
melt at the bounteous mercy of God, and kyndnes showed of Christ. For when the
Euangelion is preached, the spirit of God enters into them, which God has
ordained and appointed unto eternal life, and opens their inward eyes, and
works such belefe in them. When the woeful consciences feel and taste how
sweet a thing the bitter death of Christ is, and how merciful and loving God
is through Christ's purchasyng and merits, they begin to love gain, and to
consent to the law of God, how that it is good and ought so to be, and that God
is righteous which made it, and desire to fulfill the law even as a sick man
desires to be whole, and are an hungered and thirst after more righteousness and
after more strength, to fulfill the law more perfectly. And in all that they
do, or omit and leave undone, they seek Gods honor, and his will with
meekness, ever condemnyng the imperfectness of their deeds by the law.

Now Christ stands us in double stead, and us serves two manner wise. First
he is our redemer, deliverer, reconciler, mediator, intercessor, advocate,
Christ ^e^^ nothing undone, that might be to our salvation.
attorney, soliciter, our hope, comfort, shield, protection, defender,
strength, health, satisfaction and salvation. His blood, his death, all that he
ever did, is ours. And Christ him self, with all that he is or can do, is ours.
His blood shedyng and all that he did, does me as good service, as though I my
self had done it. And God (as great as he is) is mine with all that he has as
an husband is his wives, through Christ and his purchasing.

Secondaryly after that we be overcome with love and kindness, and now seek to
do the will of God (which is a Christen man's nature) Then have we Christ an
example to counterfeit, as says Christ an example to us of all goodness.
Christ him self in John: I have given you an example. And in an other
Evangelist, he says: He that will be great among you shall be your servant and
Minister, as the son of man came to minister and not to be ministered unto.
And Paul says: Counterfeit Christ. And Peter says: Christ dyed for you, and
left you an example to follow his steps. What soever therefore faith What
faith receives of God thorough Christ's blood, that we must bestow on our
neighbors, though they be our enemies.
has received of God through Christ's blood and deseruyng, that same must love
shed out every whit, and bestow it on our neighbors unto their profit, yea
and that though they be our enemies. By faith we receive of God and by love we
shed out again. And that must we do freely after the example of Christ without
any other respect, save our neighbors wealth only, and neither look for
reward in earth, nor yet in heaven for the deseruyng and merits of our deeds
as Friars preach, though we know that good deeds are rewarded, both in this
life and in the life to come: but of pure love must we bestow our selves all
that we have, and all that we are able to do, even on our enemies to bring them
to God, considering nothing but their wealth, as Christ did ours. Christ did
not his Christ did not good deeds to merit heaven, for that was his all
ready, but freely for our sakes.
deeds to obtain heaven thereby (that had been a madness) heaven was his all
ready, he was heir thereof, it was his by inheritance, but did them freely for
our sakes, considering nothing but our wealth and to bring the favor of God to
us again and us to God. As no natural son that is his fathers heir, does
his fathers will because he would be heir, that he is already by birth: his
father gave him that yer he was borne and is lother that he should go without
it, then he him self has wit to be: but of pure love does he that he does.
And ask him why he does any thing that he does, he answers: my father bade,
it is my fathers will, it pleases my father. Bond servants work for hyre,
Children for love. For their father with all he has, is theirs already. So
does a Christen man freely all that he does, considers nothing but the will of
God, and his neighbors wealth only. If I live chaste, I do it not to obtain
heaven thereby. For then should I do wrong to the blood of Christ: Christ's
blood has obtained me that, Christ's merits have made me heir thereof. He is
both door and way thither wards. Neither that I look for an higher room in
heaven, the^ they shall have which live in wedlock, other the^ a whore of the
stews (if she repent) for that were the pride of Lucifer. But freely to wait
on the Euangelion: and to avoid the trouble of the world and occasions that
might pluck me there from, and to serve my brother with all, even as one hand
helps an other, or one member an other, because one feels an others grief,
and the pain of the one is the pain of the other. What soever is done to the
lest of us (whether it be good or bad) it is done to Christ, and what soever is
done to my brother (if I be a Christen man) that same is done to me. Neither
does my brothers pain grieve me less then mine own. Neither rejoice I less
at his wealth then at mine own if I love him as well and as much as my self, as
the law commands me. If it were not so: how says Paul? let him that
reioyseth, rejoice in the Lord, that is to say Christ, which is Lord over all
creatures. I^ my merits obtained me heaven or a higher place there, then had I
wherein I might rejoice besides the Lord.

Here see ye the nature of the law, and the nature of the Euangelion. How the
The law byndeth, and the Gospel louseth all men.
law is the key that byndeth and damneth all men, and the Euangelion is the
keye that loses them again. The law goes before, and the Euangelion
follows. When a preacher preaches the law, he byndeth all consciences, and
when he preaches the Gospel, he loses them again. These two salues (I mean
the law and the Gospel) uses god and his preacher to heal and cure sinners
with all. The law drives out the The force of the law.
disease, and makes it appear, and is a sharp salve, and a freatyng corsey,
and kills the dead flesh, and louseth and draws the sores out by the
roots, and all corruption. It pulls from a man the trust and confidence that
he has in him self, and in his own works, merits, deseruinges and
ceremonies and robs him of all his righteousness and makes him poor. It
kills him, sends him down to hell, and brings him to utter desperation,
and prepares ye way of the Lord, as it is written of John the Baptist. For it
is not possible that Christ should come to a man, as long as he trusts in him
self, or in any worldly thing or has any righteousness of his own, or riches
of holy works. Then comes the Eua^gelion a more gentle paster, which
soupleth and swageth the wounds of the conscience, and brings health. It
brings the spirit of God, which loses the bonds of Satan, and coupleth us
to God and his will through strong faith and fervent love, with bonds to
strong for the devil, the world, or any creature to lose them. And the poor
and The vprising sinner feels such joy in the Gospel that he thinks it*
impossible that God should forsake him.
wretched sinner feels so great mercy, love, and kyndnes in God, that he is
sure in him self how that it is not possible that God should forsake him, or
withdraw his mercy and love from him. And boldly cries out with Paul saying:
Who shall separate us from the love that GOD loves us withal? That is to say:
what shall make me believe that God loves me not? Shall tribulation? Anguish?
Persecution? Shall hunger? Nakedness? Shall sword? Nay, I am sure that neither
death, nor life, neither angel, neither rule nor power, neither present
things, nor things to come, neither high nor low, neither any creature is
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. In
all such tribulations a Christen man perceaueth that God is his father, and
loves him, even as he loved Christ when he shed his blood on the cross.
Finally, as before, when I was bond to the devil and his will, I wrought all
manner evil and wickedness, not for hells sake which is the reward of sin, but
because I was heir of hell by birth and bondage to the devil, did I evil.
For I could none otherwise do: to do sin was my nature. Even so now since I
am coupled to GOD by Christ's blood, do I well, not for heavens sake which is
yet the reward of well doing: but because I am heir of heaven by grace and
Christ's purchasyng, and have the spirit of God I do good freely, for so is my
nature. As a good tree brings forth good fruit, and an evil tree evil
fruit. By the fruits shall ye know what the tree is. A ma^s deeds declare what
he is within, but make him neither good nor bad, though after we be created a
new by the spirit and doctrine of Christ we wax perfecter always with
woorkyng according to the doctrine, and not with blind works of our own
imagining. We must be first evil yer we do evil, as a Serpent is first
poisoned yer he poison. We must be also good yer we do good, as the fire must
be first hoate yer it heat an other thing. Take an example. As those blind and
deaffe which are cured in the Gospel could not see nor hear, till Christ had
given them sight and hearing, and those sick could not do the deeds of an
whole man, till Christ had given them health: So can no man do good in his
soul, till Christ have losed him out of the bonds of Satan, and have given
him wherewith to do good, yea and first have powered into him that self good
thing which he shedeth forth afterward on other. Whatsoever is our own is
sin. Whatsoever is above that, is Christ's gift, purches, doing, All sin in
us is of (...) selves* and all goodness of Christ.
and working. He bought it of his father dearly with his blood, yea with his
most bitter death, and gave his life for it. What soever good thing is in us,
that is given us freely without our deseruyng or merits for Christ's bloudes
sake. That we desire to follow yt will of God, it is the gift of Christ's blood.
That we now hate the devils will (whereunto we were so fast locked, and could
not but love it) is also the gift of Christ's blood, unto whom belongs the
praise and honor of our good deeds, and not unto us.

Our deeds do us three manner service. First they certify us that we are
Works certify us of everlasting ^nheritaunce, ^ill sin in us, and releue
the necessity of our neighbor.
heirs of everlasting life. And that the spirit of God, which is the earnest
thereof is in us, in that our hearts consent unto the law of God, and we have
power in our members to do it, though imperfectly. And secondarily we tame the
flesh therewith and kill the sin that remains yet in us and wax daily
perfecter and perfecter in the spirit therewith and keep that the lusts choke
not the word of God that is sown in us, nor quench the gifts and working of
the spirit, and that we lose not the spirit again. And thirdly we do our
duty unto our neighbor therewith and help their necessity unto our own
comfort also, and draw all me^ unto the honoryng and praising of God.

And whosoever excels in the Gifts of grace belong to our brother as much
as to our selves.
gifts of grace, let the same think that they be given him, as much to do his
brother service as for his own self, and as much for the love which God has
to the weak as unto him, unto whom God gives such gifts. And he that
withdraws ought that he has from his neighbors need, robs his neighbor
and is a thief. And he that is proud of the gifts of God and thinks him
self, by the reason of them better then his feeble neighbor, and not rather
as the truth is, knowledgeth him self a servant unto his poor neighbor, by
the reason of them the same has Lucifers spirit in him and not Christ's.

These things to know: first the law: how that it is natural, right, and
equity, that we have but one God to put our hope and trust in, and him to love
with all the heart, all the soul, and all our might and power, and neither to
move heart nor hand but at his commandment, because he has first created us
of naught, and heaven and earth for our sakes. And afterward when we had marred
our self through sin, he forgave us and created us again in the blood of
his beloved son.

And that we have the name of our one God in fear and reverence, and that we
dishonor it not in swearyng thereby about light trifles or vanity or call it
to record for the confirming of wickedness or falshead, or ought that is to
the dishonor of God, which is the breakyng of his laws, or unto the hurt of
our neighbor.

And in as much as he is our Lord and God and we his double possession, by
creation and redemption, and therefore ought, as I said, neither to move heart or
hand without his commandment, it is right that we have needful holy days to
come together and learn Holidays necessary to come together in, and learn
Christ's will.
his will, both the law, which he will have us ruled by, and also the promises
of mercy which he will have us trust unto: and to give God thanks together
for his mercy, and to commit our infirmities to him through our Savior Jesus,
and to reconsile our selves unto him, and each to other, if ought be between
brother and, brother that requires it. And for this purpose and such like, as
to visit the sick and nedy, and redress peace and unity were the holy days
ordained only, and so farforth are they to be kept holy from all manner works
that may be conveniently spared for the time till this be done and no further,
but then lawfully to work.

And that it is right that we obey father and mother, Master, Lord, Prince and
King and all the ordinances of the world bodily and ghostly by which God
rules us and ministers freely his benefits unto us all. And that we love them
for the benefits that we receive by them, and fear them for the power they
have over us to punish us if we trespass the law and good order. So far yet
are the worldly powers or rulers to be obeyed only, as their Worldly rulers to
be obayed so far forth a^ their laws impugn not Gods laws.
commau^dements repugne not against the commandment of God, and the^ hoo.
Wherefore we must have Gods commandment ever in our hearts, and by the higher
law interpret the inferior: that we obey nothing against the belefe of one
God, or against the faith, hope and trust that is him only, or against the
love of God, whereby we do or leave undone all thing for his sake, and that we
do nothing for any man's commandment against the reverence of the name of God,
to make it despised and the less feared and set by: and that we obey nothing
to the hynderaunce of the knowledge of the blessed doctrine of God whose
servant the holy day is.

Notwithstanding though the rulers which God has set over us command Though
rulers appointed of God oppress us, yet we may not avenge they being in Gods
room.
us against God, or do us open wrong and oppress us with cruel tyranny, yet
because they are in Gods rowme, we may not aue^ge our selves, but by the
process and order of Gods law, and laws of man made by the authority of Gods
law, which is also Gods law, ever by an higher power, and remittyng the
vengeance unto God, and in the mean season suffer until the hour be come.

And on the other side to know that a man ought to love his neighbor equally
We must love our neighbor as our self.
and fully as well as him self, because his neighbor (be he never so simple)
is equally created of God and as full redeemed by the blood of our savior Jesus
Christ. Out of which commandment of love spring these: Kill not thy
neighbor: defile not his wife: bear no false witness against him, and
finally, not only do not these things in deed but couete not in thine heart,
his house, his wife, his manseruaunt, maydeseruaunt, ox, ass or what soever
is his. So that these laws pertaynyng unto our neighbor are not fulfilled in
the sight of God save with love. He that loves not his neighbor keeps not
this commandment, defile not thy neighbors wife, though he never touch her
or never see her or think upon her. For the commandment is, though thy
neighbors wife be never so fair, and thou have never so great opportunity
given thee, and she content, or happly provoke thee as Putiphers wife did
Joseph, yet see thou love thy neighbor so well, that for very love thou can not
find in thine heart to do yt wickedness. And eue^ so he that trusts in any
thing save in God only and in his son Jesus Christ, keeps no commandment
at all in the sight of God.

For he that has trust in any creature whether in heaven or in earth, save in
God and his son Jesus, ca^ see no cause to love God with all his heart etc.
neither to abstain from dishonoryng his name nor to keep the holy day for the
love of his doctrine, nor to obey loving ly yt rulers of this world nor any
cause to love his neighbor as him self and to abstain from hurtyng him,
where he may get profit by him and save him self harmeles. And in likewise
against this law, love thy neighbor as thy self. I may obey no worldly power,
to do ought at any man's commandment unto the hurt of my neighbor that has
not deserved it, though he be a Turk.

And to know how contrary this law is unto our nature, and how it is damnation
not to have this law written in our hearts, though we never commit the deeds:
and how there is no other means to be saved from this damnation then through
repentance toward the law and faith in Christ's blood which are the very
inward baptism of our souls, and the washyng and the dippyng of our bodies in
yt water is the outward sign. The plungyng of the body under the Our baptism
signifies that we repent and profess a new life.
water signifies that we repent and profess to fight against sin and
lusts, and to kill them every day more and more, with the help of God and our
diligence in following the doctrine of Christ and the leadyng of his spirit,
and that we believe to be washed from our natural damnation in which we are
borne, and from all the wrath of the law, and from all the infirmities and
weaknesses that remain in us, after we have given our consent unto the law,
and yielded our self to be scholars thereof, and from all the imperfectnesse
of all our deeds done with cold love, and from all actual sin which shall
chance on us while we enforce the contrary and ever fight thereagaynst and
hope to sin no more. And thus, repentance and faith begin at our Baptism
and first professing the laws of God, and continue unto our lives end, and
grow as we grow in the spirit. For the perfecter we be, the greater is our
repentance and the stronger our faith. And thus, as the spirit and doctrine on
Gods part, and repentance and faith in our part beget us a new in Christ: even
so they make us grow and wax perfect and save us unto the end, and never
leave us until all The perfecter we are, the greter is our repentante and the
stronger is our faith.
sin be put of and we clean purified and full formed and fashioned after the
similitude and lickenes of the perfectnes of our Savior Jesus, whose gift all
is.

And finally to know yt what soever good thing is in us, that same is yt gift
of grace and therefore not of deseruyng, though many things be given of God
through our diligence in workyng his laws and chastising our bodies and in
praying for the^ and beleuyng his promises, which else should not be given us:
yet our working deserves not y^ gifts, Our works deserve not yt gifts of
grace.
no more the^ the diligence of a merchant in seeking a good ship brings
the goods safe to la^d, though such diligence does now and the^ help thereto.
But when we believe in God and then do all that is in our might and not tempt
him, then is God true to abide by his promise and to help us and perform
alone when our strength is past.

These things I say to know, is to have all the scripture unlocked and opened
before thee, so that if thou will go in and read thou can not but understand.
And in these things to be ignorant, is to have all the Scripture locked up,
so that ye more thou read it, the blinder thou art, and the more
contrariety thou find in it, and the more ta^gled art thou The principles
of scripture perfectly learned, a^ y^ rest is more easy.
therein and can no where through. For if thou add a gloss in one place, in
an other it will not serve. And therefore because we be never taught the
profession of our Baptism, we remain always unlearned, as well the
spirituality for all their great clergy and high schools, as we say, as the lay
people. And now because the lay and unlearned people are taught these first
principles of our profession therefore they read the scripture and understand
and delight therein. And our great pillars of holy church, which have nailed a
veil of false gloses on Moses face, to corrupt the true understanding of his
law, can not come in. And therefore bark and say yt scripture makes heretics
and it is not possible for them to understand it in the English, because they
the^ selves do not in Latin. And of pure malice that they ca^ not have their
will, they slay their brethren for their faith they have in our savior, and
therwt utter their bloody woluish tyranny, and what they be within and whose
disciples. Herewith, reader, be committed unto the grace of our savior Jesus,
unto who^ and God our father thorough him be praise for ever and for ever.

Amen.
The exposition of the first Epistle of S. John, set forth by M. William
Tyndall in the year of our Lord. 1531. September.
Except a man have the profession of his baptism in his heart, he can not
understand the Scripture.

The Prologue.
AS a man can by no means read, except he be first taught the letters of the
crosserow: We must first learn the profession of our Baptism.
even so it is impossible for a man of whatsoever degree or name he be off, to
understand ought in the Scripture unto the honor of God, and health of his
soul, except he be first taught the profession of his baptism, and have it
also written in his heart.

Which profession stands in ij. things. The profession of our Baptism what
it is.
The one is the knowledge of God, understanding it spiritually, as Christ
expounds it, Math. v. vj. and vij. so that the root and life of all laws be
this: Love thy Lord God with all thine heart, all thy soul, and all thy might:
and thy neighbor as thy self, for his sake: and that love only is the
fulfilling of the law (as Paul teaches) and that whatsoever deed we do, and
not of that love, that same fulfilleth no law in the sight of God.

And the other is to know the promises Gospel.
of mercy, which are in our Savior Christ: understanding them also purely
without all leven, after the mercifullest fashion as Scripture sounds them,
and after al fatherly love and kindenes of God, unto all that repent toward the
law, and believe in Christ.

And to have this profession written in thine heart is to consent unto the law
that it is righteous, and good, and to love it in thine heart, and to submit thy
self thereunto for to learn it, and to rule and square al thy deeds thereby,
and the^ to believe in Christ, that for his All our sins for Jesus Christ's
sake, and for his death and passion are clearly forgeuen.
sake all thy sins which thou did before the knowledge of this
profession, are forgeeuen thee clearly both a poena and culpa, to use the popes
terms, and that for none other satisfaction to Godwarde then Christ's blood,
and even so, that all the sin which we do after this knowledge, either of
chance, ignorance, infirmity, negligence, or provoked and overcome of the
flesh, is forgeuen us like wise both Poena and culpa, through repentance and
faith in Christ, without our satisfaction of works to Godwarde.

Notwithstanding we being all sons of one God, and servants of one Christ,
must agree among our selves, and he that has offended must meekly knowledge
his fault, and Every Christen man must reconcile himself unto his brother.
offer himself to make amends unto the utmost of his pour: and if he have not
wherewith, ask forgiveness for Christ's sake, the other is bound to forgive
him. Neither with out reconsiling himself unto his brother may any man be at
the first received unto the profession of Christ's faith nor continue therein,
nor be received in again if he be for his open offenses put thereout. For how
can a man love his neighbor as well as himself, and be sorry that he has hurt
him, except he should offer himself to make amends?

And we must from henceforth walk in The right penance is repentance of
sin and amendeme^t of life.
the life of penance (if ye will have it so called) and after the doctrine of
Christ every man tame his flesh with prayer, fasting, and the continual
meditations of Christ's penance, and passions for us, and of the holy saints,
and with such abstinence, and kind of living as every man thincketh most meet
All our life must tend to this end, to came our flesh and serve our neighbor.
for his complexion, the younger confessing their infirmities to the elder,
discreter, and better learned, and asking their advise and wholesome counsel
for the repressing of their diseases, but all to tame the flesh, and to serve
thy neighbor without any superstious mind.

But to Godward is there no satisfaction, Faith in Christ's blood with a
repentau^t heart is the only satisfaction that we ca^ make toward God.
save faith in Christ's blood out of a repenting heart. For our outward deeds
can not be referred unto God, to do him service in his own person, and to
help him, or make him better therewith. We can do no more with them, were they
never so perfect, and done with all love, then satisfy the law for the
present time, and do our duty unto our neighbors, and tame our own flesh,
but not to make satisfaction to God for sin that is once past. The sin that
is once committed must God forgive freely of a fatherly love for Christ's sake.

When God visits us with sickness, poverty, or whatsoever adversity it be,
he does it not of a tyrannous mind to satisfy his lust in our suffering of
evil to make satisfaction for the sin that is past of which we repent, and
be sorry: But of a fatherly love to make The father of love corrects the child.
us know our selves, and feel his mercy, and to tame our flesh, and to keep
us from sinning again. As no natural father punishes his child because he
delights in tormenting of him, to take satisfaction for the sin that is
past: but first teaches kindly, and suffers, and forgeueth once or twice, and
then at the last, when he sees the body so wanton, that the child can not
continue in the right way for the rage of wild lusts, he beats to subdue the
flesh only, and to tame it, that the doctrine of y^ father may have her due
course in the heart of the child, and should not be choked with lusts.

Even so is it of God, if any of his children God as a loving father cares for
us and ge^tlye corrects us to keep us in the right way.
that have professed his law, and the^ faith of our Savior, be negligent to
tame his flesh, with prayer, fasting, and good deeds after the doctrine of
Christ, he will surely scourge him, to bring him into the right way again, and
to keep him that the doctrine of his souls health perish not in him. But he
takes not his mercy from us, nor thinks on the sin that is past, after
that we repent and be full converted, but ablolueth us both a poena and culpa,
for Christ's sake: and is as mighty and as merciful to do it for Christ's
sake, as the Pope for money, besides that he has promised mercyfully so to do.

The knowledge of our baptism is the key and the light of the Scripture.
ANd again, as he which knows his letters well, and can spell perfectly, can
not but read if he be diligent: and as he which has clear eyes without
impediment or let, To understand our baptism is to understand the law and the
Gospel.
and walks thereto in the light and open day, can not but see, if he attend
and take heed: even so who so ever has the profession of baptism written in
his heart, can not but understand the scripture, if he exercise him self
therein, and compare one place to an other, and mark the manner of speech, and
ask here and there the meaning of a sentence, of them that be better exercised.

For as the doctrine which we should be The key and light of the Scripture.
taught before we were baptized, and for lack of age is deferred unto the
years of discretion is the key that binds and loses, locketh and vnlocketh
the conscience of all sinners: even so that lesson, where it is understand is
only the key that opens all ye scripture, and even the whole scripture in it
self gathered together in a narrow compass, and brought into a
compendiousnes. And til thou be taught that lesson, that thine heart feel the
sweetness of it, the Scripture is locked and shut up from thee, and so dark
that thou could not understand it, though Peter, Paul, or Christ himself
did expound it unto thee, no more then a blind man can see, though thou set a
candle before him, or shewedst him the Sun, or poyntedst with thy finger,
unto that thou would have him look upon.

Now we be all baptized: But alas, not How the Scripture is locked up from ou^
understanding.
one from the highest to the lowest ever taught the profession or meaning
thereof. And therefore we remain all blind generally, as well our great
Rabines for all their hye learning which they seem to have, as the lay people:
yea and so much the more blind are our great clerks, that where the lay people
for a great number of them are caught naught at al, they be all wrong taught,
and the doctrine of their baptism is all corrupt unto them, with the l^uen of
false gloses, ere they come to read the scripture. So that the light which they
bring with them to understand the scripture withal, is utter darkness, and as
contrary unto the scripture as the devil unto Christ,

By reason whereof the Scripture is locked up and become so dark unto them,
that they grope for the door, and can find no way in, and is become a maze
unto them, in which they wander as in a nust, or (as we say) led by Robin
Goodfellow, that they can not come to the right way, no though they turn their
cappes: and the brightness thereof has blinded their eyes with malice, so that
though they believe not the Scripture to be false, yet If we be not taught by
God, we do but wander ^leane out of the way.
they persecute the right understanding thereof, and can not believe it true in
the plain sense, which it speaks to them in. It is becomme a tu^nagaine lane
unto them, which they can not go thorough, nor make iij. lines agree together.
And finally the sentences of the Scripture are nothing but very riddles unto
the^, ^s the which they cast, as the blind man does at the Crow, and expound by
guess, an hundred Doctoures an hundred ways, and one man in xx. sermons
alleging one text after xx. fashions, having no sure doctrine to cleave
unto, and all for lack of the right knowledge of the profession of our
Baptism.

He that has the profession of his Baptism written in his heart, can be no
heretic.
AN other conclusion is this. As he which ever creeps a long by the ground
and never clymeth can not fall from an high. Even so no man that has the
profession of He that understands the profession of his Baptism can be no
heretic.
his Baptism written in his heart can stomble in the Scripture, and fall unto
heresies or become a maker of division and settes and a defender of wild and
vain opinions. For the whole and only cause of heresies and sects is pride.

Now the law of God truly interpreted robs all them in whose hearts it is
written, and makes them as bare as Job of all things whereof a man can be moved
to pride. And on the other side they have utterly forsaken them selves with all
their high learning and wisdom and are become the servants of Christ only
which has bought The Scripture teaches low, lines, and hates pride*
the^ with his blood, and have promised in their hearts unfeignedly to follow him
and to take him only for the author of their religion, and his doctrine only
for their wisdom and learning, and to maintain it in word and deed, and to
keep it pure and to build no strange doctrine thereupon, and to be at the
highest never but fellow with their brethren, and in that fellowship The
Scripture makes no heretics.
to wax ever lawer and lower, and every day more servant then other, unto his
weaker brethren, after the example and Image of Christ and after his
commandment and ordinance, and not in feigned words of the Pope.

This he said because of them that say that the Scripture makes men
heretics and corrupts with false opinions contrary unto the profession of
their Baptism, and the light wherewith they should expound the Scripture is
turned into darkness in their hearts, and the door of the Scripture locked,
and the wells stopped up yer they come at it.

And therefore because their darkness can not comprehend the light of Scripture,
as it is written John. i. The light shyned in darkness If God lighten not our
hearts we read the Scripture in vain.
but the darkness could not comprehe^d it, they turn it into blind ridles and
read it without understanding as lay men do our Lady Mattines, or as it were
Marlynes prophecies, ever their minds are upon their heresies. And when they
come to a place that sou^deth like, there they rest and wring out wonderful
expositions to stablishe their heresies with all, after the tale of the boy
that would feign have eaten of the pastie of lamprese but durst not unto the
belles sang unto him. Sit down Jack boy and eat of the lamprey, to stablishe
his waueryng conscience withal. Is it not a great blyndnes to say in the
beginning of all together, that the whole scripture is false in the litterall
sense, and kills the soul. Which pestilent heresy to prove, they abuse the
text of Paul saying. The letter kills, because that text was become a ridle
unto them and they understood it not. The law condemns to drive us to faith
in Christ's death.
When Paul by this word letter understood the law given by Moses to condemn
all consciences and to rob them of all righteousness to compel them unto the
promises of mercy that are in Christ.

Heresy springs not of the Scripture no more then darkness of the Sun, but
is a dark cloud that springs out of the blind hearts of hypocrites, and
covers the face of Heresy springs out of the hearts of hypocrites.
the Scripture, and blyndeth their eyes that they can not behold the bright
beams of the Scripture.

The whole and sum then of all together is this. If our hearts were taught
the appointment made between GOD and us in Christ's blood when we were
Baptized, we had the kay to open the Scripture, and light to see and perceive
the true meaning of it, and the Scripture should be easy to understand. And
because we be not taught that profession, is the cause why the Scripture is so
dark, and so far passing our capacity. And the cause why our expositions
are heresies, is because we be wrong taught, and corrupt with false opinions
before hand and made heretics yer we come at the Scripture, and have corrupt
it, and it not us: as the taste of the sick makes wholesome and well seasoned
meat bitter, He that is sound in faith shall easily attain to the true se^ce
of the scripture.
werish and unsavory. Nevertheless yet the Scripture abides pure in her self
and bright, so that he which is sound in the faith shall at once perceive that
the judgment of the heretic is corrupt in their expositions, as an whole man
does feel at once even with smelling to the meat that the taste of the sick
is infected. And with the Scripture shall they ever improve heresies and false
expositions, for the Scripture purges her self, even as the water once in the
year casts all filthynes unto the sides. Which to be true ye see by the
authority of Paul. 2. Timo. 3. saying. All the Scripture was given of God by
inspiration, and is good to teach with all, to improve and so forth. And by
the example of Christ and the Apostles, how they confounded the Jews with the
same Scripture which they had corrupt, and understood them amiss after their
own darkness, and as ye see by the example of us now also, how we have
manifestly improued the hypocrites in an hu^dre h textes which they had corrupt
to prove their false opinions brought in besides the Scripture, and have driven
them of. And they be fled and openly confess unto their shame that they have
no Scripture and sing an other song, and say they received them by the mouth of
the Apostles. Unto which stopping oyster. I answer here grossly, seeing The
papists unwritten berities are not to be credited.
they are answered before. That as he were a fool which would trust him to
tell his money in his absent that has pyked his purse before his face, even so
sith ye have corrupt the open Scripture before our eyes and taken with the
manner that ye ca^ not deny, we were mad to believe that, which has lain. xv.
C. years as ye say in your rotten mawes, should now be wholesome for us ye have
chewed and mingled it with your poison spetel. Can ye bear us in hand and
persuade us think ye with your sophistry to believe that ye should minister
your secret traditions without ground truly, when we see you minister the
open Scripture falsely? Can ye bewyche our wits with your Poetry to believe
that ye should minister your secret traditions for our profit when we see you
corrupt the open Scripture to the loss of our souls for your profit? Nay it
is an hundredth times more likely y^ ye should be false in secret things the^ in
open. And therefore in the very Sacraments which the Scripture testifies,
that Christ him self ordained them we must have an eye unto your hand, how ye
minister them. The papist(...)have corrupted the scriptures and abused the
sacraments.
And as we restore the Scripture unto her right understanding from your false
gloses: even so deliver we the Sacraments and ceremonies unto their right use
from your abuse. And that must we do with the Scripture, which can corrupt no
man that comes thereto with a meke sprite, sekyng there only to fashion him
self like Christ, according to the profession and vow of our Baptism. But
contrariwise, he shall there find the myghtie power of GOD, to alter him, and
change him in the inner man a little and little in process until he be full
shappen after the image of our Savior, in knowledge and love of all truth and
power to work thereafter.

Finally then for as much as the Scripture is the light and life of Gods elect,
and that mighty power wherewith God creates the^ The scripture to the life of
Gods elect.
and shapeth them, after the similitude, likeness and very fashion of Christ,
and therefore sustenaunce, comfort, and strength to courage them, that they may
stand fast, and endure and meryly bear their souls health, wherewith the
lusts of the flesh subdued and killed, and the spirit mollified and made
soft, to receive the print of the image of our Savior Jesus. And as much as the
Scripture is so pure of it self that it ca^ corrupt no man, but the wicked
only, which are infect before hand and yer they come at it, corrupt it with
the heresies they bring with them. And for as much as the complaynt of the
hypocrites that the Scripture makes heretics is vain and feigned, and the
reasons wherewith they would Hypocrites say that the scripture makes
heretics.
prove that the lay people ought not to read the Scripture false, wicked, and
the fruit of roten trees, therefore are they faithful servants of Christ and
faithful Ministers and dispe^sers of his doctrine, and true hearted toward
their brethren, which have given them selves up into the hand of God, and put
them selves in ieoperdy of al persecution, their very life despised, and have
translated the Scripture purely and with good conscience, submittyng them
selves, and desiryng them that can to amend their translation, or (if it please
the^) to translate it themselves, after their best manner, yea and let them sow
to their gloses, as many as they think they can make cleave thereto, and then
put other men's translation out of the way. The translation of the scripture is
not sufficient only, but it must be well taught that the people may have the
true se^ce.


Howbeit, though God has so wrought with them that a great part is translated,
yet as it is not enough that the father and the mother have both begotten the
child and brought it into this world, except they care for it and bring it up
till it can help it self. Even so it is not enough to have translated, though
it were ye whole Scripture into the vulgar and common tongue. Except we also
brought again, the light to understand it by, and expel that dark cloud
which the hypocrites have spread over the face of ye scripture to blind the
right sense and true meaning thereof. And Introductions made to bring you to
the true understanding of the scripture.
therefore at their diverse introductions ordained for you, to teach you the
profession of your Baptism the only light of the Scripture, one upon the
Epistle of Paul to the Romans and an other called The pathway into the
Scripture. And for the same cause, have I taken in hand to interpret this
Epistle of S. John the Evangelist to edify the lay man and to teach him how to
read the Scripture, and what to seek therein, and that he may have to answer
the hypocrites and to stop their mouths with all.

And first understand that all the Epistles that the Apostles wrote, are the
Gospel of Christ, though all that is the Gospel be not an Epistle. It is
called a Gospel, that is to say glad tydinges, because it is an open preaching
of Christ, and an Epistle, because it is sent as a letter or a bill to them
that are absent.

Here begins the first Epistle of S. John.
Chapter. 1.
THat which was from the beginning declare (...)* Ioh. 1.
we unto you, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life. For the life
appeared, and we have seen, and bear witness and show unto you that
everlasting life, which was with the father and appeared unto us.

In that S. John says. The thing S. John witnesses that Christ is very God.
which was from the beginning, and the everlasting life that was with the
father, he witnesses that Christ is very God, as he does in the beginning of
his Gospel saying. The word or the thing, was at the beginning, and the thing
was with God, and that thing was God, and all things were made by it.

And when he says, which we heard and saw with our eyes, and our hands handled
That Christ is very man.
him, he testifies that Christ is very man also, as he does in the beginning
of his Gospel saying. The word or that thing was made flesh, that is, became
man. And thus we have in plain and open words a manifest Article of our
faith, that our Savior Christ is very God and very man.

Which Article who soever not only He that believes that Christ is the son
of God, and also very man, has everlasting life.
believes, but also believes in it, the same is the son of God, and has
everlasting life in him, and shall never come into condemnation, as it is
written. John. i. He gave them power to be the sons of God, in that they
believed in his name. And John. iij. He that believes in the son has
everlasting life. And a little before in the said Chapter. He that believes in
him shall not be condemned. And to believe in the words of this Article, is yt
eating of Christ's flesh and drinkyng his blood of which is spoken John. vj.
The words which I speak are spirit and life, and the flesh profits not at
all, meaning of ye fleshly eating of his body, and fleshly drinkyng To believe
in Christ.
of his blood. There is therefore great difference between believing that there
is a God and that Christ is God and man, and to believe in God and Christ God
and man, and in the promises of mercy that are in him. The first is common to
good and bad, and unto the devils thereto and is called the faith and believe of
the hystory. The second is proper unto the sons of God and is their life, as
it is written. The righteous lives To believe that Christ is God and man, is to
put all our trust, hope, and confidence in him.
by faith, that is, in puttyng his trust, confidence, and whole hope in the
goodness, mercy, and help of God, in all adversities, bodily and ghostly, and
all temptations, and even in sin and hell, how deep so ever he be fallen
therein.

But as he which feels not his disease, can long for no health, even so it is
impossible for any man to believe in Christ's blood, except Moses have had him
first in cure, and with his law have Moses.
robbed him of his righteousness, and condemned him unto everlasting death and
have showed him under what damnation they are in by birth in Ada^: and how all
their deeds (appear they never so holy) are yet but damnable sin because
they ca^ refer nothing unto the glory of God, but seek the^ selves, their
own profit, honor and glory. So that repentance toward the law must go
before this belefe, and he which repents not, but co^senteth unto the life of
sin has no part in this faith.

And when John calls Christ the everlasting life that was with the father,
he signifies that Christ is our life, as after in the Epistle, and in the
first also of his Gospel saying. In him Christ is our life.
was life. For until we receive life of Christ by faith we are dead and can be
but dead, as says John. iij. He that believes not in the son, can see no
life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. Of which wrath we are heirs by
birth says Paul. Ephe. ij. Of which By nature we are the children of wrath.
wrath we are ignorant, until the law be published, and walk quyetly after
our lusts, and love God wickedly, that he should be content therewith and
maintain us therein contrary unto his godly and righteous nature. But as soon
as the law (whose nature is to utter sin. Roma. iij. and to set man at
variaunce, with God) is preached, the^ we first awake out of our dream, and
see The law condemns us.
our damnation, and have the law which is so contrary unto our nature, and
grudge against God thereto, as young children do against their elders when they
first commau^de, and count God a cruel tyrau^t because of his law in that he
condemns us for that thing which we can not love, nor of love fulfill.

But when Christ is preached, how Christ.
that God for his sake receives us to mercy, and forgiueth us all that is
past, and henceforth rekeneth not unto us our corrupt and poisoned nature, and
takes us as his sons, and puts us under grace and mercy, and promises
that he will not judge us by the rigorousnes of the law, but nourture us with
all mercy and patience, as a father most mercyful. Only if we will submit our
If we submit our selves to Christ, and knowledge our weakness he will of his
great mercy receive us.
selves unto his doctrine and learn to keep his laws. Yea and he will thereto
consider our mekenes, and what soever chances never takes away his mercy,
till we cast of the yoke of our profession first, and run away with utter
defiaunce, that we will never come more at schole. Then our stubburne and hard
hearts mollify and wax soft, and in the confidence and hope that we have in
Christ and his kindness we go to God boldly as unto our father and receive life,
that is to say love unto God and unto the law also.

That which we have seen and heard we declare unto you that ye may have
felowshyppe with us, and that our felowshyppe may be with the father, and with
his son Jesus Christ. And these things we write unto you that your joy may
be full.

To bring unto the fellowship of The touch stone of all true doctrine and
preachers.
God and Christ, and of them that believe in Christ, is the final intent of all
the Scripture, why it was given of God unto man, and the only thing which all
true preachers seek, and whereby ye shall ever know and discern the true word
of God from all false, and counterfayted doctrine of vain traditions and the
true preacher from the wily hypocrite. We preach unto you (says John) yt
everlasting life which we have heard, and in hearing received through faith and
are sure of it, to draw you to us out of the fellowship that ye have with the
damned devils in sinful lusts and ignorance of God, for we seek you and
not yours as says Paul. ij. Cor. xij. We love you The modest and charitable
manner of S. Paul's doctrine.
as our selves in God, and therefore would have you fellows, and equal with us,
and build you upon the foundation laid of the Apostles and Prophets which is
Christ* Jesus, and make you of the household of God for ever, that ye, and we,
fellows and brethren, and coupled together in one spirit, in one faith and in
one hope, might have our fellowship thereby with God, and become his sons and
heirs, and with Jesus Christ, being his brethren and coheyres, and to make
your joy full through that glad tydinges, as the angel said unto the
shepheardes Luke. ij. Behold I show you great joy that shall be unto all the
people, how that there is a Savior borne unto you this day which is Christ
the Lord. And these tydinges we bring you with the word of God only which we
received of his spirit, and out of the mouth of his son as true messengers.

We preach not our selves, but Christ S. Paul preached Christ and not him
self.
our Lord, and us your servants for his sake, we do not love our selves, to
seek yours unto us, that after we had with wiles robbed you of all ye have, we
should exalte our selves over you and separate our selves from you and make our
selves a several kingdom, free and fra^ke raygnyng over you as heathen
tyrauntes and holdyng you in bondage to serve our lucre and lusts tanglyng
your conscience with doctrine of man which draws from God and Christ and
fearing you with the bugge of excommunication against Gods word. Or if that
served not, shaking a sword at you.

And this is the tydinges which we have heard of him, and declare unto you,
that God is light and in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have
fellowship with him, and yet walk in darkness we lie, and do not the truth. But
and if we walk in light as he is in light, then have we fellowship together,
and the blood of Christ his son cleanses us from all sin.

As the devil is darkness and lies, so is God light and truth only, and As God
is light, so the devil is darkness.
there is no darkness of falshead and consentyng to wickedness in him. And the
brightness of his light is his word and doctrine, as the. C. and. xix. Psalm
says. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet and a light to my paths. And
Christ is the light that lightneth all men. And the Apostles are called the
light of the world, because of the doctrine. And all that know truth are
light. Ye were once darkness says Paul. Ephesians. v. but now light in the Lord,
walk therefore as the children of Good works are the fruits of light.
light. And good works are called the fruits of light. And all that live in
ignorance are called darkness, as he says afterward, he that hates his
brother walks in darkness. For if the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
did shine in his heart, he could not hate his brother.

By walking understand consenting, doing, and working. If then we Walkyng in
darkness or in light.
walk in darcknes, that is, consent and work wickedness, and say we have
fellowship with God, we ly. For to have fellowship with him, is to know, and
consent, and profess his doctrine in our hearts. Now if the commandments of
GOD be written in our hearts, our members can not but practice the^ and show
the fruit. So whether light or darkness be in the heart, it will appear in yt
walking. For though our members be never so dead unto virtue, yet if our souls
knowledge the truth, and consent unto righteousness, we have the sprite of life
in us. And Paul says, Romans viij. If the spirit of him yt If we have the
spirit of God in us, then will he raise us up with Jesus Christ.
raised up Jesus from death be in you, the^ will he yt raised up Jesus from
death, quicken your mortal bodies, by the reason of the spirit that dwells
in you. So that it is not possible for him that knows the truth, and
consents thereto, to continue in sin. And then finally if we have the light
in our hearts, and walk therein, then we have fellowship with God, and are his
sons and heirs, and are purged from all sin through Christ's blood.

If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us.

If we think there is no sin in us, He that says he has no sin
deceaueth him self.
we are beguiled, and blind, and the light of Gods word is not in us, and
either follow sin as beasts without conscience at all. Or if we see the
gross sins, as murder, theft, and adultery, yet we have hanged a veil of
false gloses upon Moses face, and see not the brightness of the law, how that it
requires of us, as pure an heart to God, and as great love unto our neighbors
as was in our savior Jesus, and cease not before to condemn us as sinners.

If we knowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgeeue us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all vnrigh teousnes.

If we confess our sins, not in the If we confess our sins to God with
true faith and repentance he will forgive us.
preistes ear (though that tradition restored unto the right use were not
damnable,) but in our hearts to God with true repentance and fast belief:
then is he faithful to forgive and to purge us, because of his merciful truth
and promise. For he promised Abraham, that in his seed all the world should
be blessed from the curse of sin. And has abundantly renewed his everlasting
mercy unto us in the new testament, promising that our sins shall be forgeuen
us in Christ's blood, if we repent and trust thereto.

If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

For his word testifyeth against us, All me^ are sinners.
that we are all sinners, yea, and else Christ dyed in vain. Solomon says, 3.
Reg. 8. That there is no man that sins not against God. And Paul proves by
the authority of the Scripture unto the Romans, that we are all sinners
without exception. And the scripture witnesses that we are damnable sinners,
and that our nature is to sin. Which corrupt and poisoned nature, though it
be bego^ to be healed, yet it is never through whole until the hour of death.
For the which cause with all our best fruits, there grow weeds among.
Neither can there be any deed so perfect that could not be amended. When a
blind bungler wondreth at his glorious works, a cunning workman yt has a
clear judgment, perceaueth that it is impossible to make a work that could
not be Nothing can be so well done, but it may be amended.
made better. Now the law requires works of us in the highest degree of
perfection, and cease not to accuse us until our works flow naturally, as
glorious in perfection as the works of Christ. And Christ teaches us to pray
in our Pater noster: Forgeeue us our trespasses as we forgive our trespassers.
Whereby ye may easelye understand, that we sin daily one against another,
and all against God. Christ taught also to pray that our Father should not let
us slip into temptation: signifying that our nature cannot but sin if
occasions be given, except that God of his especial grace keep us back.
Which readiness to sin is damnable sin in the law of God. David prayed
Psalm. 68. Let not the tempest drown me, let me not fall into the bottom, and
let not the pit shut her mouth upon me: as who should say: First keep me O
God from sinning, then if I shall chance to fall, as no flesh can escape, one
time or other, then All the nature of man is sinful.
call me shortly back again, and let me not sincke to deep therein: and
though I yet fall never so deep, yet Lord let not the way of mercy be stopped:
signifying that it is impossible to stand of our selves, and much less to rise
again. Which impotencie and feebleness is damnable in the law of God except that
we saw it, and repented, and were fled to Christ for mercy.

Chap. 2.
MY little children, I write these things unto you, that ye sin not. And
though any man sin, yet we have an advocate with the Father, even Jesus
Christ, which is righteous.

I write unto you on the one side, that God is light, and therefore that no man
which willingly walks in the unfruitful works of darkness, has any
fellowship with that light, or part in the blood of his Son. And this I We
must resist sin with all our power and might.
write and testify unto you my dear children, that ye sin not: that is,
that ye consent not unto sin, nor should sin of lust and purpose
maliciously: but contrariwise that ye fear God, and resist sin with all
your might and power according as ye have promised. For whosoever sins of
purpose after the knowledge of truth, the same sins against the holy Ghost
remediless. Heb. 6. 10.

And on the other side I testify unto you that we be always sinners, though not
of purpose and malice after the nature We sin daily by the frailty and
weakness of our flesh.
of damned devils, but of infirmity and frailty of our flesh, which flesh not
only let teth us that our works can not be perfect, but also now and then
through manifold occasions and temptations caryeth us clean out of the right
way, spite of our hearts. How be it (I say) if when the rage is past, we turn
unto the right way again, and confess our sins unto our Father with a
repenting heart, he has promised us mercy, and is true to fulfill it. So that
if we sin not deuilishly against the holy Ghost, refusing the doctrine which
we can not improve that it should not be true: but after the frail tie of man,
there is no cause to despair: For we have an advocate and an intercessour with
the Father, even Jesus Christ that is righteous.

The name of our advocate is Jesus, Our advocate Jesus
that is to say, a savior. Call his name Jesus, said the Angel to Joseph: for
he shall save his people from their sins. Math. 1. And this advocate and our
Jesus to save us from our sins, continues ever, as it is written, Heb. 7.
and has, Sempiternum Sacerdotium, an everlasting office, to make an attonment
for sin: by the reason whereof (says the text) he is able ever to save them
that come to God through him, with repentance and faith, and lives ever to
speak for us. And besides that Jesus that is God and man, calls ^o thee O
Father for us.
our Jesus is God and almighty. He took our nature upon him, and felt al our
infirmities and sicknesses, and in feeling learned to have compassion on us,
and for compassion cried mightily in prayers to God the Father for us, and was
heard. And the voice of the same blood that once cried, not for vengeance as
Abels, but for mercy only, and was heard, cries now and ever, and is ever
heard, as often as we call unto remembrance with repenting faith how that it was
shed for our sins. He is Christus.
also called Christus, that is to say, king anointed with all might and power
over sin, death and hell, and over all sins, so that none that flies unto
him shall ever come into judgment of damnation. He is anointed with all
fullness of grace, and has all the treasure and riches of the spirit of God
in his hand, with which he blesses all men according to the promise made to
By Jesus Christ we are made blessed.
Abraham, and is thereto merciful to give unto all that call on him. And how
much be loves us, I report me unto the ensamples of his deeds.

And he is righteous, both toward God in that he never sinned, and therefore
has obtained all his favor and grace: and also toward us in that he is true
to fulfill all the mercy that he has promised us, even unto the uttermost
iotte.

And he is the satisfaction for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for all the worlds.

That I call satisfaction, the Greek calls Ilasmos, and the Hebrew Copar.
And it is first taken for the swaging of wounds, sores, and swellings, and the
taking away of pain and sinarte of them. And thence is borrowed for the
pacifying and swaging of wrath and anger, and for an amends making, a
contenting, satisfaction, a ransom, and making at one, as it is to see
abundantly in the Bible. So that Christ is a full contenting, satisfaction and
rau^some Christ's blood is the satisfaction for our sins.
for our sins. And not for ours only which are Apostles and Disciples of
Christ while he was yet here: or for ours which are Jews or Israclites and the
seed of Abraham: or for ours that now believe at this present time, but for all
men's sins, both for their sins which went before and believed the promises
to come, and for ours which have seen them fulfilled, and also for all them
which shall afterward believe unto the worlds end, of what soever nation or
degree they be. For Paul commands. 1. Timo. 2. To pray for all me^ and all
degrees, saying that to be acceptable unto our Savior God, which will have
all men saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, that is, some of al
nations and all degrees, and not the Jews only. For (says he) there is one
God, and one Christ gave himself for the redemption and salnation of all the
world.
mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, which gave him self a
redemption and full satisfaction for all men.

Let this therefore be an undoubted Article of thy faith, not of an history
faith as thou beleuest a gest of Alexander, or of the old Romans, but of a
lively faith and belefe, to put thy trust and confidence in, and to by and sell
thereon, as we say, and to have thy sins taken away, and thy soul saved
thereby, if thou hold it fast: and to continue ever in sin, and to have thy
soul damned if thou let it slip, that our Jesus, our Saniour that saves his
people from their sins, and our Christ, that is our king over all sin,
death and hell, anointed with fullness of all grace and with the spirit of
God, to distribute unto all men, has according unto the Epistle to the Hebrews
and all the scripture, in the days of his mortal flesh, Christ is king over
death, hell, and sin.
with fasting, praying, sufferyng, and crying to God mightily for us, and with
shedyng his blood made full satisfaction both a poena and a culpa (with our
holy fathers leave) for all the sins of the world both of theirs that went
before, and of theirs that come after in the faith, whether it be Original
sin or actual, and not only the sins committed with consent to evil in
time of ignorance before the knowledge of the truth, but also the sins done
of frailty after we have forsaken evil and consented to the laws of God in
our hearts promising to follow Christ and walk in the light of his doctrine.

He saves his people from their Christ only is our savior.
sins. Math. 1. and that he only. So that there is no other name to be saved
by. Acts. 4. And unto him bear all the Prophets record, that all that believe
in him shall receive remission of their sins, in his name. Acts. 10. And by
him only we have an entering in unto the father and unto all grace. Ephe. 2. 3.
and Romans 5. And as many as come before him are thieves and murderers. John. 10.
That is, whosoever preaches any other forginenesse of sin then through faith
in his name, the same slays the soul.

This to be true, not only of original but of actual, and as well of that we
commit after our profession, as before, may thou evidently see by the
ensamples of the Scripture. Christ forgave the woman taken in adultery. John.
8 Christ forgeueth all our sins freely for his mercy sake.
and an other whom be healed. John. 5 And he forgave Publicanes and open
sinners, and put none to do penance as they call it, for to make satisfaction
for the sin, which he forgave through repentance and faith, but enjoined
them the life of penance, the profession of their Baptism, to tame the flesh
in keeping the commandments and that they should sin no more. And those
sinners were for the most part Jews and had their Original sin forgiven
them before through faith in the Testament of God. Christ forgave his Apostles
their actual sins after their profession which they committed in denyeng
him, and put none to do penance for satisfaction. Peter Acts. 2. absolueth
the Jews thorough repentance and faith from their actual sins which they
did in consentyng unto Christ's death, and enjoined them no penance to make
satisfaction. Paul also had his actual sins forgiven him freely thorough
repentance and faith without Christ only is our advocate.
mention of satisfaction. Acts. 9. So that according unto this present text
of Iohu. If it chance us to sin of frailty, let us not despair for we have
an advocate and intercessour, a true attorney with the father Jesus Christ
righteous toward God and man, and is the reconcilyng and satisfaction for our
sins.

For Christ's works are perfect, so that he has obtained us all mercy and
has set us in the full state of grace and favor of God, and has shade us as
well-beloved as the angels of heaven, though we be yet weak. As the young
children though they can do no good at all are yet as tenderly beloved as the
old. And God for Christ's sake has promised that whatsoever evil we shall do,
yet if we turn and repent he will never more think on our sins.

Thou will say, God forgiueth the displeasure but we must suffer pain Popish
for geuenesse.
to satisfy the righteousness of God. A then God has a righteousness which may
not forgive pain and al, yt the poor sinner should go skotfre without ought at
all. God was unrighteous to forgive the thief his pain and all thorough
repentance and faith unto whom for lack of laysure was no penasice enjoined.
And my faith is, that whatsoever example of mercy God has showed one, that
same he has promised all, ye will he peradventure forgive me, but I must make
amends? If I owe you xx. l. ye will forgive me, that is, ye will The
forgiveness that we have of god for Christ's sake, is ^ree.
no more be angry with me, but I shall pay you the. xx. pounds. O Popish
forgiveness with whom it goes after the common proverb, no penny no pardon.
His fatherhode gives pardon freely but we must pay money abundantly.

Paul's doctrine is. Romans 9. if a man work, it ought not to be said, that his
hyre was given him of grace or favor, but of duty: But to him that works
not: but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith (he says not
his works although he commands us diligently to work and despises none
Faith in Christ is accounted to us for righteousness.
that God commands) his faith (says he) is rekened him for his
righteousness. Confirmyng his saying with the testimony of the prophet David in
the 32. Psalm: saying. Blessed is the man unto who^ God imputes or rekeneth
not his sin: that is to say, which man although he be a sinner, yet God
lays not it to his charge for his faithes sake. And in the. xi. he says. If
it come of grace then it comes not of works. For then were grace no grace
says he: For We are saved by grace, and not by works of the law.
it was a very strange speaking in Paul's cares to call that grace that came
of deseruyng of works: Or that deseruyng of works, which came by grace: for
he rekened works and grace to be contrary in such manner of speech. But our
holy father has coupled the^ together of pure liberality I dare say, and not
for covetousness. For as his holiness if he have a cause against any man,
immediately bretheth out an excommunication upon him and will have satisfaction
for the uttermost farthing and somewhat above, to teach the^ to beware against
an other time yet he will bless again from the terrible sentence of his heavy
curse, even so of that blessed complexion he describes the nature of the
mercy of God that The Pope when any man offends him, falls to cursing.
God will remitte his anger to us upon the appointment of our satisfaction.
When the Scripture says Christ is our righteousness, our justifying, our
redemption, our atonement, that has appeased God, and cleanses us from our
sins, and all in his blood, so that his blood, is the satisfaction only.

And that thou may the better perceive Works can be no satisfaction for
sin to Godward.
the falshead of our holy fathers fleshly imagination, call to mind how that
the Scripture says. John the iiij. God is a spirit and must be worshypped in
the spirit. That is, repentance, faith, hope, and love toward his law and our
neighbor for his sake is his worship in the spirit. And therefore whosoever
woorshyppeth God with works, and refers his works to God, to be a
sacrifice unto him, to appease God is a spirit, and must be worshipped in yt
spirit.
him as though he delited in the work for the works sake, the same makes
of God an image or idol and is an image seruer, and as wicked an Idolater as
ever was any blind heathen, and serves God after the imagination of his own
heart and is abominable unto god, as thou see in how many places God defieth
the sacrifice of the children of Israel, for the said imagination. So that
whosoever supposes that his candle stickyng before an Image, his puttyng a
penny in the box, Popish works.
his going a pilgrimage, his fasting, his wolward going, barefoote going, his
crowchyng, knelyng, and pain taking, be sacrifice unto God, as though he
delited in them, as we in the gestures of Jack Napes, is as blind as he that
gropeth for his way at none. Gods worship is to love him for his mercy, and of
love to bestow al our works Gods worship.
upon our neighbor for his sake, and upon the tamyng of our flesh, that we
sin not again, which should be the chiefest care of a Christen man while
Christ cares for that that is once past and committed already, whether before
our profession or after. For the conditions of the peace that is made between
God and us in Christ's blood are these. The law is set before us, unto which
if we consent and submit our selves to be scholars thereof, then are not only
all our foresinnes forgiven both Poena and culpa (with our holy fathers license
ever) but also all our infirmities, weakness, pronesse, readynes, and motions
unto sin are pardoned and taken aworth and we translated from under the
damnation of the law which damneth as well those infirmities as the sin that
springs of them, and puts us under grace. Romans 7. So that we shall not
henceforth, as long as we forsake not our profession be judged by the
rigorousnes of the law. But chastised if we do amise as children that are under
no law. Now then if God in Christ pardon God does pardon and forgive all our
sins whatsoever they are for Christ's sake.
our infirmities, by reason of which we cannot escape but that we shall now and
the^ sin, it follows that he must likewise pardon the actual sin which
we do compelled of those infirmities in spite of our hearts, and against the
will of the spirit. For if thou pardon the sickness of the sick, then must
thou pardon the deeds which he does, or ^eueth undone by the reason of his
sickness. If the madness of a mad man be pardoned and under no law, then if he
murder in his madness, he may not be slain again. If children within a
certain age are not under the law that flayeth thieves, then can ye not of
right hang them, though they steal. What popish pardoning were that? This
does Paul, Romans 7. so confirm that all the world cannot quitch against it,
saying: I consent unto the law of God that it is good, and feign would I do it,
and yet have I not always power so to do, but find an other thing in my flesh,
rehelling against the will of my mind, and leading me captine into sin, so
that I cannot do that I would do: but am compelled to do that I would not. If
(says he) I do that I would not, then I do it not, but the sin that
dwells in me does it: And then says he: Who shall deliver me from this body
of death, in which I am bound prisoner against my will? Thanks be to God
(says he) through Christ's victory.
Jesus Christ our Lord, which has conquered and overcome sin, death, and
hell, and has put the damnation of the law out of the way, unto all that
profess the law, and believe in him.

We be under the law to learn it, and to fasshion our deeds as like as we
can, but not under the damnation of the law, that we should be damned though
our deeds were not perfect as the law requires, or though of frailty we at a
time break it. As children are under the law that they steal not, but not
under the damnation though they steal. So that all they that are graffed into
Christ to follow his doctrine, are under the law to learn it only, but are
delivered from fear of everlasting death and hell, and all the threatenings of
the law, and from conscience of sin, which feared us from God. And we are
come into God thorough the confidence that we have in Jesus Christ, and are as
familiar and bold with him, as young innocent children which have no conscience
of sin, are with their fathers and mothers, or the^ that nourishe them. Which
were impossible if God now (as the pope painteth The popes purgatory is
terrible.
him) did shake a rod at us of vij. years punishment, as sharp as the pains
of hell for every trespace we do, which trespace for the number of them were
like to make our purgatory almost as long as hell, seeing we have no Gods word,
that we shall be delivered thence, until we have paid the last farthing. And
therefore could our conscience never be at rest, nor be bold and familier with
God.

If ye say the Pope can deliver my Bind and lose.
conscience from fear of purgatory (as his poetry only puts me in fear)
and that by this text, Whatsoever thou bindest on earth. etc. If thou this way
understand the text, whatsoever thou being in earth losest any where: then
might he lose in hell, and bind in heaven. But why may not I take the text
Note this text.
of Christ. Ioh. 16. Whatsoever ye ask my Father in my name, he will give it
you, and desire forgiveness of all together in Christ's name, both a poena and
culpa: and the^ remains no such purgatory at all? Howbeit the text of binding
and losing, is but borrowed speech, Bynding and losing is by the true preaching
of Gods Word.
how that after the similitude of worldly binding and losing locking and
vnlocking: the word of God truly preached does bind and lose the conscience,

God says to Hieremias, cap. 1. Behold I give thee power over nations and
kingdoms to pluck up by the roots, and to shiuer in pieces, to destroy and
cast down, and to build and plant. How did he destroy nations and kingdoms,
and how did he build the^? verily by preaching and prophesying. What nation,
kingdom, or city he prophesied to be overthrown, was so. And what City he
prophesied to be built again, was so. And what nation after they were brought
into captivity he prophesied to be restored again, were so. And whom he
prophesied to perish, perished. And whom he prophesied to be saved, was saved.

Even so whomesoeuer a true preacher of Gods word says shall be damned for his
sin, because he will not repent and believe in Christ, the same is damned: And
whomesoeuer a true preacher of Gods word says shall be saved because he
repents and believes in Christ's blood, the same is saved. And this is the
binding and losing that Christment.

Notwithstanding ye must understand that when we have sinned, though our hearts
were not to sin, and though we repent, ere the deed be done, yet the body in
sinning has overcome the spirit, and has got the maistrye. So that the
spirit is now weaker and feebler to virtue, and to follow the law of God and
doctrine of Christ, and the flesh stronger to follow vice and sin. Wherefore as
when an old sore is broken forth again, we begin as it were a new cure with
greater diligence and more care then before: even so here we We must struggle
and strive with sin.
must renew our old battayl against the flesh, and more strongly go to work,
to subdue it, and to quench the lusts thereof, which are waxen so rank, that
they bnd out openly, according to the profession of our baptism, which is y^
very sacrament or sign of repentance, or if they will so have it called
penance, by the interpretation of Paul. Romans 6. For the plunging into the
water, as it betokens on the one part that Christ has washed our souls with
his blood: even so on the other part it signifies that we have promised to
quentch and ^lay the lusts of the flesh with prayer, fasting, and holy
meditation, after the doctrine of Christ, and with all godly exercise, that
tame the flesh, and kill not the man.

Whereupon the Bisshops that succeeded How penance came up and Purgatory.
the Apostles, when men had done any open sins, enjoined them penance as
they call it, by the authority of the congregation and gouernoures thereof, and
advise of the most wise and discrete, and with the willing cousent of the
trespassers, to tame the flesh, as to go woolward, to wear shurtes of heir,
to go barefoote and bare head, to pray, to fast bread and water, some once in
the week, some twice, or all the week, an whole year, ij. years, iij.
years, vij. years, xx. years, and some all their lives long. And to go in
pilgrimage to visit y^ memorial of saints, to strength them the better to
follow the ensample and such like, and all to slay the worldly mind of the
flesh. Which manner when it was once received of yt people by custom, it became
a law. And the bishops by little and little gat it whole into their own hands.

When the Bishops saw that, how they had got the simple people under How the
Pope and his shauelyngs have abused penance.
them in such humble obedience, they began to set up their crestes, and to
reign over them as princes, and to enjoin sore penance for small trifles,
namely, if ought were done against their pleasure, and beat some sore, and
spared other, and sold their penance to the rich, and ouerladed the poor,
until the tyranny was waxed so grenous that the people would bear it no
longer. For by this time, what with the multitude of ceremonies and heap of men's
constitutions whose right use was thereto clean forgotten, and partly because
our shepheardes were busyed to seek themselves and their hye authority, and
exalted every man his throne, and were become wolves unto yt flock, the cause
why the people were disobedient unto wholesome counsel: the word of God was sore
darckened, and no where purely preached. And therefore the Prelates loath to
lose their hye authority, and to let the people go free of their yoke, began
to turn their tale, and sing a new song, how that this penance was enjoined
to make satisfaction to God for the sin that was committed, robbing our
souls of the fruit of Christ's blood, and making us imageseruauntes,
referring our deeds unto the person of God, and worshipping him as an image
of our own imagination with bodily work, saying moreover, if we would not do
such penance here at their injunctions we must do it in an other world, and
so feigned purgatory where we must suffer Here was Purgatory kindled.
vij. years for every sin. And when the kingdom of Antichrist was so
enlarged that it must have an head, they set up our holy father of Rome, or
rather usurped that Rome with violence, and to him was given this prerogative
to sell whom he would from purgatory.

And the sacrament of penance they The de^nition of penance made by the
Papists.
thus describe: Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction. Contrition, sorrow for
thy sins. Confession, not to God and them whom thou have offended, but tell
thy sins in the priests ear. Satisfaction, to do certain deeds enjoined
of them, to buy out thy sins. And in their description they have clean
excluded the faith in the satisfaction of Christ's blood, which only brings
life, and the spirit of life, and righteousness, and without the which it is
impossible to please God. Heb. 11. In whose stead they have put in the Faith is
the chiefest part of penance.
presumption of our own works. And for lack of trust in Christ's blood our
contrition is but a fruitless sorrow in yt respect of hell, which makes us
hate the law still, and consequently God that made it: where true contrition
annexed with faith, is sorrow in respect of the law, unto which we consent that
it is good and love it and therefore mourn partly because we have offended it
and partly because we lack power to fulfill it as we would.

These things to be true our Prelates know by open hystories as well, as when
it is Noone, the Sun is flat South: but it deliteth them to resist the holy
ghost and to persecute the preachers of the things which if they as well
loved as they know to be true, they would preach the same them selves and
live thereafter. Hereof ye may see our works are but to tame the Our works
can make no satisfaction, but only faith in Christ's blood.
flesh only, and can be no satisfaction to God, except we make him an image
and our selves image servant. And hereof ye may see how out of this open
penance came the ear confession, satisfaction of works Purgatory and
pardons. For when they had put the satisfaction of Christ's blood out of yt
way, then as they compelled to confess open sins and to take open penance,
eue^ so they compelled to confess secret sins and to take secret penance.
And as they made marchau^dise of open penance, so did they of secret. And for
the^ The practice and marcheu^dise of the Pope and his Clergy
that would not receive such pardon, feigned they Purgatory, and for them that
received them feigned they pardon, turnyng bindyng and losing with preaching
Gods word unto byeng and sellyng sin for money. And since that time hitherto,
the worse the people were the better were the Prelates content, ever resistyng
that they should be made better through their blessed covetousness and proud
desire of honor.

And out of this false presumption of Vows of Religion.
works, spranke the wicked vows of Religion which they vow to make
satisfaction for sin, and to be higher in heaven, instead of the life of
penance which Christ taught us in the Gospel to tame the flesh and to
crucify the members with all, that we henceforth should walk in the ways of
Gods law, and sin no more.

And to speak of worshyppyng of Worshyppyng of Saints.
Saints and praying unto them and of that we make them our advocates well nigh
above Christ or all together, though it require a long disputation, yet it is
as bright as the day to all that know ye truth, how that our fasting of their
euens and keeping their holy days going bare foot, stickyng up of ca^dels in
the bright day in the worshypping of them to obtain their favor, our giuyng
them so costly jewels, offering into their boxes, clothyng their Images, The
Pope and his Clergy sets up Idolatry.
shooyng them with silver shoes with an ouche of Crystal in the mids, to
stroke the lips and eyes of the ignorant as a man would stroke yolig
childrens heads to entice them and bring them in, and rock them a sleep in
ignorance are with all like service plain idolatry, that is in English
Imageseruice. For the Saints are spirits and can have no delectatio^ in
bodily things. And because those bodily deeds can be no service unto the
spiritual Saints, and we do them not to be a service to our selves or our
neighbors: we serve the work and the false imagination of our fleshly wit,
after the doctrine of man, and not of God, and are imageseruauntes. And this is
it that Paul calls Seruire elementis mundi, to be in captivity under dome
ceremonies and vain traditions of men's doctrine and to do the work for the
work it self, as though God delited therein, for the deed it self without
all other respect.

But and ye will know the true worshyppyng of Saints, hearken unto The true
worshipping of saints.
Paul Phil. ij. where he says, Ye shine as lights in the world holdyng fast
the word of life unto my glory or worship against the day of Jesus Christ, that
I have not run nor labored in vain. That is to wete the worship which all
true Saints now seek and the worship that all the true messengers of God seek
this day or ever shall seek, is to draw all to Christ with preaching the true
word of God, and with the example of pure living fashioned thereafter. Will ye
therefore worship saints truly? the^ hear what they preached, Good lessons are
to be learned of y^ saints.
and believe their doctrine. And as they followed that doctrine so conform your
living like unto theirs. And that shall be unto their high worship in the coming
again of Christ (when all men's deeds shall appear and every man shall be
judged and receive his reward according unto his deeds) how that they not
only while they here lived, but also after their death with the example of
their doctrine and living left behynd in writing and other memorials unto the
example of them that should follow, them unto Christ that were The true
worshipping of saints is to follow their life and doctrine.
borne. v. hundredth, yea a thousand years after their death. This was their
worship in the spirit at the beginning as they were spirits, and lights were
sticked before their memorials at the beginning to be a ceremony to put us in
remembrance that we so praised the Saints and boasted their liuyngs that we
followed their examples in our deeds, as Christ says Math. v. Let your light
so shine before me^ that they see your good works and glorify your father
that is in heaven. For preaching of the doctrine which is light has but small
effect to move the heart if the example of living do disagree.

And that we worship Saints for fear lest they should be displeased and angry
with us and plague us or hurt us, as who is not afraid of S. Laurence? who
dare deny. S. Anthony a flese of woll for fear of his terrible fire or lest
he send the pox among our sheep) is heathen imageseruice and clean against
the first commandment which is. Hear Israel, the Lord thy God is one God.
Now God in the Hebrew is called El or Elohim in the plural number, strength or
might. So that the commandment is, Hear Israel he that If we harken to the
voice of God, he is mighty and of power to help us.
is thy power and might, thy sword and shield is but one, that is, there is
none or might to help or hurt the save one, which is all together thine and
at thy commandment if thou will hear bis voice. And all other might in the
world, is borrowed of him. And he will lend no might against the contrary to his
promises: keep therefore his commandments and he shall keep thee. And if
thou have broken them, and he have lent of his power against thee, repent and
come again unto thy profession and he will return again unto his mercy and
fetch his power home again, which he lent to vex thee, because thou
forsookest him and brakest his commandments. And fear no other creature,
for false fear is ye cause of all Idolatry.

Moreover all we that are Baptized in Christ have professed to do good for evil
and not to avenge our selves. And We must do good for evil.
many of us come unto such perfection that we can be provoked by no temptation
to desire vengeance, but have compassion and mekely pray for them that slay us.

How wicked a thing then is it to A popish imaginatio^^
think that the Saints plague us, because we do the^ not such superstitious
honor which is their dishonor and our shame? It is verily a Popish
imagination, and eue^ to describe the Saints after the nature of our Prelates
which be meek and lowly till they be where they would be. But when they be
once a loft they play the tormentours if we will not honor them and do
whatsoever they command, more earnestly then that which God him self has
commanded, and fear them above God him self.

And it can be but like abomination Aduour^es.
also, that we choose of a fleshly mind every man his several Saint or rather
several God, to be our advocates, attorneys, mediators (when there is but
one. i. Timo. ij.) and intercessours, and call them our aduouryes, when we
might better call them our adulterers, and serve the^ or rather a painted post
Idolatry.
in their stead, with our imageferuice, therewith to bind them for to help us
whensoever and for whatsoever we call unto them, and to save our souls there to
with their prayers and merits, and will yet neither hear yt doctrine or follow
the example of living (which is their only honor in the spirit of any saint
whose doctrine and living is autentike.

For first, God which alone has power to help or hurt, has made appointment
God has promised to give us whatsoever we ask in Christ's name, and for
Christ's sake.
betwixt him and us in Christ's blood and has bound himself to give us
whatsoever we ask in his name, testifiyng thereto that there is no other name
to be saved by; and that he will be a father unto us and save us both in this
life and in the life to come, and take us from under the damnation of the law,
and set us under grace and mercy, to be scholars only to learn the law, and
that our imperfect deeds shall be taken in worth, yea and though at a time we
mar all through our infirmity, yet if we turn again, that shall be forgeuen
us mercifully, so that we shall be under no damnation: which testament is
confirmed with signs and wonders wrought thorough the holy ghost. Now this
indented obligation laid apart, we make an other of our own imagination
between the Saints Saints ca^ not help us
and us, in their merits for our image service. Which can be but a false
faith, seeing it has not Gods word (unto which alone we ought to cleave) but
is also clean contrary thereto.

And again the Saints were not saved through their own merits, but through
Christ's. Neither were their deeds which they did after they were The saints
were not saved by their ^ne merits, but by Christ's merits.
received under grace sufficient in them selves to fulfill the law for the
present time, save as Christ's merits did supply ye imperfectnes of the^, and
yt which was lackyng on their part thorough their infirmities. And therefore as
the Saints holy works made no satisfaction for the sin they did before they
were received under mercy, even so made they none for the deadly sins which
they did under mercy: seeing the deeds were imperfect, and had sin annexed
unto the^ by reason of the flesh, and were insufficient to excuse their own
masters. What merits have they in store for us then, seeing by all men's
confession they now merit not^ If the most obedient child in the world disobey
his fathers commandments, his fore good deeds cannot make that disobedience
no sin, or to be a satisfaction, that the child should presume in the
confidence of his old deeds, and We must humble our selves to the mercy of
almighty God.
think his father should do him wrong to punish him. But he must knowledge
his fault, and that he has deserved punishmente, and desire forgeuenes, unto
the glory of his fathers mercifulness, and not of his old deeds, though his
old obedience be a great presumption that he sinned of frailtye, and not of
purpose. Even so if I being as holy as ever was Paul in his most holiness,
sin this day thorough the frailty of my flesh, mine old deeds ca^ be no
satisfaction: but I must know ledge my sin unto my Father, and grant that I
have deserved damnation, and meekly desire forgeuenes, and challenge it by the
obligation, wherein God has bound him self to me, unto the glory of the mercy
of God, and not to the glory of my holy deeds: for if my deeds save me, it is
my glory. But if he forgive us freely without respect of my deeds, then it is
the glory of his mercy, by Paul's doctrine unto the Romans.

Moreover if the saints be in heaven, The Angels serve us.
then can they be there in none other case then the Angels, in which state
Christ testifyeth they shall be in the resurrection. Now the Angels are
ministers sent of God, to do service unto the elect, which shall be saved.
Heb. 1. And God has bound himself, that if I come in the right way, by the
door of Christ's blood and ask help, that he will send me if need be, an
hundred legions of Angels or saints. But when God has bound himself to send
me angels or saints, or an angel or saint, he has not promised to send this
Angel or that, or this or that saint. And therefore when I appoint God whom he
shall send, and bind him, where he has not bound himself, to send me what
saint I will, I tempt God. And thus this chosing of several saints is To
choose saints to be our aduacates, is mere idolatry.
but tempting of God. And yet we do worse then this: for we leave yt way of
Christ's blood, and go not to God through him: but run to the saints in a
testament of our own making, and will that they either save us themselves for
our imageseruice, or compel God for merits sake to save us. Why go thou
not unto thy Father thine own self? I am a sinner, will they say, and dare
not. If thou go in the right way, thou have no sin. Christ has taken all thy
sins from thee, and God has no rod in his hand, nor looks sour, but
merrily, that it is a lust to behold his cheerful countenance, and offreth
thee his hand. But this way is stopped up through unbelief, and therefore
Christ is the way and life that leads us to salvation.
we seek an other which is no way to life, but unto everlasting death. We will
not look on the law with open eyes, and therefore have we no due repentance,
and so no lust to harken unto the gospel of glad tidings in Christ's blood.
And where the right way is set before us, and we of malice will not walk
therein, God can not but let the devil play with us, and iuggle our eyes to
confirm us in blindness.

But after what manner does Christ How Christ prays for us
pray for us? Verily Christ in the days of his mortal flesh suffered and
prayed for all that shall be saved, and obtained and was heard, and had his
petitions granted. And he made satisfaction, and purged, and purchased
forgeuenes, eue^ then for all the sin that ever shall be forgeuen: And his
praying for us, and being a mediator now, is that the remembrance of all that
he did for us, is present in the sight of God the Father, as fresh as the hour
he did them, yea the same hour is yet present, and not past in the sight of
God. And Christ is Christ is a king and has power him self to forgive us, and
to receive us unto him self.
now a King, and reigns, and has received power of all that he prayed for,
to do it himself. And that whenever the elect call for ought in his name he
se^deth help eue^ of yt power which he has received: yea ere they ask, he
sends his spirit into their hearts to move them to ask. So that it is his
gift that we desire ought in his name. And in all that we do or think well, he
preue^teth us with his grace: yea he cares for us, ere we care for ourselves,
and when we were yet evil, he sends to call us, and draws us with such
power that our hearts cannot but consent and come. And the Angels stand by,
and behold the testament of the elect, how we shall be received into their
fellowshippe, and see all the grace that Christ shall pour out upon us. And
they rejoice All the blessed company of heaven rejoice and are glad to have us
to be with them, that we might loye together.
and praise God for his infinite mercy, and are glad, and long for us, and of
very love are ready against all hours when we shall call for help in Christ's
name, to come and help. And Christ sends them when we call in his name, and
ere we call, even while we be yet evil, and happily persecute the truth of
ignorance, as Paul did, the Angels wait upon us to keep that the devils
slay us not, before the time of our calling be come.

Now if an Angel should appear unto thee, what would thou say unto him?
If thou prayedst him to help, he would answer: I do. Christ has sent me to
help, and believe that the Angels be ever about thee to help. If thou
desiredst him to pray for thee to obtain this or that, he would say: Christ
has prayed, and his prayer is heard for whatsoever thou ask in his Christ
prays for us and his prayer is heard.
name, and would show thee all that God would do to thee, and what he would
also have thee to do: and if thou beleeuest, so were thou safe. If thou
desiredst him to save thee with his merits. He would answer that he had no
merits: but that Christ only is Lord of all merits: nor salvation, but that
Christ is Lord of salvation. Will thou therefore be saved by merits, would the
Angel say: then pray to God in Christ's name, and thou shall be saved by the
merits of him, and have me or some other thy servant immediatlye to help thee
unto the uttermost of our power, and to keep thee and bring thee unto the
reward of his mertites. If thou would promise him to worship Imageseruice
is abhorred of God.
him with imageseruice, that is, to stick up a candle before his image, or
such an image as he appeared to thee in. He would answer that he were a
spirit, and delighted in no candlelight but would bid thee give a ca^dle to
thy neighbor that lacked, if thou had to many. And so would he answer thee
if thou would put money in a box for him, or cloth his image in cloth of
gold, or put golden shoes upon his Images feet. If thou saydest that thou God
hates superstition.
would build a chapel in his name, he would answer that he dwelt in no
house made with stones, but would bid thee go to the churches that are made
already, and learn of the Preachers there how to believe, and how to live, and
honor God in the spirit, for the which cause churches were chiefly builded,
and for quietness to pray. And if there be no church, then to give of that
Churches were or deined for preaching and calling on the name of God.
thou may spare to help that one were builded to be a preaching and a praying
house, and of worshipping God in the spirit, and not of imageseruice.

And if Paul appeared unto thee, what other thing could he answer also, then
that he were a spirit, and would refuse all thy imageseruice. And if thou
speak to Paul of his merits, he can none otherwise answer thee, then he
answered his Corinthians: That he dyed for no man's sins, and that no man was
baptized in his name to trust in his merits. He would say, I builded all men
upon Christ's merits: preaching that all that repented and believed in his
name, should be saved, and taken from under the wrath, vengeance, and
damnation of the law, and be put under mercy and grace. And by this faith was I
saved from damnation, and put under mercy and grace, Christ has made a
change with us, for he has taken upon him all our sins, and granted us his
mercy and gifts of grace.
and made one with Christ, to have my part with him, and he with me, or rather
to make a chainge that he should have all my sins, and I his mercy and the
gifts of his grace, and become glorious with the ornaments of his riches. And
of my savior Christ I received this law, that I should love my brethren all
Gods elect as tenderly as he loved them. And I consented unto this law, for it
seemed right, and became a scholar to learn it. And as I profited in the
knowledge, faith, and love of Christ, so I grew in the love of my brethren, and
suffered all things for their sakes, and at the last waxed so perfect, that I
wished my self damned (if it might have been) to save my brethren. And al my
brethren that received Christ received the same commandment, and grew
therein. And they that were perfect loved me and all their other brethren, no
less then I loved them. And look with what love I ministered the gifts of
grace, which I received of Christ for the edifying of his congregation, upon my
brethren, with the same love did they minister their gifts again on me, which
they had and I lacked: and so love made all common. love makes all things
common.
And moreover if they call my works my merits, I bestowed all my works upon
my brethren to teach them, and reaped the fruit thereof, even my brethrens
edifying and souls health, yea and reap daily, in that I left my doctrine and
ensample of living behind me, by which many are converted unto Christ daily.
If thou desire therefore to enjoy part of my merit, go and read in my Gospel,
and thou shall find the fruit of my labor, the knowledge of Christ, the
health of the soul, and ever lasting life.

And as I loved my brethren when I lived so I love them still, and now more
perfectly. Howbeit my love then was paynful: for the more I loved the more S.
Paul was a loving and careful preacher.
I sorowed, feared and cared for them to bring them into the knowledge of the
truth, and to keep them in unity of faith lest the false prophets should
deceive them, or their own infirmities should break peace and unity, or
cause them to fall into any sin.

But now my love is without pain. For I see the will and providence of God,
and how the end of all things shall be unto his glory and profit of the elect.
And though I see the elect shall sometime fall, yet I see how they shall arise
again and how that their fall shall be unto the glory of God and their own
profect. And we that are in heaven, love you al a like: neither we love one
more and an other less. And therefore if ye love us more one the^ an other,
that is fleshly as mine old Corinthia^s once loved, and I rebuked them. Neither
can we A good saying of S. Paul.
be moved to come more to help one the^ an other. But we wait when God will
send any of us unto the elect that call for help in Christ's name. Wherefore if
thou will be help of any of us pray in Christ's name. And God shall send one
of us, an Angel or a Saint, to keep the power of the devils from you: but
not who^ thou would chose temptyng God: but whom it pleases God to send.

And if your preachers love you not after y^ same manner, to edify you with the
true doctrine of Christ and example of living thereafter, and to keep you in
unity of faith and charity, they be not of Christ's Disciples, but
Antichrists which under yt name of Christ, seek to reign over you as
temporal tyrauntes. And in like manner if this be not written in your hearts,
that ye ought to love one an other as Christ loved you, and as ye had example
of us his Apostles, ye go astray in vanities and are not in the right way.

And hereby are we sure that we know him, if we keep his commandments.

This is clean against y^ doctrine of The state of grace.
them which say that we can not know whether we be in the state of grace or no.
John says if we keep his commandments, then we be sure that we know
Christ is everlasting life John. xvij. Then contrary to the pope: Christen men
have doctrine to know whether they be in grace or no.

The keeping of Gods commandments certifieth us that we be in the They that
keep the commandments are in the state of grace.
state of grace. But our Doctors have no doctrine to know when a man is in the
state of grace, wherefore it is manifest that they keep not Gods
commandments, nor be in state of grace, but of all ungraciousness.

Our Doctors know not whether they be in state of grace. Our doctors keep
men's co^mau^dements, Ergo men's commandments certify not that we be in state
of grace. Though thou have a devotion to stick up a candle before a post, and
so forth, yet thou can never be sure thereby that thou art in the When we do
good to our neighbor, then we may be assured that we are in the state of grace.
favor of God. But if thou have devotion to help thy brother in all his
misfortunes, because he is the image of God and price of Christ's blood, then
thy denotio^ certifieth the that thou art in the favor of God or state of
grace.

He that says I know him and yet keeps not his commandments, is a liar,
and the truth is not in him.

When our Phariseis say, do as we bid you and not as we do, they testify that
they keep not Gods commandments, A sure argument to know false Prophets by.
unto which testimony our eyes also bear record: And they that keep not
Gods commandments, be liars and have no truth in them. And then when they
preach, they ca^ not but preach lies. And then though they preach Christ, they
preach him falsely, unto their fleshsly vau^tage and not our souls health. And
for as much as we may have no fellowship with the^ that keep not Gods
commandments. i. Cor. v. and in as much as all such are false Prophets
void of all truth, it follows that we ought to give our Doctors none
audience, though their defenders stood by them with their swoordes drawn, but
rather to lay down our heads and stretch forth our necks, to be slain.

He that keeps his word: in him verily is the love of God perfect, and
hereby know we that we are in him.

That is, he that keeps his commandments, To be in God is to believe in the
mercy of God.
loves unfeignedly, and is thereby sure that he is in God. For to be in God is
to believe in y^ mercy of God: And to believe in mercy is cause of love, and love
cause of workyng. And therefore he that works for Gods sake, is sure that he
loves and that he trusts in God: which is to be in God or in Christ. And as
by wilful keeping A rule to know whether we love God or love him not.
of the commandment we be sure that we love God and believe in God, even so
thorough wilful breakyng of them we may be sure that we neither love nor
believe in him, and therefore that we be not in him.

He that says he abides in him ought to walk as he walked.

All that be Baptized in Christ, are washed in him, to put of pride, wrath,
hate and envy, with all their old conversation by which they oppressed their
neighbors, and have promised to become every man even as Christ him self unto
his brethren in love and kyndnes both in word and deed. They therefore They
that be enemies to the Testament of Christ, and are teachers of man's (...)tions
are not in Christ.
which resist Christ's Testament and will not let it be known, and walk in
the Testament of the Pope, with unions pluralities, and totquots, some one of
them robbyng. x. parishes of the tenth of all their yearly increase, and
withdrawing from them Gods word, the food of their souls, and from the poor
their daily sustenaunce, which ought to have their part in the tithes and
other rentes, when the preacher and other necessary Ministers have out their
parts, a due and lawful stipend: are not in Christ. For Christ neither so
walked not so taught.

Brethren I write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment
which ye had at the beginning. For an old commandment is the word which ye
heard from the beginning.

I write no new precept, but only put you in remembrance of that old which
was taught you when ye were And old commandment is the word which ye heard
from the beginning.
first Baptized in Christ, to love each other as he did you. Which is an old
commandment and was given at the beginning of the world, and has ever since
been written in the heart of all that put their hope in God.

Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which is true in him and also
in you: for the darkness is past and the true light now shyneth.

The devil has sown his darkness in the field where this commandment should
grow and the weeds of men's traditions had ouergrowen the corn of this old
commandment: so that it was antiquate and clean out of knowledge. But Christ
yt light of all true doctrine now shyneth, and has scatered the darkness and
plucked up the weeds by the roots and restored this old commandment again.
And in him it is a true commandment, for he loved truly. And in you it is a
true commandment for ye for his sake, love one an other truly also. And by
the reason of this renewyng, it is called a new commandment, as it is now
called new learning, and may well so be: for it has lain long in darkness, and
that in such darkness, that many be shryned for holy Saints, whose deeds and
living, when thou look upon them in the light of this old doctrine that now
shyneth again out of darkness, are more abominable then the deeds and living
of Si^ transit glori^ ^u^^.
him, which of late for all his exaltyng his throne and swearyng by his high
honor, and for the worship of his hat and glory of his precious shoes when
This was Cardinal wolsey.
he was payned with the coli^ke of an evil conscience having no other shift,
because his soul could find no other issue, took him self a medicine, (...)
emit^er^t spiritum per posteriora.

He that says he is in the light: and yet hates his brother: is in
darkness.

For whosoever feleth his own damnation under the law, and believes in the
mercy that is in Christ, the same ca^ not but love Christ and his neighbor for
his sake. And therefore he that hates He that hate^h his brother, is in
darkness and se^th not Christ.
his brother for any offense done to him the same seith not what Christ has
done for him, but is in darkness still.

He that loves his brother: abides in the light: and there is none offendyng
in him.

Abides in the light, that is continues To abide in the light is to abide in
(...) knowledge of Christ.
in the knowledge of Christ. And there is none offending in him, that is. First
he will willingly do nothing either in word or in deed that shall offe^de his
brother. For love will not let him. And secondarily if ought be done or said,
that may be well done or said, he takes it to the best and is not offended.
And thus ye see that the knowledge of Christ is cause of all goodness, and the
igoraunce of Christ cause of all evil. And so the doctrine of the^ is not
false, Faith in Christ is the root of all goodness.
which say that faith in Christ is root of all godly virtue and the cause of
keeping the commandments: and where says is, there to be no sin, nor
damnation: and that say, unbelief to be the mother of all vice, and cause of
breakyng the commandments, and to keep men in sin and damnation only, as
faith only loses us thence.

And he that hates his brother is in darkness: and walks in darkness and
knows not whether he goes. For darkness has blinded his eyes.

He that hates his brother, is in the He that hates his brother is in
ignorance.
ignorance of Christ, and of his own sin, and without repentance and faith
that his sins be forgeuen him in Christ, and therefore is merciless unto his
brother, whom Christ commanded him to pity and love. And in that ignorance
he walks: that is, works Ignorance
evil, and loves the things of the world, and seeks in them the lusts of
the ^lesh, which are the quenching of the spirit, and death of the soul, and
for love of them hates his brother. And this ignorance of Christ which is
unbelief, is the cause of all the wickedness that we do unto our brethren.

I write unto you little children, that your sins are forgeuen you for his
names sake. I write unto you fathers, that ye know him that was from the
beginning. I write unto you young men, how that ye have overcome the wicked.

I write unto you that are young in When we have offended our brother, if we
reconcile our selves unto him again, the^ are our sins forgeuen.
the faith and yet weak, and therefore fall now and then, how that your sins
are forgeuen you, as soon as ye repent and reconcile your selves unto your
brethren whom ye have offended even for his names sake only, and not for our
own deeds whether before or after, or for any other man's deeds or
satisfaction, save for his only.

I write unto you that are fathers in the doctrine of God to teach other how
that ye know him that was from the beginning and is no new thing, though he
newly received our nature. And through knowledge of him which is the only
light, and the door unto the knowledge of God, ye are become fathers in the
Scriptures. Or else ye had never understand it, though ye had studied never so
much, as it appears by the indurate Jews, and also by our own new
Pharisees, which persecute the scripture, and the true sense thereof, because
they be drowned in the ignorance of Christ, as their deeds and contrary
living well testify.

I write unto you young me^ that are strong in suffering persecutions, and fight
for your profession, not with the sword, but with suffering, how that ye have
overcome that wicked which poisoned the world at the beginning, and yet
woorketh in the children of darcknesse, and unbelief: and that in believing the
word of truth, as it follows anon after.

I write unto you young children how that ye know the Father. I write unto you
fathers, how that ye know him that was from the beginning. I write unto you
young men, that ye be strong: and the word of God dwells in you, and that
ye have ouercomme the wicked.

I write unto you young children, how that ye know the Father, whom We can not
know the father, but by the son.
ye love thorough knowledge of the Son, or else you had never known him as a
father, but as a Judge and a tyrant, and had hated him. I write un to you
fathers as before, how ye are fathers of all truth in knowing the Son. Or
else ye had ever continued in darkness remediless.

I write unto you young men, how yt ye are strong, and that your strength is
the word of God, which dwells in Faith in Christ over comes the world.
your breast through faith, in which ye have overcome the wicked devil, and all
his pomp: as it follows chapt. v. this is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our faith.

Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world. If a man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, as
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of good, are not of
the Father, but are of the world. And the world vanishes away and the lust
thereof. But he that does the will of God abides ever.

The love of the world quenches the ^^arice or covetousness.
love of God. Balaam for the love of the world, closed his eyes at the clear
light which he well saw. For love of the world the old Pharisees blasphemed
the holy Ghost, and persecuted the mani^est truth, which they could not
improve. For love of the world many are this day fallen away, and many The love
of y^ world (...) many from Christ.
which stood on the truths side, and defended it a while, for love of the
world have gotten them unto the contrary part, and are become the Popes
mamalukes, and are waxed the most wicked ^s unto the truth and most cruel
against it. They know the truth but they love the world. And when they espied
the truth could not stand wysh the honors which they sought in the world,
they hated it deadly, and both wittingly and willingly persecuted it, sinning
against the holy Ghost. Which sin shall not escape here unpunished as it
shall not be without damnation in the world to come, but shall have an end
here with confusion and shame, as had the glory of our right reverend father in
God Thomas Wolfse late cardinal Thomas Wol^ l^^^ Cardinal of England.
and legate a latere etc. whom after his shitten death (as the saying is) his
own servants which before exalted his glory, have sent to hell with grace and
privilege.

By the lust of the flesh is understand Lechery.
lechery which makes a man altogether a swine, and by the lust of the eyes is
understood covetousness, which is Covetousness.
the root of all evil, and makes ^o err from the faith. 1. Tim. vl^. And
then follows pride: which three are the Pride.
world, and captains over all other vices, and occasions of all mischief.

And if pride, covetousness, and lechery be the world, as S. John says, then
turn your eyes unto the spirituality: Compare the world^ to the pope
Cardinals* etc. and you shall find them to be the world.
unto the pope, cardinals, bishops, a^bates, and all other prelates, and see
whether such dignities be not the world, and whether the way to them be not
also the world. To get the old abbats treasure I think it be the readiest way
to be the new. How few come by promotion, except they buy it, or serve long
for it, or both? To be well skilled in war and in polling, to maintain war and
lusts, and to be a good ambassador, is the only way to a bishopric, or to
pay truly for it. See whether pluralities, unions, totquets and chainging the
less benefice and bysshoprike for the greater (for the contrary chainge I trow
was never ^ene) may be without covetousness and pride. And then if such things
be the world, and the world not of God, how is our spirituality of God? If
pride be seking Pride*
of glory, and they that seek glory can not believe. Ioh. 5. How can our
spiritualty believe in Christ? If covetousness turn men from the faith, how are
our spiritualty in the faith? If Christ when the devil proferred him the
kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof, refused them as things
impossible to stand with his kingdom, which is not of the world: of whom
are our spirituality which Covetousness.
have received them? If covetousness be a traitor, and taught Judas to sell his
master: how should he not in so long time teach our spirituality the same
craft? namely when they be of all kings secrets and the ambassadors of their
secrets, and have thereto thoroughout al Christendom a secret counsel of
their own of the which never lay man was partaker, and with which they turn
the end of all appointments unto their own honor and profit? Covetousness
has taught the^ to bring in damnable sects, according unto the prophecy of
Peter, and to corrupt the Note.
Scripture with false gloses, and to turn every good ordinance that had a
virtuous beginning unto vicious end. The pro^tions of the spiritualitie
corrupt their minds.
The promocio^s of the spirituality corrupt their minds while they be yet in
the shel and vnhatthed. For they come thither but for covetousness, and to avoid
the cross of Christ in the world: except them that be compelled of their
friends, or be so simple that they mark not their falshode beforehande. Who
knowing the truth and loving it, would put his head in the popes halter that so
moseleth men's mouths that they can not open them to defend any truth at all?
When the temporal kings were in their hye authority, then the general
Counsel repressed the enormities of the spirituality. But since the Pope,
Popes and Bishops will suffer nothing that shall restrain their pride and
covetousness.
cardinals and bishops were exalted, and the emperor and kings became their
servants: they would suffer naught to be determined in their counsels that
should reform the world of their demilish pride, insatiable covetousness, and
stinking lechery, which may stand with no godly virtue. But the world which is
not of God, shall at the last have an end with confusion, and they only abide
that do ye will of the Father, which will is, that we believe in the Son, and
love one an other. Let them therefore that have ye worlds good (I might say the
worlds God) use it, but not love it, that they may be ready to bestow it at
the pleasure of God. And let Riches and covetousness, blyudeth the eyes of the
(...).
them which have it not, desire it not, for it blinds the eyes of the seeing:
Seut. 1^. But let them put their trust in God, which shall not fail them, nor
leave them destitute of raiment and food, which Paul counsels to be
content with. The rich (as James says) persecute the true beleuers. The (...)
never stand forth openly for the (...) of God. If of x. thousand there (...)
Nichodemus, it is (...) great thing.

Little children it is now the last hour, and as ye have heard that Antichrist
should come: even so now are many Antichrists come already: whereby we know
that it is the last hour. They went out of us, but were none of us: for had
they been of us, they had continued with us. But that fortuned that it might
appear, how they were not all of us.

Hour is here taken for time: the Hour.
last hour is as much to say, as the last time. Though the Apostles might not
know when the last day shall be and how long the world should endure yet this was
showed them, and us by the^, that Antichrist should first come, and not only
come but also prenayle and be received after a worldly manner and reign over
all, and set up a long continuyng kingdom with damnable sects and wonderful
kinds of hypocrisy that is to say, falshead cloked under a contrary pretense
as testifies Paul and also Peter. Which Antichrist began Antichrist.
with the Apostles and sue his doctrine among the doctrine of the Apostles,
preaching many things as the Apostles did and addyng ever somewhat of his own,
that the weeds might ever grow up together with the corn. Of which John
gathered a sign, that the last day drew nigh, though he could not be sure how
long it were thereto.

Antichrist is one of the first that sees the light and comes and preaches
Christ a while, and seeks his glory in Christ's Gospel. But when The
worldings love the Gospel, so longes it brings gain.
he e^pyeth that there will no glory clean unto that preaching, the^ he
gets him to the contrary party and professes him self an open enemy, if
he can not disguise him self and hide the angle of his poisoned heresy under
a bayte of true doctrine.

The Apostles were clear eyed and espied Antichrist at once, and put him to
flight and weeded out his doctrine quickly. But when charity waxed cold, and
the preachers began to seek them selves and to admit glory and honor of
riches, then Antichrist disguised him The Papists poudred the doctrine of
Christ with their dregge^.
self after the fashion of a true Apostle and preached Christ wylyly, bryngyng
in now this tradition and now that, to darke^ the doctrine of Christ, and set
up innumerable ceremonies and Sacraments and imagerie: giuyng them
significations at the first: but at the last the significations laid a part,
preached the work as an holy deed, to justify and to put away sin and to
save the soul, that men should put their trust in works and in whatsoever
was unto his glory and profit, and under the name of Christ, ministered Christ
out of all together and became head of the congregation him self.

The Pope made a law of his own The Pope has put Christ from his rule and
government.
to rule his church by, and put Christ's out of the way. All the Bishops swear
unto the Pope, and all Curates unto the Bishops, but all forswere Christ and
his doctrine.

But seeing John took a sign of the last day that he saw Antichrist begin, how
nigh ought we to think that it is, which after viij. hundredth years reigning
in prosperity, see it decay again, and his falshead to be disclosed and him
to be slain with the spirit of Antichrist has been long among us.
the mouth of Christ: that is, with that old doctrine that proceeded out of
Christ's mouth? for Paul says when Antichrist is uttered, the^ comes the
end.

But ye have anoyntyng of that holy, and know all thing. I write not unto you
as though ye knew not the truth, but as unto them that know it, and how that
no lie is of truth.

Christ in the Scripture is called the Christ only is called holy.
holy, because he only sanctifies and haloweth us. And he is called Christ:
that is to say, anointed, because he annoynteth Anointed.
our souls with ye holy ghost and with all the gifts of the same. Ye are not
anointed with oil in your bodies, but with the spirit of Christ in your
souls: which spirit teaches you all truth in Christ and makes you to judge
what is a lie and what truth, and to know Christ from Antichrist. For except he
taught your souls with in, the pouring in of words at your cares were in
vain. For they must be all taught of God. John. vj. And the things of God no
man knows, save the spirit of God: and the carnal man The carnal man
knows not the things of the spirit of God.
knows not the things of the spirit of God: when contrary the spiritual
that is anointed with the spirit, judges all things. i. Cor. ij. And
therefore we are forbidden to call us any Master upon earth. Math. xxiij. seeing
we have all one Master now in heaven, which only teaches us with his spirit
though by the administration and office of a faithful preacher. Which
preacher yet can not make his preaching spryng in the heart, no more then a
sower can make his corn grow, nor can say this man shall receive and this not:
but sows the word only and commits the growyng to God whose spirit
bretheth where he lists and makes the ground of whose heart he lusts
fruteful, and chooses whom he will at his own pleasure, and for no other cause
known unto any man.

Who is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is Christ? The same is Antichrist
that denies the father and the son.

For as much as Antichrist and Christ Antichrist who it is.
are two contraries, and the study of Antichrist is to quench the name of
Christ, how can the Pope and his sects be Antichrist, when they all preach
Christ? How was say I again to thee, Pelagius whose doctrine the Pope
defends in the highest degree, Antichrist, and all other heretics? Verily
Sir the Pope seeks him self as all heretics did and abuses the name of
Christ, to gather offeringes, tithes and re^tes in his name, to bestow them
unto his own honor and not Christ's, The Pope captiuateth the understanding
of all me^ with his superstitious rites and ceremonies.
and to bring the conscience of the people into captivity under him through
superstitious fear, as though he had such authority given him of Christ. And
every syllable that has a sou^de as though it made for his purpose, that he
expounds falsely and fleshly, and therewith iuggleth and bewitcheth the ears
of the people and makes them his own possession, to believe what him lusts,
as though it made no matter to them whether he preached true or false, so they
believe and do as he bids them. But all the textes that show his duty to do,
he puts out of the way, and all the textes thereto that set the consciences
at liberty in Christ and prove our salvation to be in Christ only. And
Pelagius heresy.
with Pelagius he preaches the justifying of works, which is the denying of
Christ. He preaches a false bynding and losing with ear confession which is
not in the trust and confidence of Christ's blood shedyng. He preaches the
false penance of deeds, not to tame the flesh that we sin no more, but to
make satisfaction and to redeem the sin that is past. Which what other ca^ it
be save the denying of Christ, which is the only redemption of sin. He
makes of the works of the ceremonies, which were wont to be lignes and
remembraunces of things to be believed or done, image service unto God and his
Saints which are spirits, to purchase with the merits of them, what soever
the blind soul imagines which all are the denying of Christ. For if thou will receive any annoyntyng of grace or mercy any whence, save of him, he is no
longer Christ unto thee. Christ is called Jesus, a Savior, he is Jesus.
Christus.
called Christus, king anointed over all men of whom they must hold, and whose
benefit must all they have. He is called Emanuel, God is with us. Emanuel.
For he only makes God our God, our strength, power, sword and shield, and
shortly our father. He is called Sanctus, that is, holy that haloweth,
sanctifies, Sanctus.
and blesses all nations. And these be his names for ever, and be no names of
hypocrisy, as we some time call him Thomas Curteis, which is but a churl: and
as we call them Curates which Thomas Curteise, a churl.
care for their Parishes as the Wolf for the flock, and them Bishops that are
ouersears, which will so over see, that they will suffer naught to be
prosperous save their own commonwealth: and as some call them selves dead
which Dead men
live in all voluptuousnes, and as some call them selves poor without having
Poor me^.
any thing proper, and yet live in all abundance: and as they shave and
disguise them selves with garments and ornaments, to signify ever a contrary
thing then that they be.

Nay Christ is no hypocrite, or disguised Christ is no disguised person.
that plays a part in a play and represents a person or state which he is
not: But is always that his name signifies, he is ever a Savior, and ever
annyonteth with grace, and ever makes God with us, and ever sa^ctifieth.
Neither is there any other to save and sanctify from sin or annointe with
grace, or to set God at one with men. And these things which his name signify
does he ever unto all that have trust and confidence in his blood, as soon as
they repent of the sin which they desire to be saved and sanctified from.

Now though the Pope and his sects give Christ these names, yet in that they
rob him of the effect, and take The Pope and his shanelynges are right
Antichrists
the significations of his names unto them selves, and make of him but an
hypocrite, as they them selves be, they be right Antichrists and deny both the
father and son. For they deny the witness that the father bare unto his
son, and deprive the son of all the power and glory that his father gave
him.

Whosoever denies the son, the same has not the father.

For no man knows the father but To know God.
the son and to whom the son shows him. Math. xj. Moreover if thou know
not the mercy that God has showed thee in Christ, thou can not know him as a
father. Thou may well besides Christ know him as a tyrant. And thou may
know him by his works as the old Philosophers did, that there is a God, but
thou can neither believe in his mercy, nor love his laws, which is his only
worship in the spirit, save by Christ.

Let therefore abide in you that which ye heard at the beginning. If that which
ye heard at the beginning shall remain in you, then shall ye continue in the
Son, and in the Father. And this is the promise that he has promised us,
everlasting life.

If we abide in thold doctrine which The Apostles doctrine ought we to abide by.
the Apostles taught, and harken to no new: then abide we in the Son (for
upon the Son build they us) and in the Father thorough confidence in the
Son, and are heirs of everlasting life.

These things have I written un to you because of them that deceive you. And
the anointing that ye received of him dwells in you and ye need not that any
man teach you, but as that annoynting teaches you of all things, and is
true, and is no lie: Even as it has taught you, so abide therein.

When a true preacher preaches, the spirit enters the hearts of the elect,
and makes them feel the righteousness of the law of God, and by the law the
poison of their corrupt nature, and thence leads them thorough repentance
unto the mercy that is in Christ's blood, and as an ointment heals the body:
eue^ so the spirit through confidence and trust in Christ's blood heals the
soul, and makes her love the law of God, and therefore is called annoynting or
an ointment, and may Annoyntyng.
well be signified by the oil of our sacrament. But outward oil can neither
heal the soul, nor make her feel save as a sign, or as a bush at a tauern
Outward oil avails nothing.
door quenches a man's thirst, neither is it a thing to put trust in. Let us
there fore follow the teaching of the spirit, which we have received (as Paul
says) an earnest, to certify our hearts, and to make us feel the things of
God, and not cleave to the traditions of men, in which is no feeling, but that
one says so, and an other thus, confirming their assertions with glorious
persuasions of wisdom, but not after the wisdom of God, which reasons an
other denies with contrary sophismes: and so rises brauling about vain
words without all certainty.

And now little children abide in him, that when he shall appear we may have
confidence, and not be made ashamed of him at his coming.

Here are ij. things to be marked: We must cleave to the doctrine of the
Apostles.
one, if we cleave unto Christ after the doctrine of the Apostles, and as they
built us upon him, we shall be bold and sure of our selves at his coming. As
a servant which in his masters absence does only his masters
commau^dements, cannot be confounded at his coming home again. But and if we
follow men's doctrine, how can we be bold: yea how should we not be ashamed with
our teachers, unto whom the^ he shall say (when they boast the^ selves how yt
they have been his vicars,) A fore saying to all hypocrites and teachers of
false doctrine.
I know you not, depart from me ye that have wrought wickedness, and under my
name have brought in damnable sects, and have taught your disciples to believe
in other things then in me. Now the sum of all that the Apostles taught, and
how they built us upon Christ is the new testament. But the popes doctrine is
not there found, but improued. Confounded therefore shall he be, which witting
and willing shuts his eyes at the true light, and opens them to believe his
lies.

An other thing is this, all the scripture makes mention of the resurrection
and coming again of Christ: and that all men, both they that go before, and
they that come after, shall then receive their rewards together, and we are
commanded to look every hour for that day. And what is done with the souls
from their departing their bodies unto that day, does the Scripture make no
mention, save onley that they rest in ye Lord, and in their faith. We must
believe the resurrection and not to be curious to understand the state of the
souls departed, where they are, nor what they do.
Wherefore he that determines ought of the state of them that be departed, does
but teach the presumptuous imaginations of his own brain: neither can his
doctrine be any article of our faith. What God does with them is a secreat laid
up in the treasury of God. And we ought to be patient, being certefied of the
scripture that they which dye in the faith, are at rest, and ought no more to
search that secret, the^ to search ye hour of the resurrection which God has
put only in his own power. But this remember that the whole nature of man is
poisoned, and infected with sin. And ye whole life of sin must be
mortefied. And the root of al sin and first vice we were infect with, is
that we would be wise where God has not taught us, as ye see how Eve would
have been as God in the knowledge of good and bad. And therefore has God hid
many things in his power, and commanded that we shall search none of his
secrets further, then he has opened them in his scripture, to mortefy this
poison of all poisons, the desire to appear wise, and that we be ashamed to be
ignorant in any thing at all. Wherefore they that violently make articles of
the faith with out Gods word, are yet alive in the root of all sin and
vice, and grow out of the devil, and not out of Christ. And their articles are
of the blindness of the devil, and not of the light of Christ, for Christ's
light has testimony of the scripture every where.

If ye know that he is righteous, know that all that work righteousness are
borne of him.

Our nature is to work wickedness and so blind thereto that it can see no
righteousness. And then it follows that we must be borne a new in Christ ere we
can either do or yet know what is righteous. And in him we must first be made
righteous our selves ere we can work righteous works, which conclusion is
contrary unto the Pope, for he says that the works do make the man
righteous. And Christ's doctrine says that the man makes the works
righteous. A righteous man The doctrine of the Pope is clean contrary to
Christ's doctrine.
springs out of righteous works, says the Popes doctrine. Righteous works
spring out of a righteous man, and a righteous man springs out of Christ,
says Christ's doctrine. The works make yt man righteous which before was
wicked, says the Pope. The works declare that the man is righteous, says
Christ's doctrine: but the man was first made righteous in Christ, and the
spirit of Christ taught him what righteousness was, and healed his heart, and
made him consent thereto, and to have his lust in righteousness, and to work
righteouslie.

Chap. 3.
Behold what love the Father has The third Chapter.
showed us, that we should be called the sons of god. For this cause the
world knows you not, because it knows not him. Dearly beloved now we are
the sons of God, though yet it appears not what we shall be. But we know
that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

The love of God to us ward is exceeding great, in that he has made us his
sons without al deserving of us and has given us his spirit through Christ,
to certify our hearts thereof, in that we feel that our trust is in God, and
that our souls have received health, and power to love the law of God, which
is a sure testimony, that we are sons, and under no damnation. Neither ought
it to discourage us, or to make us think we were less beloved because the
world hates us, and persecuteth us, for the world knows us not. Neither any
marvel, for yt world The world could not know Christ.
could not know Christ him self for all his glorious coming with miracles and
benefits in healing the sick, and raising the dead. But for all the oppression
of the world, we are yet sure that we are Gods sons. And in like manner,
though the glory that we shall be in appear not: yet we are sure that we shall
be like him, when he appears. As darkness vanishes away at the coming of the
sun, and the world receaueth a new fashion, and is turned in to light, and
suddenly made glorious: Even so when he appears, and we The world shall know
Christ.
shall see him as he is, we shall with the sight of him, be changed into the
glory of his image, and made like him. And then shall the world both know him,
and us, unto their shame and confusion.

And all that have this hope in him, purge themselves as he is pure.

The faith and hope of a Christen A Christen man's faith and hope are not idle.
man, are no dead, idle, or barren things, but lively works and fruitful.
For when the law through conscience of sin, has slain the soul, the^ hope
and trust in Christ's blood thorough certefying of the conscience, that the
damnation of the law is taken away, quickens her again, and makes her to
love the law, which is the purifying of the soul, and her life, and serving
the law in the inner man. And then the said gifts of hope and faith stretch
them selves forth unto the members, dead with natural lust, consent, and
custom to sin, and quickens them and purges them, with the wholesome
penance of Christ's doctrine, and make them serve the law outward, and bear
wholesome fruit of love unto the profect of their neighbors, according to
Christ's love unto us. For if the spirit of Christ with which God annoynteth
The faith of a Christen man.
us and makes us kings, and seals us and makes us his sure and several
kingdom, and which he gives us in earnest. 2. Cor. 1. And with which he
changes us into the Image of Christ. 2. Cor. 4. dwell in our souls through
faith, the same spirit can not but quicken the members also, and make The
popes faith.
them fruteful. Romans viij. Wherefore the faith and hope of the Pope which by
their own confession, may stand with all wickedness and consent unto all evil
and be without repentance toward Gods law (as it appears by their three
capital sins touched of John a little above: pride, covetousness and lechery)
are no true faith and hope: but vain words and visures only, according to
his other disguisyng and names of hypocrisy.

All that commit sin, commit unrighteousness, for sin is unrighteousness.

That the English calls here unrighteousness the Greek calls Anomia,
unlawfulness or breakyng yt law. So that all sin is breaking of Gods What
sin is.
law, and only the tra^sgression of Gods law is sin. Now all Gods laws are
contained in these two points, believe The su^me of Gods law.
in Christ, and love thy neighbor. And these two points are the interpretyng
and expoundyng of all laws, so that whatsoever edifieth in faith and love, is
to be kept, as long as it so does. And whatsoever hurts faith or love, is to
be broken immediately: though King, Emperor, Pope or an Angel command it.
And all indifferent things that neither help nor hurt faith and love, are
whole in the hands of Father, Mother, Master, Lord and Prince. So that if they
will sin against God and ouerlade our backs, we may well run away, if we
can escape, but not aduenge over selves. But and if they will break into thy
conscience, as the Pope does with his dome traditions, and faith, to do this
saves thy soul, and to leave it undone loses thy soul, the^ defy them as
the works of Antichrist, for they make thee sin against the faith that is in
Christ's blood, by which only thy soul is saved, and for lack of that only
damned. And how love breaks the law take Love breaks the law.
an example. It is a good law that me^ come to the Church on the Sondayes to
hear Gods word and to receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
in remembrance of his benefits and so to strengthen thy soul, for to walk
in his love and in the love of our neighbor for his sake etc. yet if my
father, mother, or any other that requires my help be sick, I break that
good commandment, to do my duty to mine elders or my neighbor. And thus all
laws are under love and give room to love. And love interprets them: yea
and breaks them at a time, though God himself command them. For love is
Lord over al laws.

And ye know that he appeared to take away our sins, and there is no sin in
him.

Christ dyed not alone to purchasse pardon for our foresinnes, but also to s^ay
all sin and the life of sin in our members. For all we that are Baptized in
the name of Christ says Paul. Romans 6. are Baptized to dye with him We are
baptized to dye with Christ concerning sin.
concerning sin, and that as he after his resurrection dies no more, so we
after our Baptism should walk in a new life and sin no more. Our members
are crucified with him, in all that pertayneth unto the life of sin. And if
in Christ be no sin, then how can therbe wilful sin in the faith that is
in him, or in the quick members that through faith grow out of him? Every man
therefore that has the true faith of Christ, purges him self, as he is pure.

All that abide in him sin not. And all that sin have neither seen him nor
known him.

As there is no sin in Christ the stock, so can there be none in ye quick
members that live and grow in him by faith. And they that give them selves to
sin have neither seen, known, or felt by faith y^ mercy that is in him. Our
holy father then which forbids The filthynes of the Popes doctrine.
Matrimony and gives his Disciples licenses with his holy blessing to keep
whores: and pluralities, unions, and totquots, to rob the Parishes, has
neither seen nor known Christ, no more have his Disciples that consent unto
his iniquity. And if they know him not, they ca^ not truly describe him unto
us. It follows then, that their preaching is but hypocrisy.

Little children let no man beguile you. He that works righteousness is
righteous, as he is righteous.

Judge men by their deeds. For Where true faith is there proceeds good works.
whosoever has the light of God in his soul, he will let his light shine,
that men shall see his good works. And therefore where ye see not the
righteousness of works in the members outward, there, be sure, is no
righteousness of faith in the heart in ward. Let no man mock you with vain
words. Whosoever preaches Christ in word He that preaches Christ in word
and deed, him take for Christ's vicare.
and deed, him take for Christ's Vicare. And them that would prove them selves
his Vicares with Sophistry, and when it is come to the point make a sword
only their mighty arguments, and live contrary to all his doctrine, and in all
their preachinges blaspheme and rail on his blessed blood, take for the
Vicares of Antichrist.

He that sins is of the devil, for the devil sins from the begins.
But for this cause appeared the son of God: Even to destroy the works of
the devil. All that are borne of God do no sin, for his seed abides in
them and they can not sin, because they be borne of God: And hereby are the
sons of God known, and also the sons of the devil.

God and the devil are two contrary fathers two contrary fountains, and two
contrary causes: the one of all goodness, the other of all evil. And they that
do evil are borne of the devil and first evil by that birth, yer they do
evil. For yer a man do any evil outward of purpose, he conceived that evil
first The man is first evil.
in his mind and consented unto it, and so was evil in his heart yer he wrought
evil, and yer he conceived evil in his heart he was borne of the devil and had
received of his seed and nature: By the reason of which nature, seed and
birth, he works evil naturally, and ca^ do no other. As Christ says John 8.
ye are of your father the devil and therefore will do the lusts of your
father.

And on the other side, they that do good are first borne of God and receive
The man is first good.
of his nature and seed, and by the reason of that nature and seed, are first
good yer they do good by yt same rule. And Christ which is contrary to the
devil came to destroy the works of the devil in us and to give us a new
birth, a new nature, and to sow new seed in us, that we should, by the reason
of that birth, sin no more. For the seed of that birth, that is to wete the
spirit of God and the lively seed of his word, sown in our hearts, keeps
our hearts that we can not consent to sin, as the seed of the devil holds
the hearts of his, that they can not consent to good. This is contrary unto the
Pope in two The Popes doctrine.
points, in one that he says, that our good deeds make us first good, and
teaches us not to believe in Christ's blood, there to be washed and made first
good. And in an other, that he says, God choseth us first for our good
qualites and properties and for the enforcement and good endeavor of our
frewill. What good endeavor is there where the devil possesses the whole
heart, that it can consent to no good.

And finally there is great difference The faithful and unfaithful sin
diversely.
between the sin of them that believe in Christ unfeignedly, and the sin of
them that believe not. For they that believe, sin not of purpose and of consent
to wickedness that it is good, castyng and compassyng before hand without
grudge of conscience to bring their purpose about. As ye see our hypocrites
have vexed all Christendom this. xx. years to bring a little lust to effect.
Their fathers conceived mischief. viij. hundredth years ago. And the sons
consent unto the same and have no power to depart therefrom. And therefore their
sin is deuilishe and under the damnation of the law. But if he that believes,
sin: he does it not of purpose, or that he consents unto the life of sin:
But of infirmity, chance, and some great temptation that has overcome him.
And therefore his sin is venial and under mercy and grace, though it be
murder, theft, or adultery: and not under the damnation of the law. So that
his father shall scourge him, but not cast him away or damn him. Mark in the
sin of Saul and of David. Saul ever excused his sin, and could not but
persecute the will of God. And David confessed his sin, with great
repentance at the first warnyng, whenever he forgot him self.

All that work not righteousness are not of God. Nor he that loves not his
brother. For this is the tydinges which ye heard at the begynnyg, that we
should love one an other, and not be as Cain which was of the devil and slew
his brother. And wherefore slew he him? for his deeds were evil and his
brothers righteous. Marvel not my brethren though the world hate you.

The law of righteousness is, that we love one an other as Christ loved us, and
he that has not this law living in his heart, and when the time is, brings
not forth the fruits thereof, the same is not of God, but of the devil whose
birth and properties of the same ye see described in Cain, how he resisted God
and persecuted the children of God for their belefe and works thereof. And as
ye see in Cain and his brother Abell, so shall it ever continue between the
children of God and of the devil unto the worlds end. Wonder not therefore
though the world hate you.

We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. He that loves not his brother, abides in death. All that hate their
brethren are murderers, and ye know that no murderer has eternal life
abydyng in him.

If thou love thy brother in Christ, and art ready to do and to suffer for him
as Christ did for thee, then thou art sure thereby that thou art the son of
God and heir of life and delivered from death and damnation. So have Christen
men signs to know whether they be in the state of grace or no. And on the
other side he that has no power to love his brethren, may be sure that he is
in the state of death and damnation. An other is this, let every man look upon
his heart, and be sure that he which hates his brother has slain him before
God and is a murderer. And murderers shall not obtain the kingdom of God.
Gala. 5. But are Caines brethren and the devils children, and are heirs of
death and ever under damnation. Compare the regiment of the spirituality, which
have had the temperall sword in their hands now above viij. hundredth years
unto this doctrine of John, and Judge whether they have led us truly after the
steps of Christ's doctrine.

Hereby we are assured of love, because he left his life for us, and therefore
ought we to leave our lives for our brethren. He then that has the substance
of the world, and seith his brother have need and shuts up his compassion
from him, how dwells the love of God in him?

If we felt the love of Christ's death, it would sure set our heart on fire to
love him again and our brethren for his sake, and should never cease to s^ay
our resisting members until we could not only be well content, that our
brethren were in a more prosperous state then we, but also until we could
bless them whe^^ they curse us, and pray for them when they persecute us, and
to suffer death for the^, to testify the word We must recompense evil with
goodness.
of their souls health unto them, and with love to overcome them, and to win
them unto Christ. If now every Christen man ought to have this rule of his
profession before his eyes to learn it, that he should love his brother as
Christ did him, to depart with his life for his brothers example, how far are
they of from good scholars, that can not find in their hearts to depart with a
little of the abundance and superfluity of their temporal goods, to help
their neighbors need?

My little children let us not love in word nor with the tongue, but with the
deed and of a truth. For thereby we know that we be of the truth, and so shall
we certify our hearts in his sight.

If we have power to work, then does the work certefie our hearts that our
faith in Christ, and love to God, and our neighbor for his sake are unfeigned,
and that we are true children, and no hypocrites. And then are we bold in our
conscience before God. And Good ^orkes declare where good says is.
this is it that Peter means. 2. Pet. 1. where he bids us minister in our
faith virtue, godly living, and all manner of good works, and therewith to make
our vocation and election, or our calling add chosing sure. For the sight of
the work does certify us, that God has called us, and chosen us unto grace
and mercy.

But and if when the time of woorking is come, I fly and have no power to
work, then will our conscience accuse us of sin and transgressio^ within the
heart before God, and so for fear of the rod we dare not be bold, but draw
back and stand aloo^e.

Let a child have never so merciful a father, yet if he break his fathers
commandments, though he be not under damnation, yet is he ever child and
rebuked, and now and then lasshed with the rod: by the reason whereof he is
never bold in his fathers presence. But yt child that keeps his fathers
commau^dements, is sure of himself, and bold in his fathers presence, to
speak and ask what he will. They that minister well get them good degree and
great confidence in the faith that is in Christ Jesus, says Paul. 1. Tim. 3.
He that works, is bold before God and man. For his conscience accuses him
not within, neither have we ought to wit him withal or to cast in his teeth.
And as without the sight of the works Jacob the Apostle can not see thy faith
Iaco. 2. no more shall thou ever be sure or bold before God or man.

But if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all
thing.

If our conscience accuse us of sin, God is so great and so mighty that it
can not be hid.

Dearly beloved if our hearts condemn us not, then we trust to Godward. And
whatsoever we ask, that shall we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments and do the things which are pleasant in his sight.

Keeping of the commandments makes a man see his faith and to be bold
therein. And faith when it is without conscience of sin, goes into God
boldly, and is strong and mighty in prayer to conjure God by all his mercyes,
and therewith obtayneth what soever he asks, of all his promises. And the
text says, because we keep his commandments. Yea verily his commandments
make us bold. But the keepyng of men's traditions and domine ceremonies make us,
not bold before God, nor certify our conscience that our faith is unfeigned.
Thou shall not know by sprynkling thy self with holy water, nor kyssing the
pax, nor with taking ashes, or though thou were anointed with all the oil in
Thames street that thy faith is sure. But and if thou could find in thine
heart to bestow both life and goods upon thy neighbor in a just cause, and
have proved it: then art thou sure, that thou love Christ, and feel that
thou have thy trust in his blood.

And this is his commandment that we believe in his son Jesus Christ, and
love one another, as he gave commandment.

Faith is the first and also the root Faith is the root of all
commandments.
of all commandments. And out of faith spryngeth love: and out of love
works. And when I break any commandment I sin against love. For had I
loved I had not done it. And when I sin against love I sin against faith.
For had I earnestly and with a full trust remembered the mercy that Christ has
showed me, I must have loved. Wherefore when we have broken any commandment,
there is no other way to be restored again, the^ to go through repentance
unto our faith again, and ask mercy for Christ's sake. And as soon as we have
received faith that our sin is forgiven, we shall immediately love the
commandment again, and through love receive power, to work.

And he that keeps his commandments abides in him, and he in him. And
hereby we know that there dwells in us of his spirit which he gave us.

Through the works we are sure that we continue in Christ, and Christ in us,
and that his spirit dwells in us. For his spirit it is that keeps us in
faith, and through faith in love and through love in works.

The fourth Chapter.
Dearly beloved believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits whether they
be of God. For many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

Spirits are taken here for preachers, Spirits.
because of the preaching or doctrine, which if it be good, is of the spirit
of God: and if it be evil, of the spirit of the devil. Now ought we not to
believe every man's doctrine unadvisedly, or condeinne any man's preaching yer it
be heard and seen what it is. But a Christen ma^s part is to examine, judge and
try it, whether it be true or no. Quench not the spirit says Paul i. These.
the last. Neither despise prophesiynges, We may not believe every doctrine that
is taught and preached, but we must first examine it with the touch stone of
Gods word, and so either receive it or reject it.
but prove all thing, and keep that which is good. Destroy not the gifts of
the spirit of God, but try whether they be of God, and good for the edifiyng
of his congregation: and keep that which is good and refuse that which is
evil. And suffer every person that has any gift of God, to serve God therein,
in his degree and estate, after a Christen manner and a due order. Why shall we
try the doctrines: Verily for there be many false Prophets abroad already. We
told you before that Antichrist should come, as our master Christ told us that
he should come. But now I certify you that Antichrists kingdom is begone
already. And his Disciples are gone out to preach. Try therefore all
doctrine. The trial of all doctrine.
wherewith shall we try it? with the doctrine of the Apostles, and with the
Scripture which is the touchstone: ye and because ye love compendiousnes, ye
shall have a short rule, to try them with all.

Hereby know ye the spirit of God. Every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh is of God. And every spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God. And the same is that
spirit of Antichrist, of who^ ye have heard that he should come: And even now
he is in the world already.

Whatsoever opinion any member Antichrist will not confess that Christ (...)
come in the flesh.
of Antichrist holds, the ground of all his doctrine is to destroy this
article of our faith, that Christ is come in the flesh. For though the most
part of all heretics confess that Christ is come in the flesh after their
manner, yet they deny that he is come, as the Scripture testifies and the
Apostles preached him to be come. The whole study of the devil and all his
members is to destroy the hope and trust that we should have in Christ's flesh,
and in those things which he suffered for us in his flesh, and in the
Testament and promises of mercy which are made us in his flesh. For the
scripture testifies that Christ has taken away the sin of the world in his
flesh, and that the same hour that he yielded up his spirit into the hands of
his father, he had full purged and made full satisfaction for all the sins
of the world. So that all the sin of the world, both before his passion and
after, must be put away through repentance toward the law and faith and trust
in his blood, without respect of any other satisfaction, sacrifice or work.
For if I once sin, the law rebukes my conscience, and sets variaunce
between God and me. And I shall never be at peace with God again until I have
heard the voice of his mouth, how that my sin is forgiven me for Christ's
blood sake. And as soon as I that believe, I am at peace with God. Romans v. and
love his law again, and of love work.

And that Christ has done this service in his flesh, deny all the members of
Antichrist. And hereby thou shall know them. All doctrine that builds
Doctrine that is of God.
thee upon Christ, to put thy trust and confidence in his blood, is of God and
true doctrine. And all doctrine that withdraws thine hope and trust from
Doctrine that is of the devil.
Christ, is of the devil and the doctrine of Antichrist. Examine y^ Pope by
this rule, and thou shall find that all he does, is to the destruction of
this article. He wresteth all the Scriptures and sets them clean against
the woll, to destroy this article. He ministers the very Sacraments of Christ
unto the destruction of this article: and so does he all other ceremonies, and
his absolution, penance, purgatory, dispensations, pardons, vows, with all
disguisings. The Pope preaches that Christ The Popes doctrine of Christ.
is come to do away sins, yet not in the flesh but in water, salt, oil,
ca^dles, bows, ashes, friars coats, and monks cowles, and in the vows of
the^ that for^were matrunonie to keep whores, and swear beggerie, to possess
all the treasure, riches, wealth and pleasures of the world: and have vowed
obedience, to disobey with authority, all the laws both of God and man. For
in these hypocritish and false sacrifices, teaches he us to trust for the
forgiveness of sins, and not in Christ's flesh.

Ye are of God little children, and have overcome them. For greater is he that
is in you, then he that is in the world.

He that dwells in you, and works God is the worker in us by faith that we
have in (...).
in you through faith, is greater then he which dwells and works in them
through unbelief. And in his strength, ye abide by your profession, and
confess your Lord Jesus, how that he is come in the flesh and has purged the
sin of all that believe in his flesh. And through that faith ye overcome them
in the very torments of death. So that neither their iugglinges, neither their
pleasures, neither their thretnynges, or their torments, or the very death
wherewith they slay your bodies, can prevail against you.

They be of the world, and therefore they speak of the world, and the world
atte^deth unto them. We be of God: and he that knows God hears us. And he
that is not of God hears us not. And hereby we know the spirit of truth and
the spirit of error.

There be and ever shall be two generations Two generations in the world.
in the world: one of the devil, which naturally hearken unto the false
Apostles of the devil, because they speak so agreeable unto their natural
complexion. And an other of God, which hearken unto the true Apostles of God,
and consent unto their doctrine. And this is a sure rule to indge spirits with
all, that we indge them to have the spirit of truth, which hearke^ unto yt
true doctrine of Christ's Apostles: and them to have the spirit of error
which hearken unto worldly and deuilish doctrine, abhorryng the preathing of
the Apostles. And look hither the Popes doctrine be worldly or no, if pride
and covetousness be worldly, yea and secherie to. For what The Popes doctrine is
worldly.
other is all his doctrine then of benefices, promotions, dignities,
byshoprikes, cardinallshyps, vicarages, parsonages, prebendes, change of
bishoprikes, and resignyng of benefices, of unions, pluralities, totquots, and
that which comes once into their hands, may not out again: yea and of whores
and concubines, and of captiuyng of consciences for covetousness, and all that
hearken to that doctrine abhor the doctrine of the Apostles and persecute it,
and them that preach it.

Dearly beloved let us love one an other, for love is of God. And all that
love are borne of God, and know God. And he that loves not, knows not God:
for God is love.

John sings his old song again, and teaches an infallible and sure token
which we may see and feel at our fingers ends, and thereby be out of all
doubt, that our faith is unfeigned and He that loves God, is borne of God.
that we know God and be borne of God, and that we hearke^ unto the doctrine
of the Apostles purely and godly and not of any curiosity, to seek glory and
honor therein unto our selves, and to make a cloak thereof to cover our
covetousness, and filthy lusts. Which token is, if we love one an other. For
the love of a man's neighbor unfeignedly spryngeth out of the unfeigned knowledge
of God in Christ's blood. By which knowledge we be borne of The founte^ne of
love.
God and love God and our neighbors for his sake. And so he that loves his
neighbor unfeignedly, is sure of him self, that he knows God, and is of God
unfeignedly. And contrariwise, he that loves not, knows not God. For God in
Christ's blood is such a love that if a man saw it, it were impossible that he
should not break out into the love of God again and of his neighbor for his
sake.

Herein appeared the love of God unto us ward, because God sent his only
son into the world, that we should live through him. Herein is love: not that
we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son, a satisfaction for our
sins.

If a man had once felt within in his conscience the fierce wrath of God
toward sinners and the terrible and most cruel damnation that the law
threatens: and then beheld with the eyes of God first loved us before we could
love him.
a strong faith, the mercy, favor and grace the taking away of the damnation
of the law and restoryng again of life, freely offered us in Christ's blood, he
should perceive love, and so much the more, that it was showed us, when we were
sinners and enemies to God. Roma. 5. and that without all deseruyngs, without
our endeuouryng, enforcyng and preparyng our selves, and without all good
motions, qualities and properties of our frewill. But when our hearts were as
dead unto all good workyng, as the members of him whose soul is departed,
which thing to prove, and to stop the blasphemous mouths of all our
adversaries, I will of innumerable textes rehearse one in the beginning of the
second chapter to the Ephesians. where Paul says thus. Ye Ephes^.
were dead in trespass and sin in which ye walked according to the course of
the world and after the governor that rules in the air, the spirit that
works in the children of unbelief, among which we also had our conversation
in time past, in the lusts of our flesh: and fulfilled the lusts of the
flesh and of the mind (so that the flesh and the mind were agreed both to
sin, and the mind consented as well as the flesh) and were by nature the
children of wrath, as well as other. But God Herein appears the great and
loving mercy of almightte God toward us, when we were yet sinuers.
being rich in mercy, through the great love wherewith he loved us, even when we
were dead in sin, has quickened us with Christ: for by grace are ye saved:
and with him has raised us up and with him has made us sit in heavenly
things through Jesus Christ, for to show in time to come the exceeding riches
of his grace, in kyndnes to us ward in Jesus Christ. For by grace are ye saved
through faith, and that not of your selves: for it is the gift of God, and
comes not of works, lest any man should bost him self. But we are his
workemanshyp created in Christ Jesus unto good works, unto which God ordained
us before that we should walk in them. The text is plain, we were stone, dead
and without life or power to do or consent to good. The whole nature of us was
captive under the devil and led at his will. And we were as wicked as the
devil now is (Except that he now sins again the holy ghost) and we
consented unto sin, with soul and body and hated the law of God. But God of
his grace only quickened us in Christ, and raised us out of that death and
made us sit with Christ in heavenly things. That is, he set our hearts at rest
and made us sit fast in the life of Christ's doctrine, and immovable from the
love of Christ. And finally we are in this our second birth Gods workema^shyp
and creation in Christ: so that as he which is yet unmade, has no life nor
power to work, no more had we till we were made again in Christ. The
preaching of mercy in Christ quickened our hearts through faith, wrought by the
spirit of Christ which God poured into our hearts, yer we wist.

Dearly beloved, if God so loved us, then ought we love one an other.

If we felt the love of God in Chrisles blood, we could not but love again,
not only God and Christ, but also all that are bought with Christ's blood. If
we love God for the pleasures that we receive, then love we our selves. But if
we love him to do him pleasure again: that can we no otherwise do, then in
loving our neighbors for his sake, them that are good, to continue them in
their goodness, and them that are evil, to draw them to good. Love is the
instrument wherewith faith makes us Gods sons and Love makes us the sons
of God.
fashioneth us like the image of God, and certifieth us that we so are. And
therefore commands Christ. Math. v. Love your enemies, Bless the^ that curse
you, pray for them that persecute you, that ye may be the sons of your
heavenly father, which makes his sun rise over good and bad, and sends
his rain upon just and unjust: ye which made the sun of his mercy shine
upon us and sent the rain of the blood of his dear and only child upon our
souls, to quicken us and to make us see love to love again.

No man has at any time seen God. If we love one an other God dwells in us,
and his love is perfect in us.

Though we can not see God, yet if we love one an other, we be sure that No man
has seen God.
he abides in us, and that his love is perfect in us: that is, that we love
him unfeignedly. For, to love God truly and to give him thanks, is only to
love our neighbor for his sake. For upon his person thou can bestow no
benefit. And for as much as we never saw The scripture has seen God.
God, let us make no image of him nor do him any imageseruice after our own
imagination, but let us go to the scripture that has seen him, and there wete
what fashion he is of and what service he will be served with. Blind reason says
God is a kerued post and will be served with a candle. But Scripture says God
is love and will be served with love. If thou love thy neighbor the^ art thou
the image of God thy self, and he dwells in the living temple of thine heart.
And thy loving of thy neighbor for his sake, is his service and worship in the
spirit, and a ca^dle that burns before him in thine heart and casts out the
light of good works before the world, and draws all to God, and makes his
enemies leave their evil, and come and worship him also.

Hereby we know that we abide in him, and he in us. For he has given us of his
spirit.

He that has not Christ's spirit, the By this badge of love, we are known to
have the spirit of God.
same is none of his. Roma. 8. If we have the spirit of God, then are we sure.
But how shall we know whether we have the spirit? Ask John and he will say,
if we love one an other.

And we have seen and do testify that the father has sent his son, the
savior of the world. Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of God, in
him dwells God, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that
God has to us.

First the Apostles taught no fables, but that they saw and received of God by
the witness of his spirit. Secondaryly He that be leueth that Jesus to Gods
son, has God in him.
John asce^deth up stepe higher, from love to faith, and says he that be
leueth that Jesus is Gods son, has God in him. And I doubt not but the Pope
and his defe^ders will answer John and say, then the devil has God in him,
and is also in God. For other faith then such as the devil has, felt they
never any. But John preuenteth them, we have known and believed the love that
God has to us. That is, we believe not only with story faith, as men believe
old Chronicles, but we believe the love and mercy that GOD showed us, and put
our trust and confidence therein (And so takes Scripture belefe) we believe
that Jesus is the son of God, made man and slain for our sins, which is a
toke^ of great love. And that love believe we and trust thereto. Where Paul
says. i. Cor. xij. No man can call Jesus Lord except the holy ghost had taught
him. But thorough the holy ghost he means not with the mouth only, but in
the heart with unfeigned faith, putting his hope and trust in the Lordshyp which
he has over sin, damnation, hell, and death. For so could no man call Jesus
Lord, except the holy ghost had taught him, as Christ says Math. xvi. flesh
and blood showed thee not that.

But yet how shall I see my faith? I must come down to love again, and thence
to the works of love, yer I can see my faith. Not always but sometime thou
shall fecle thy faith without the outward deed, as in great adversity and
persecution when the devil assaulteth thee with desperation, and lays thy
sins before thee, and would bear the in hand that God had cast the away and
left the succourles, for thy sins sake. Then comes faith forth with her
shield, and turns back again Faith takes hold of Christ's death and
deseruyng.
the darts of the devil, and answers: Nay for Jesus is y^ son of God:
yea and my very God and my very Lord, and has taken away my sins and all
damnation. And this trouble and adversity which is come upon me, by setting of
thee and on of thy lymmes, is only to make me feel the mercy of my father and
his power and help within in my soul, and to slay the rest of the poison
which remains in the flesh.

God is love and he that abides in love, abides in God, and God in him.

This have we heard above and it is easy to be understand.

Herefore is love perfect with us, that we should have confidence in the day of
Judgment.

Howsoever this text sound, this me thinks should be the meaning: that we
should provoke each other to love, and ever have those examples of edifieng
before our eyes that should most move us to love. For perfect love serves to
make a man bold, because it is the keeping of the commandments. And therefore
he that is perfect in love, when he seith him self yet in this Love makes
the faithful and Christian man to be bold.
world to be unto his neighbor as God is unto him, and to be like his heavenly
father in all example of kyndnesse, is bold in the presence of God: yea though
he come to judge sinners. When on the other side, they that continue ever in
their wickedness and grow not in love, fall often. And therefore their
conscience ever accuses them and puts them in fear, by the reason of the
fresh memory of the offense, that they can not at once be bold, though they
have never so great promises of mercy.

There is no fear in love. But perfect love casts out fear. For fear has
paynefulnes. He therefore that fears, is not perfect in love.

Love is not paynefull but makes Love.
all thing easy and pleasant: fear of punishment for ye trespass newly
committed is paynefull: Therefore where love is perfect there is no such fear.
Love is the fulfillyng of all commandments. And therefore where love is
perfect, there is no sin. And where conscience does not accuse of sin,
there is faith bold to go into God and to stand before him, and look him in
the face, and to conjure him by all his mercies, and to ask the petitions of
his desire. Lack of love is the breakyng of the commandments and cause of
sin. And where the conscience accuses of sin, their faith is abashed,
dismayed, ashamed and affrayed to go in, for fear of rebuke. Love therefore
serves to make a man bold in the day of judgment and in all temptations.

John speaks not generally of all Fear.
manner fear, but of that only which the conscience of sin puts a man
in. For diverse fears there be that accompany love and grow as she does. The
more a woman loves her child, the more she cares for it and fears lest
ought should chance it a miss. Even If we love ou^ brethren the^ are we
careful for them.
so the more we love our brethren, the more we care for them, and fear lest
any temptation should trouble them. As Paul says. ij. Cor. xj. who is sick
and I am not sick? who is offended or hurt and mine heart burns not? How
cared he for Timothe, for Titus, and for all that were weak, and for the
Corinthians, Galathia^s, and for all congregations? and how diligently wrote he
to them in his absence? and the more we love God, the more diligent and
circumspect are we, that we offe^de him The more we love God, the more diligent
we are to do his will.
not. And tell me I pray thee, whosoever have had experience, what a pain and
grief, yea and what a freatyng coresey is it unto the heart of a true lover of
God, to here the poison generation of vipers, the pestilent sect of hypocritish
Phariseis, wittingly and willingly to blaspheme and rail on the open and
manifest truth of the holy ghost?

If ye will see how bold love is: go to Moses. Exodus 32. and Numeri. 14. And
there behold how he coniureth God and among all says: Forgive this people or
put me out of the book that thou have written. As who should say, they be thy
people and thou commau^dest me to love them. And for thy sake I love them and
teach them and care for them, as a mother that had borne them and love them no
less then my self. Wherefore if thou love me as thou Where perfect love is
there is no fear.
promisest me, then save them with me: or if not, the^ cast me away with them,
and let me have such part as they take. And Paul said as much. Roma. ix. Look
upon worldly love, and see what pageantes she plays now and then and how
dronken a thing it is: and be sure, where the love of God is perfect, she will
not only go between bodily death and her lover, but also between him and hell.
If a man would take of this, that a man might be so perfect in this life, that
he might not be perfecter, it would not follow. For though the spirit at a time
get the upper hand of the flesh, and wynneth her self to God, that she can not
tell whether she be in the body or no: yet the flesh will pull her down again
and not let her continue, and now and the^ pluck of some of her feathers, for
mountyng so high again. For Moses fell through unbelief well enough after that
seruentnes.

We love him, because he loved us first.

We deserve not ye love of God first, but he deserves our love, and loves us
first, to win us and to make us his friends of his enemies. And as soon as
we believe his love, we love again. And so faith is mother of all Faith is the
mother of love.
love. And as great as my faith is so great is love, though faith can not be
perfectly seen, but through the works of love and in the fire of temptation.

If a man say, I love God, and hates his brother: he is a liar. For how ca^ he
that loves not his brother whom he sees, love God who^ he sees not? And this
commau^deme^t have we of him: that he which loves God, love his brother also.

To love a man's neighbor in God A sure rule
is a sure rule to know that we love God: and not to love him, is a sure token
that we love not God: and to hate our neighbor is to hate God. For to love God
is to do his commandments as Christ says John. xv. ye are If we love God, we
must do his commandments, and his commandment is to love our neighbors.
my lovers if ye do those things which I have commanded you: and the
commau^deme^t is to love our neighbors: then he that loves not his neighbor,
loves not God. And likewise to hate the commandment, is to hate God that
commanded it: and the commandment is to love our neighbors: he then that
hates his brother who^ God bids him love, hates God.

The fifth Chapter.
ALl that believe that Jesus is Christ are borne of God. And all that love him
which begat, love him that is begotten of him. In this we know that we love
the sons of God, when we love God and keep his commandments. For this is
the love of God that we keep his commandments.

This is a sure conclusion that we be Faith makes us Gods sons.
borne of God through faith. And that faith makes us Gods sons, in that we
believe that Jesus is Christ: as the first chapter of John also testifies, he
gave them power to be the sons of God, in that they believed in his name.

What it is to believe that Jesus is What it is to believe that Jesus is Christ.
Christ, may be understand by that which is above rehearsed. It is a far
other thing then as the devil believed it against his will and to his great
pain, or as they believe it which to fulfill their sin, envy the glory of
Christ and persecute his Gospel, forbydding to preach it or to read in it. To
believe that Jesus is Christ, is to believe in Christ: that is, to believe
earnestly, and to put all thy trust therein, and to lay the price of thy soul
thereupon: that the son of Marie whom the angel commanded to be called
Jesus because he should save his people from their sins, is that Christ, that
Messiah, and that Jesus the true Messiah and the Dauiour of the world from
their sins.
anointed which God promised the fathers should come and bless all nations
and annoint them with the oil of his spirit, and with mercy and grace, and to
deliver them from death of their souls, which is the consentyng to sin, and
to make them a live with consentyng unto the law of God, and in certifiyng the^
that they be the sons of God: And to put the whole trust in all that he
suffered in his flesh for thy sake and in all promises of mercy that are in him
and that thou be full persuaded that there is no other name under heaven given
unto men to be saved from sin by, or to purchase forgiveness of the lest
sin that ever was committed.

An other conclusion is this: whosoever loves God, loves all that believe All
that love God love all that believe in him.
in God. For all that love him that begets, love them that are begotten of
him: and all that believe in God are begotten of God through that belefe, and
made his sons: the^ all that love God, love all that believe in God.

An other conclusion is this. When we love God and his law, the^ we love the
sons of God. Which is this wise He that loves God, loves also the sons of
God.
proved: The love of God is to keep the law of God, by the text before and
after the law of GOD is to love our neighbors and therefore if we love God in
keeping his laws we must needs love the sons of God.

But John should seem to be a very negligent disputer to many men in that he
here certifieth us of the love of our neighbors by the love of God, when above
he certifieth us that we love God because we love our neighbors. He seems
to do as I heard once a great Clerk in Oxford stand half an hour in a
pulpit to prove that Christ was a true Prophet by the testimony of John
Baptist and an other half hour to prove John yt Baptist a true Prophet by the
authority of Christ, as we say claw me, claw thee: and as every these might
lightly prove him self a true man, in bearyng record to an other as false as
he and taking record of the same again. Which kind of disputyng schole men
call Petiti^ pr^ncipij, the prouyng of two certain things, each by the other,
and is no prouyng at all, as our holy father proves the authority of
Scripture by his decrees (for the Scripture is not autentike but as his decrees
admit it) and to make his decrees shine and appear glorious, and to obtain
authority, he allegeth the Scripture after his iugglyng manner, to make fools
stark mad.

But it is not so here, for both the demonstrations are certain, both the
proffe of the love of God and his law by the love of my neighbor, and the
proof of the love of my neighbor by the love of God and his law. For when ij.
things are so joined together that they can not be separated, then the
presence of the one utters the presence of the other, whether soever thou
first see. As if I see fire I am sure that The love of God and the love of my
neighbor are in seperable.
some thing does burn. And if I smell burning, I am certified of fire. Even so
the love of God is the cause why I love my neighbor: and my love toward my
neighbor is the effect of the love of God. And these two loves are ever
inseparable, so that whether soever I feel first, the same certifieth me of
the other.

John calls the love of a ma^s neighbor the deeds of love, after the Hebrew
speech, as to help at need. For the deed declares what the man is within.
Neither can my love to God and faith be seen to the world, save thorough the
works. And by the works does Christ command us to judge. So that if a man
have evil works and Works set forth (...) declare faith.
continues therein, he loves not God nor knows God, no though he call him
self master doctor, or Gods vicare. Neither understands he Gods word for
all his high divinity: but is in all his preaching an hypocrite, a false
Prophet, and a liar though his preaching please the world never so well.
Nevertheless a man is certified that he loves God yer he come at the work,
by the testimony of the spirit which is given him in earnest. The spirit
says Paul. Roma. viij. testifies unto our spirit, that we be the sons of
God: and then it testifies that we believe in God: for thorough faith are we
sons. And then it certifieth me that I love God. For faith and love are
inseparable. The spirit thorough faith certifieth my conscience that my sins
are forgiven, and I received under grace and made the very son of God, and
beloved of God. And the^ naturally mine heart breaks out into the love of God
again, and I seek how to utter my love, and to do God some pleasure. And
because I can neither do service or pleasure unto his own person, my neighbor
is set before me, to do God service and pleasure in him and to be to him as
Christ is to me, because he is my brother, bought with Christ's To do good to
my neighbor is to do God good service.
blood as I am. And I consent unto that law, and love it yer I come at the
deed, and long after the deed. And then when I love my neighbor in the deed
according to this law; I am sure that I love him truly. Or else if I examined
not my love by this law, I might be deceived. For some love their neighbors
for pleasure, profit, glory and for their doing service only, as our
spirituality love us, and of that blessed love, do their busy cure to keep us
in darkness: which love is a sign that a man hates God and his neighbor
thereto, and loves him self only. But Gods law is that I should abstain from
mine own pleasure and profit, and become my neighbors servant, and bestow
life and goods upon him, after the example of Christ. Wherefore if I love my
neighbor out of the love of Christ and after the example of his law, I am sure
that I love him truly.

And his commandments are not grievous. For all that is borne of God
overcomes the world: and this is the victory that overcomes the world,
eue^ our faith.

To love is not paynefull: the commandments are but love: therefore they be
not grievous, because love makes the commandments easy. The service that a
mother does unto her child is not grievous, because she loves it. But if she
should do the tenth part unto one that she loved not, her A goodly similitude.
heart would brast for impacience. Unto a man that fetleth not the love of
Christ it is as impossible to keep the commandments, as for a Camel to
enter through the eye of a nedle. But impossible is possible and easy to,
where the love of Christ is believed. For it follows, All that are borne of God
overcome the world.
all that are borne of God, overcome the world: that is to wete, the devil
which is the ruler of the world: and his disciples which have their lust in his
governance and consent to sin, both in body and soul, and give themselves
to follow their lusts without resistance: and their own flesh which also
co^senteth to sin, do they overcome with all that moves to sin. By what
victory? Verily through faith. For if our souls be truly underset with sure
hope and trust, and continual meditations of Christ's love, showed already,
and of succor, help and assistence that is promised in his name, and with the
continual memory of their examples which in times past have sought through
faith and overcome: the^ were it impossible for the world with all his
chinalrie, to overthrow us with any assault or with any ordinance that he
could shoot against us. For if yt faith The conquestes of faith.
and meditation were ever present in us, then love thorough that faith, should
easly overcome what so ever peril thou could imagine. Read in the Bible and
see what conquestes faith has made, both in doing and also sufferyng. The xj.
chapter unto the Hebrews ministers the examples aboundauntly. How mighty was
David when he came to fight, and how overcame he thorough faith? And how
mightyer was he when he came to sufferyng, as in the persecution of the king
Saul? In so much that when he had his most mortal enemy king Saul, that twelfe
years persecuted him against al right, in his hands to have done what he
would with him, through faith he touched him not, nor suffered any man else to
do, though he was yet all his life a man of war and accustomed to murder and
shedyng of blood. For he believed that God should aduenge him on his unrighteous
king, upon whom it was not lawful to adue^ge himself.

Who is it that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the
son of God?

If to believe that Jesus is Gods son be to overcome the world, then our
Prelates understand not what belief is, which affirm that the best belefe and
the worst man in the world may stand together.

This is he that came by water and blood Jesus Christ: not by water only but
by water and blood. And it is the spirit that testifies, because the spirit
is truth. For there are three that bear witness in heaven. The father, the
word, and the holy ghost And these three are one. And there are three which
bear record in earth the spirit water and blood, and these three are one.

Christ came with three witnesses, Christ had three witnesses.
water, blood and spirit. He ordained the Sacrament of Baptism to be his
witness unto us. And he ordained the Sacrament of his blood, to be his witness
unto us. And he powers his spirit into the hearts of his, to testify and to
make them feel that the testimony of those two Sacraments are true. And the
testimony of these three is, as it after follows, that we have everlasting
life in the son of God. And these iij. are one full witness sufficient at the
most that the law requires, which says ij. or. iij. at the most is one full
sufficient witness. But alas we are ^t taught to take the Sacraments for
witnesses, but The true doctrine of the Sacraments is away from us.
for imageseruice, and to fore the work of them to God, with such a mind as
the old heathen offered sacrifices of beasts unto their Gods. So that what
soever testifies unto us, that we have everlasting life in Christ, that mouth
have they stopped with a leuended maunchet of their Pharisaicall gloses.

If we receive the witness of me^, the witness of God is greater. For this is
the witness that God has borne of his son.

If the witness of men, so they be iij. is to be received, much more is the
witness of God to be received. Now the witness that these iij. water blood,
and spirit bear, is the witness of God and therefore the more to be believed.

He that believes in the son of God has witness in him self. And he that
believes not God, makes him a liar, because he does not believe the witness
that God has testified of his son. And this is the witness, that God has
given us eternal life: and this life is in his son. He that has the son,
has life. And he that has not the son of God, has not life.

The true beleuers have the testimony of God in their hearts, and they
glorify The faithful have the true witness of God in their hearts
God witnessing that he is true. They have the kingdom of God with in them
and the temple of God within them, and God in that temple, and have the son
of God and life through him. And in that temple they seek God, and offer for
their sins ye sacrifice of Christ's blood, and the fat of his mercies in
the fire of their prayers, and in the confidence of that sacrifice go in boldly
to God their father.

But the unbelievers blaspheme God and make him false, describyng him after the
complexion of their lyieng nature. And because they be so full stuffed The
unfaithful, worship God in imageseruice and outward Popery.
with lies that they ca^ receive nothing else, they look for the kingdom of
God in outward things and seek God in a temple of stone where they offer
their imageseruice and the fate of their holy deeds: in confidence whereof they
go into God and trust to have everlasting life. And though the text testifies
that this life is only in the son, yet they will come at no son shynyng
but as unclean birds hate the light.

These things have I written unto you that believe in the name of the son of
God, that ye may know that ye have everlasting life, and that ye may believe in
the son of God.

They that have the faith of Christ's The Papists have not the faith of the
Apostles neither do they know and therefore they rail on it.
Apostles, know that they have eternal life. For the spirtte testifies unto
their spirits that they are ye sons of God. Roma. viij. and received under
grace. Our Doctors say they can not know whether they be in the state of
grace: therefore they have not the faith of the Apostles. And that they know it
not, is the cause whey they rail on it.

This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask ought according to
his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask,
we know that we have the petitions that we ask of him.

Christ says Math. vij. ask and it shall To ask in Christ's name what it is.
be given you. And John in the. xvj. chap. Whatsoever ye ask in my name, he
shall give it you. To ask in yt name of Jesus Christ and according to his will
be both one, and are nothing else but to ask the things contained in the
promises and Testament of God to us ward, that God will be our father and care
for us both in body and in soul: and if we sin of frailty and repent
forgive us, and minister us all things necessary unto this life, and keep us
that we be not overcome of evil etc. Now if they which believe in Christ are
bold with God that he hears them and sure that he grants their petitions,
it follows that they which are not bold that he hears them nor sure that
he grants their petitions, do not believe in Christ. They that go to dead
Saints with which they never speak nor wotte where they be, be not bold Such
as lack faith in Christ wander they wot not whether.
that God will hear them, nor sure that he will grant their petitions therefore
they believe not in Christ. That they be neither bold nor sure, appears first
by their deeds, and secondarely by their own confession: for they say what
should God hear them or grant them ought seeing they be unworthy, yea and they
confirm it with a similitude of worldly wisdom, that they should be put
back for their malapertnes, and fare the worse, as if a rude fellow should
break up into the kings privy chamber, and press unto his own person
without knockyng or speaking to any other officer: so that they believe it an
augmentyng of sin, to go to God themselves in the co^fide^ce of Christ's
blood as he bad them.

If a man see his brother sin a sin not unto death, let him ask: and he
shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto
death, and for it say I not that thou should pray. All unrighteousness is
sin. And there is a sin not to death.

Whatsoever sin we see in yt world, let us pray and not despair. For God is
the God of mercy. But for the sin The sin to yt death.
to death which is resistyng grace and fightyng against mercy and open
blasphemyng of the holy ghost, affirmyng that Christ's miracles are dove in Beel
sabub, and his doctrine to be of the devil, I think that no Christen man if
he perceive it, can otherwise pray, then as Paul prayed for Alexander the
Copersmith the. ij. Timo. the last: that God would reward him according unto
his works. They that go back again after they know the truth, and give them
selves willingly to sin, for to follow it and persecute the doctrine of truth
by profession to maynteine falshead for their glory and vau^tage, are
remedylesse: as ye may see. Hebr. vj. and. x. Bala^ so sinned: the false
Prophets in the old Testament so sinned the Phariseis so sinned: Alexander so
sinned: and now many so sin: following their pride and covetousness.

We know that all that are borne of God sin not: But he that is borne of God
keeps him self, and the wicked touch him not.

As thou read in the third chapter, they that are borne of God can not All
that are borne of God c^ not sin.
sin, for the sede of God keeps them. They cannot cast of the yocke of
Christ and consent to continue in sin nor defy his doctrine, nor persecute
it, for to quench it or to maynteine any thing contrary unto it. But in
whatsoever captivity they be in yt flesh, their hearts yield not: but imagine to
break lowse and to escape, and fly away, unto the party and standart of
their Lord Christ. And as men of war they ever keep The armor of a Christen
man.
watch and prepare them selves unto war, and put on the armure of God, the
which is Gods word, the shield of faith, the helmet of hope, and harness the^
selves with the meditation of those things which Christ suffered for us, and
with the examples of all the Saints that followed him, and think earnestly
that it is their part to live as purely as the best and come after as fast as
they can. And yet in all their works they knowledge them selves sinners unsay
nedly, as long as one jot of the perfectnes that was in yt deeds of Christ,
is lackyng in theirs. So that the devil can not touch the hearts of them,
neither with pride or vain glory of pure living, neither to make them
consentyng unto the flesh in gross sins, if at a time they be taken tardy
and ketche a fall. Whatsoever chance them, the devil can ketch no hold of
them, to keep them still in captivity: but they will break lose again, and
repent and do penance, to chaste their flesh that they come no more under yt
devils claws.

We know that we be of God, and that the whole world is set on mischief.

They that believe: that is to say, put their trust in Christ, see both their
own glorious state in God, and also the wretched estate of yt world in their
wickedness. But the world as they The world sees not the things that are of
God.
know not God, nor the glory of the sons of God: Even so they see not their
own miserable estate in wickedness and damnation under the law of God, but the
worse they are, the bolder they be and the surer of themselves, the further
from repentance and the more standing in their own conceits, for the
darkness that is in them. And therefore say our Doctors, a man can not know
whether he be in the state of grace or no nor needs to care therefore. And
they be therefore the blind leaders of the blind.

We know that the son of God is come, and has given us understanding to know
him that is true: and we be in the truth thorough Jesus Christ. He is very God
and eternal life.

Christ is all and the fountain of all Christ e^e(...) is the founteine and
fulness of all good gifts.
and of his fullness receive we all. And as he powers the gifts of his grace
upon them that believe in him so he gives them understanding to know the very
God, and that they be in the very God and that they have obtained that through
his purchasing: and leaves not his sheep in darkness. And the same Jesus
Christ is very God and eternal life: God and eternal life was he from the
beginning, and became man for the great love he had to us, for to bring us unto
his eternal life. And he He that seeks any other way to eternal salvation,
then by Christ, shall never come there.
that has any other way thither, whether his own works or other men's, or
works of ceremonies, or sacraments, or merits of Saints, or of ought save
Jesus Christ only, shall never come thither. The world seith the Pope, and
seith that they which be in the Pope, be Lords in this world: and therefore
they care to be in the Pope: but whether they be in God or not they say, it is
not necessary to know.

Little children beware of Images.

Serve none Image in your hearts. Idolatry is Greek, and the English is
imageseruice: And an Idolater is also Idolatry.
Greek, and the English an imageseruaunt. Idolater.
Be not Idolaters nor commit Idolatry, that is be none imageseruauntes, nor
do any imageseruice, but beware of seruyng all manner images. And think it not
enough to have put all the Images of false Gods out of the way, if ye now set
up the Image of very God and of his true Saints in their rowmes, to do the
same service unto the^, which ye did unto the other. For ye may do as strong
imageseruice unto the Image of GOD and of his As great Idolatry may be
committed to the Image of a Saint as was by the Gentiles committed unto Idols.
Saints, as unto the Images of false Gods: yea thou may commit as great
Idolatry to God, and yet before none outward Image, but before the image which
thou have fained of God in thine heart, as thou may before an outward Image of
the devil. The Jews in the temple of God where was none Image of God, did as
great imageseruice to God, as the heathen unto their false Gods: yea the Jews
in doing to God the things which God commanded them, did commit worse
Idolatry and sinned more grievously against God, the^ y^ heathen did in
offering unto their false Gods, which thing to be true, the Prophets
testify. For when the Jews did their ceremonies and sacrifices: the meaning
and signification lost, and the cause forgotten which God ordained them for: to
flatter and please God with the gloriousnes of the deed in it self, and to
purchase ought of him for the costlynes or propernes of the present, what other
made they of God in their imagination, then a child whom if he cry or be
displeased, men still with a popet, or if we will have him to do ought, make
him an horse of a stick.

If thou bring a bolle of blood and set it before God, to flatter him, to
Gross worshyppyng of God.
stroke him, and to cory and claw him, as he were an horse, and imaginest that
he has pleasure and delectation therein, what better make thou of God, then a
butchers dog? If thou bring the fat of thy beasts to God, for the same
imagination, what make thou of God, but one that had need of grease to
grease shoes or smeere boots? If thou burnest blood and fat together to
please God, what other thing do thou make of God, then one that had lust to
smell to burnt flotesse?

God commanded a courtesy of all Ceremonies.
first ripe fruits to be offered: not to be an imageseruice, but a witness and
testimony that he had made them grow, that the people should not forget God, but
think on his benefits and love him and of love keep his commandments. And
likewise if any had sinned against Gods law God commanded that they should
repent, and then bring a beast and fly it and offer the blood and yt fat of
the inwardes: not to make satistaction, but to testify only that God was
pleased, and had of his mercy at the repentance of the heart forgiven the
sin. The sacrifices of blood Sacrifices
were ordained partly to be a secret prophesyeng of Christ's bloudshedyng, and
partly to be a testimony and certifiyeng of our hearts, that the sin was
forgiven and peace made between us and God, and not to be a satisfaction. For
that were imageseruice, and to make an image of God.

We read in the hystories that when a love day or a truce was made between man
and man the couenauntes were rehearsed: and upon that, they sl^e beasts in a
memorial and remembrance of the appointeme^t only. And so were the
sacrifices signs and memorials only, that God was at one with us. For the Jew
could believe no The Jews could believe nothing with out tokens.
words though an angel had spoken, without a toke^, as we hold up our
fingers and clappe hands. And likewise whatsoever they were bid to do, they
must have had a toke^ of remembrance, though it had been but a ring of a rush,
as it is to see in the Bible.

Even so our images, relics, ceremonies Sacraments and ceremonies were
ordained only for remembraunces.
and Sacraments were our memorials and signs of remembrance only. And he
that gives in his heart more to them then that, is an imageseruaunt. But when
God is a spirit and worshypped in the spirit, we for lack of faith, being
spiriteles, and having no power to desire of God any spiritual thing, serve God
in the body, with imagined service, for such worldly things as our profession
is to defy. Who kisseth a relic or beholds an image for love of the
Saints living, to follow the example? Nay we will fast the Saints Euens and go
barefoote unto their Images and take pain, to obtain greater pleasure in the
world, and to purchase worldly things as to maintain the body in lusts that
the soul can not once wish for power to Idolatry.
live as the Saints lived or to long for the life to come. If we went in
pilgrimage to keep the remembrance of the Saints living in mind for our
example, and fasted and went barefoote to tame yt flesh that it should not lust
after such worldly things which we now desire of the Saints, then did our
fasting and pilgrimage going serve us, yea and the Saint were yet our servant
to edify us in Christ with the remembrance of his life left behind, to preach
and to provoke us to follow the example. For our bodily service can be no
service unto the Saint which is a spirit, except we imagine him to be an Image.

Saint White must have a chese once in a year, and that of the greatest sort
which yet eats no cheese. It shall be given unto the poor in her name say
they. First that to be false we see with our eyes. Seco^darely Christ
commands We ought to be fra^ke and to distribute to our poor brethren, such
as God has sent us.
to care for the poor, and give the^ all that we may spare in his name: saying
that what is given them is given him, and what is denied them is denied him. If
the law of Christ be written in thine heart, why distributest thou not unto thy
brethren with thine own hands, in the name of thy Savior Jesus Christ which
dyed both for them and thee, as thou have vowed and promised to him in thy
Baptism.

It is given unto Saint Whites Supersticious Popery are Idolatry.
chapleyne. Saint Whites chapleyne has a stipend already sufficient for a
Christen man, and ought to receive no more, but therewith to be content and to
be an example of despising covetousness. Moreover that Priest that would follow
the living of Jesus Christ as Saint White did, and teach his Parisshens to do
so, were a right chaplayne of Christ. And they have a promise to be fead and
clothed as well as ever was their master in the name of Christ. And so be they
and ever were, so that they need not to beg in the name of saint White.

What shall Saint White do for thee again for that great cheese? (for I wot
well it is not given for naught) Give abundance of milk to make butter and
chese? All we that believe in Christ, are the sons of God, and God has
promised to care for us, as much as we care for the keepyng of his
commandments, and has promised that we shall receive what soever we ask to
his honor and our need, of his hand. If then we be the natural sons of God,
why run we from our father, a beggyng to Saint White? Saint White sends no
rain upon the earth nor makes In all our needs we must call upon God in
the name of Jesus Christ and he will ^eare us.
the sun shine thereon nor makes the grass grow. Neither is there any Gods
word that he will now do so much for us at her request. But God has promised
if we will keep his laws to do so much for us at our own request, for the
blood of his son Jesus. What other thing then is thy serving of Saint White,
the^ lack of faith and trust to Godward in Christ's name, and a false faith of
thine own fayning to Saint Whiteward for thine imageseruice or seruyng her
with cheese, as though she were a bodily thing? And like disputation is it of
all other saints.

And as we worship the Saints with imageseruice to obtain temporal things:
even so worship we God. And as the Jews turned their sacrifices unto
imageseruice which were given the^ of God to be signs to move them to serve
God in the spirit: Even The mass as the pope uses it is damnable Idolatry.
so have we our Sacraments. And for an example let us take the Mass, which
after the Popes abuse of it, is the most damnable imageseruice that ever was
sense it began. Christ according to the testimony of the Scripture, made in
the days of his flesh, satisfaction for all the sin of them that had or
should be leave in his name, and obtained that they should be the sons of God,
and taken from under the damnation of the law and put under grace and mercy,
and that God should henceforth deal with them as a mercyful father deals
with his children that run not away from him, no though ought be at a time We
must ever cleave unto God and submit our selves to his mercy.
chanced amiss: but tarry ever still by their father and by his doctrine, and
confess their trespass, and promise henceforth to enforce them selves unto
the uttermost of their power that they do no more so negligently. And this
purchase made he with the things which he suffered in his flesh, and with the
strong prayers which he prayed. And to keep his Testament, euerfresh in mind,
that it were not forgot, he left with us the Sacrament or sign of his body and
blood, to strength our faith and to certify our conscience, that our sins
were forgeuen as soon as we repented and had reconciled our selves unto our
brethren: and to arm our souls, through the continual remembrance of
Christ's death, unto the despisyng of the world, mortifying of the flesh, and
quenching of the lusts and thyrst of worldly things. As they which have daily
conversation with the sick and miserable and are present at the deaths of
men, are moved to defy the world, and the lusts thereof.

And as Christ had institute the Sacrament The mass at the first was a
declaration of Christ's passion.
of his body and blood, so the Bishops in process of time, set signs of all
the rest of Christ's passion, in the ornaments and gestures of the Mass: so
that the, whole passion was daily described before our eyes, as though we had
presently looked upon it.

And that thou may see for what cause they came unto the Sacrament, they
reconciled them selves each one to other, if any man had offended his brother,
ere they were admitted into the congregation or body of Christ to be members of
each other knit together in one faith and love to eat the Lords Supper (as
Paul calls it) for the congregation 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 10. and 12. Ephe. 1.
thus gathered is called Christ's body and Christ their head. And likewise if a
man had been taken in open sin, against the profession of his Baptism, he was
rebuked openly. And he confessed his sin openly, and asked forgiveness of God
and of the congregation whom he had offended with the example of his evil
deed: and took penance as they call it, of the congregation, What penance
was.
that is, certain discret iniunctio^s how he should live and order him self
in time to come and came his flesh, for the avoiding of the said vice: because
his confession and repentance which he seemed to have, should be none
hypocrisy, but an earnest thing. For if an open sinner be found among us, we
must immediately amend him or cast him out of the congregation with defiaunce
and decestation of his sin, as thou seist how quickly Paul cast out the
Corinthian, that kept his fathers wife, and when he was warned would not amend.
Or else if we suffer Grievous sin, not passed upon.
such to be among us unrebuked, we can not but at once fall from the constancy
of our profession, and laughe and have delectation and consent unto their
sin, as it is come to pass throughout all Christendom. Which is ten
thousand times more abominable then if we sinned our selves. For the best man
in the world that hates sin, might at a time through ^rayltie of the flesh
be drawn to sin. But it is altogether deuilish and a sure token that the
spirit of Christ is not in us, nor the profession of our Baptism written in
the heart, if we laughe at an other man's sins, though we our selves abstain
for shame or fear of hell or for what so ever imagination it be, or that we be
so blind that we see no other sin in us, then our outward deeds. And the
penance Discipline used in the primative Church.
enjoined frail persons that could not rule them selves was under the
authority of the Curate, and the sad and discrete me^ of the Parish, to relesse
part or all at a time if necessity required, or when they saw the person so
grown in perfectnes that he neded it not. But see whereto it is now come, and
after what manner our holy father that is at Rome dispenses withal together?
And see what our Bishops officers do, and where the authority of the Curate
and of the Parish is become. If in ten Parishes round there be not one learned
and discret to help the other, the^ the devil has a great swing among us:
that the Bishops officers that dwell so far of, must abuse us as they do. And
if within a Diocese or an whole land, we can find no shift, but that the Pope
that dwells at the devil in hell, must thus mock us, what a stroke think
ye has Satan among us? And all is because we be hipocrites and love not the
way of truth, for all our pretending the contrary.

And to begin with all, they said Co^fiteor, The description of the parts of
the mass
and knowledged them selves to be sinners. And then the Priest prayed in
general for all estates and degrees and for increase of grace, and in
especially, if need required: unto which prayers the people harkened and said
Amen. And then the Gospel and glad tydinges of forgiveness of sins was
preached, to styre our faith. And then the Sacrament was ministered for the
confirmation of the faith of the Gospel, and of the Testament made between God
and us of forgiveness of sins in Christ's blood, for our repentance and
faith: as ye see how after all bargaynes there is a sign thereof made, either
clapping of hands, or bowyng a penny or a groate, or a piece of gold, or giving
some earnest, and as I showed you, how after a truse made they slew beasts,
for a confirmation. And then men departed, every man to his business, full
certified that their sins were forgiven, and armed with the remembrance of
Christ's passion and death for the mortifieng of the flesh all the day after.
And in all these was neither the Sacrament, neither other ceremonies of the
Mass, imageseruice to God, and holy deeds to make satisfaction for our sins,
or to purchase such worldly things as the Gospel teaches us to despise. And
now compare this use of the Mass to ours, and see whether the Mass be not
become the most damnable Idolatry and image service that ever was in the world.

We never reconcile our selves unto The abominable use of the mass
our brethren which we have offended: we receive unto our Mass open sinners,
the covetous, the extorcioners, the adulter, the backbiter, the common whore,
and the whore keeper, which have no part in Christ by yt Scripture, ye such are
suffered to say the Mass, as the use is now to speak, ye such are we compelled
with the sword to take for our pastors and Curates of our souls and not so
hardy to rebuke them. Neither do they repeut and confess their sins, and
promise amendment, or submit them selves to wholesome iniunctio^s for the
aduoyding of such sins, and tamyng of their flesh. We say Confiteor and
knowledge our selves to be sinners in Latin, but never repent in English. The
Priest prays in Latin and says evermore a still Mass, as we say. For though
he sing and streine his throat to cry ^onde unto them that be by him, yet as
long as no man woteth what he prays, or whether he bless or curse, he is
doubt and spechles. And so in that part we abide frutelesse and untaught how to
pray unto God. And the Gospel is song or said in Latin only and no preaching
of repentance toward the law and faith toward Christ had. And therefore abide
we ever faythles and without studieng to amend our liuinges. And of the
ceremonies of the Mass we have no other imagination, then that they be an holy
service unto God which he receaueth of our hands and has great delectation in
them and that we purchase great favor of God with them, as we do of great men
here in the world with gifts and prese^tes. In so much that if y^ Priest said
Mass without those vestimentes or left the other ceremonies undone, we should
all quake for fear, and think that there were a sin committed enough to
sink us all and that the priest for his labor were worthy to be put in the
Popes purgatory and there to be brent to ashes.

And of the very Sacrament it self we know no other thing then that we come
thither to see an vnseable miracle, which they affirm, the angels in heaven
have no power to do: Sed solis Presbyteris, quibus sic congruit, vt suma^t nec
dent caeteris: how that bread is turned The abuse of the Sacrament.
into the body, and wine into the blood of Christ, to mock our seeing,
sinellyng, feelyng and tasting, which is a very strong faith, and more a great
deal (I think) then the text compels a man to. Nevertheless it were
somewhat yet, if they had been as lonyng, kind, careful and diligent to teach
the people to repent, and to believe in the blood of Christ for the forgeuenes
of their sins unto the glory of the mercy of God and of his excedyng love to
us, and unto the profit of our souls, and upon that preaching to have
ministered the Sacrament as a memorial, remembrance, sign, token, earnest,
the seal of an obligation and clappyng of hands together for the assurance
of the promise of God, to quiet, stablish and certify our consciences, and to
put us out of all waueryng and doubt that our sins were forgeuen us and God
become our father and at one with us, for which cause only Christ ordained it:
as they were zealous and fervent to maintain the opinion of so turning bread
and wine into the body and blood of Christ, that it cease to be bread and
wine in nature, unto their own glory and profit, without help of Scripture,
but with sutle Arguments of sophistry and with crafty wiles. First with
taking away half the sacrament, Half of the Sacrament kept from the lay
people.
lest if the people should have drunk the blood of Christ, they should have
smelled the savor and felt the taste of wine, and so have been to weak to
believe that there had been no wine. And secondarily when they durst not rob
the people of all the Sacrament, they yet took away common bread, and imagined
maunchetes which may not be handled, and in sight have no similitude of bread,
and in eating very little ^ast, if there be any at all. And thyrdly whom they
could not catch with those crafts, against him they disputed with the sword.
For when they had taken away the signification and very intent of the
Sacrament, to stablish the ear confession, their merits, deservings,
justifying of works and like inue^tion unto their own glory and profit: what
had the Sacrament been, if they had not made of that opinion an article of the
faith? But now when they have destroyed for the nonce that faith which
profited, and have set up with wiles, sutiltie, falsehead, guile and with
violence, that faith which profits not, we have good cause to judge and
examine the doctrine of the spirits, whether it be grounded upon Gods word or
no.

But I ask, wherefore we believe that Christ's body and his blood is there
present? verily as many heads as many wits, every man has his meaning. We
take pains to come thither to see strange holy gestures, whereof, say they to
their shame, who knows the meaning ye or of the other disguising: and to
hear strange holy voices, whereof, say I also that no man knows the
understanding: and to look upon the Sacrament: and all to obtain worldly
things, for that service. Why may not a man desire worldly things of God?
Yes, we ought to ask of God only sufficiency of all worldly things, as we do
spiritual things, yet not for bodily service, when God is a spirit: but for
the goodness and mercy of our father and for the truth of his promise and
deseruinges of his son. And so when we do men bodily service, we ought to
look for our wages of God: lest if he move not the hearts of our masters, we
be shrewdly paid: and like wise when we lend or bargen, we ought to desire
God for payment, lest through our negligence he forget us, and the
appointementes be not truly kept. Some there be yet, that ask heaven: but for
bodyly service, which is like abomination.

But who comes thither with repentance and faith, for to obtain
forgiveness of his sins, and with purpose to walk in the life of penance
for the taming of the flesh that he sin no more? and to stablish his heart in
that purpose, and to arm his soul against all that move to the contrary, and
when he goes home is certified in his conscience, through that sign and
token, that his sins are forgeuen him: as Noe was certified by the sign of
the rain bow that the world should no more be ouerrunne with water: and as
Abraham The fruitful and profitable doctrine of the Sacraments are kept from
us.
was certified by the sign of Circumcision that God would fulfill to him and
his offspring all the mercies that he had promised: and as Abraham Genesis. xv.
when he asked a sign to be sure that he should possess that land of Canaan,
was certified through the sign that God gave him thereof, and of the four
hundred years that his posterity should be in thraldom in Egypt and of their
deliverance: and as Gedeon was certified by the sign of his Flese, of the
victory that God had promised him: and as many other that believed in God, were
certified by the signs that God gave them, of the promises which God made
them? Verily no man. For our Prelates which lay for them selves, compelle
intrare, compel not us to enter into any such feast nor will suffer any such
meat to be set before us: for fear of ouerthrowyng the foundation of their
false buildyng whereof springs so great glory and profit unto them, which
foundation to build their lies upon, they could never have laid, except they
had first thrust this doctrine of our souls health clean out of knowledge.
And as soon as they had blinded y^ light, they became leaders in darkness:
and made of the Mass imageseruice: so that the strange holy gestures, and the
strange holy voices, and strange holy vestures, with all other strange holy
ceremonies, must be meritorious works to deserve long life, health, riches,
honor, favor, dignity and aboundau^ce of all that we have, sorsakyng our
baptism, and to arm us from bearing of the cross with Christ. And they have
made of it a pill of two contrary operations: so that the same medicine that
preserves our souls from purgatory, does purge the body of house, lands,
rentes, goods and money, that it is made as bare as Job and as baulde as a
Cout. And the light that rebukes them, they call seditious, that it makes the
subjects to rise against their Princes. Which thing the hypocrites laid
sometime unto the Prophets, as ye may see in the old Testament. And at last
they laid it unto Christ's charge, as ye may see in the Gospel, and to the
charge of the Apostles, as ye may see in the Acts. But at all such times, the
hypocrites them selves styrred up such a sword to maintain their falsehead,
that evermore a great part of the world perished through their own mischeuous
incensing and prouokyng Princes to battle.

These hypocrites laid to Wickle^^es charge (and do yet) that his doctrine
caused insurrection: but they, to quench the truth of his preaching, slew the
right king, and set up iij. false kings a row: by which mischeuous sedition,
they caused half England to be slain up, and brought the Realm into such
ruin and desolatio^ that M. More could say in his Vtopia, that as Englishmen
were wont to eat sheep, even so their sheep now eat up them by whole Parishes
at once, besides other inconueniencies that he then saw. And so the hipocrites
say now likewise: that gods word causes insurrection: but ye shall see shortly
that these hypocrites them selves after their old wont and examples in
que^chyng yt truth that utters their iugglyng, shall cause all realms
Christen to rise one against an other, and some against them selves. Ye shall
see the^ run out before the year come about, that which they have been in
bruwyng (as I have marked) above this dosen years. etc.

This much I have said because of them that deceive you, to give you an
occasion to judge the spirits.
The Testament of master William Tracie Esquier, expounded by William Tyndall.
Wherein thou shall perceive with what charity the Chaunceler of Worceter
burned, when he took up the dead carcass and made ashes of it after it was
buried. 1535.
To the Reader.
THou shall understand most dear Reader that after William Tyndall was so
Iudasly betrayed by an Englisheman, a Scholar of Louayne, whose name is
Philippes, there were certain things of his doing found: which he had
intended to have put forth to the furtheraunce of Gods word among which was
this Testament of M. Tracie expounded by him self, whereunto was annexed, the
exposition of the same of John Frithes doing and own hand writing, which I
have caused to be put in Printe, to the intent that all the world should see
how earnestly the Cannonistes and spiritual lawyers (which be the chief
rulers under Bishops in every Dioces, in so much that in every Cathedral
Church the Deane Chau^celor and Archdeacon are commonly doctors or Bachelors
of law) do endeavor them selves justly to judge and spiritually to give
sentence according to charity upon all the acts and deeds done of their
Diocessanes, after the example of the Chaunceler of Worceter, which after M.
Tracie was buried (of pure zeal and love hardly) took up the dead carcass
and burnt it, wherefore he did it, it shall evidently appear to the Reader in
this little treatise, read it therefore, I beseech thee and judge the spirits of
our spiritualitie, and pray that the spirit of him that raised up Christ, may
once inhabit them, and mollify their hearts, and so illumine the^, that they
may both see and show true light, and no longer to resist God nor his truth.
Ame^.

The Testament it self. In the name of God. Ame^.
I William Tracie of Todyngton in the County of Gloceter Esquier, make my
Testament and last will, as hereafter follows.

First, and before all other thing, I commit me unto God, and to his mercy,
trustyng without any doubt or mistrust, that by his grace and the merits of
Jesus Christ, and by the virtue of his passion, and of his resurrection, I have
and shall have remission of my sins, and resurrection of body and soul,
according as it is written Job. xix. I believe that my redemer lives, and that
in the last day I shall rise out of the earth, and in my flesh shall see my
Savior, this my hope is laid up in my bosom.

And as touching the wealth of my soul, the faith yt I have taken and
rehearsed, is sufficient (as I suppose) without any other man's work, or works.
My ground and my belefe is, that there is but one God and one medaitour
between God and man, which is Jesus Christ. So that I do except none in
heaven nor in earth to be my mediator between me and God, but only Jesus
Christ, all other be but petitioners in receiuyng of grace, but none able to
give influence of grace. And therefore will I bestow no part of my goods for
that intent that any man should say, or do, to help my soul: for therein I
trust only to the promise of God, he that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, and he that believes not shall be damned, Mark, the last Chapter.

And touching the burying of my body, it avails me not what be done thereto,
wherein S. Augustine De cura agenda promortuis says, that they are rather the
solace of them that live the^ the wealth or comfort of the^ that are departed,
and therefore I remit it only to the discretion of mine executours.

And touching the distribution of my temporal goods, my purpose is by the
grace of God, to bestow them to be accepted as fruits of faith, So that I do
not suppose that my merit be, by good bestowyng of them, but my merit is the
faith of Jesus Christ only, by which faith such works are good according to
the words of our Lord, Mat. xxv. I was hongry, and thou gave me to eat, and
it follows, that ye have done to the least of my brethren ye have done to me,
etc. and ever we should consider the true sentence, that a good work makes
not a good man, but a good man makes a good work, for faith makes the man
both good and righteous, for a righteous man lives by faith. Romans i. and what
soever spryngeth not out of faith, is sin. Romans xiiij.

And all my te^porall goods that I have not given, or delivered, or not given
by writing of mine own hand bearing the date of this present writing I do leave
and give to Margarete my wife, and to Richard my son which I make mine
executours, witness this mine own hand, the x. day of October, in the xxij.
year of the reign of king Henry the eight.

Tyndall.
NOw let us examine the I description of God.
parts of this Testament sentence by sentence. First to commit our selves to
God above all, is the first of all precepts, and the first stone in the
foundation of our faith, that we believe and put our trust in one God, one all
true, one almighty, all good, and all merciful, cleaving fast to his truth,
might, mercy, and goodness, surely certified and fully persuaded, that he is our
God, yea ours, and to us all true, without all falshead and guile and can not
fail in his promises. And to us almighty, that his will can not be let to
fulfill all ye truth that he has promised us. And to us all good, and all
merciful, what soever we have done, and how soever grievously we have
trespassed, so that Jesus Christ the only way to his father.
we come to him the way that he has appointed, which way is Jesus Christ
only, as we shall see folowingly. This first clause then, is the first
commandment, or at the least, the first sentence in the first commandment,
and the first Article of our Creed.

And that this trust and confidence in the mercy of God is thorough Jesus
Christ, is the second article of our Creed confirmed and testified throughout
all scripture. That Christ brings us into this grace, Paul proves. Romans v.
saying. Justified by faith we are at peace with God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord: by whom we have an entryng in unto this grace in which we stand. And
Ephesians. iij. By whom says Paul we have a bold entering in, thorough the faith
that is in him: and in the second of the said Epistle, By him we have an
entering in unto the father, and a little before in the same Chapter, he is our
peace. And John in the first Chapter. Behold the Lamb of God which takes
away the sin of the world, which sin was the bush that stopped the entryng
in, and kept us out, and the sword wherewith was kept the entryng unto the tree
of life from Adam and all his ofspryng.

And in the second of the first of Peter, which bare our sins in his body,
and by whose stripes we are made whole. By whom we have redemption through his
blood even the forgeuenes of our sins, Collos. i. and Ephesians. i. And Romans
iiij. He was delivered for our sins and rose again for our iustifyeng.

And concerning the resurrection, it The belefe of the resurrection is an
article of our faith
is an article of our faith, and proved there sufficiently, and that it shall be
by the power of Christ, is also the open Scripture.

John vj. This is the will of my father which sent me, that I lose nothing of
all that he has given me, but that I raise it up again in the last day, and
again, I am the resurrection. John. xi.

That this lively faith is sufficient to Faith is sufficient to justify us.
justification without addyng to of any more help, is this wise proved: The
promiser is God of whom Paul says, Romans viij. If God be on our side what
matter makes it who be against us, he is thereto all good, all merciful, all
true, and all mighty, wherefore sufficient to be believed by his oath, more over
Christ in whom the promise is made has received all power in heaven and in
earth. Math. the last.

He has also a perpetual Priesthode, and therefore able perpetually to save.
Heb. vij.

And that there is but one mediator Christ the only mediator between God and
man.
Christ, as Paul. i. Tim. ij. And by that word understand an attonemaker, a
peace maker and brynger into grace and favor, having full power so to do. And
that Christ is so, is proved at the full. It is written John. iij. The father
loves the son, and has given all into his hand.

And he that believes the son has everlasting life and he that believes not
the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God bydeth upon him. All things
are given me of my father. Luke x. And all who soever call on the name of the
Lord shall be saved. Acts. ij. Of his fulness have we al received, Ioh. i. There
is no other name given to man in which we must be saved. Acts. iiij. And
again, unto his name bear all the Prophets record, that by his name shall all
that believe in him receive remission. Acts. x. In him dwells all the fulness
of God bodily. Collos. ij. All what soever my father has are mine. John. xvj.
What soever ye ask in my name that will I do for you John. xiiij. One Lord,
one faith, one Baptism, one God and father of all, which is above all, through
all and in you all. Ephesians. iiij. There is but one whose servant I am, to do
his will. But one that shall pay me my wages, there is but one to whom I am
bound, Ergo, but one that has power over me to da^ne or save me, I will add
to this Paul's Argument Balat. iij. GOD swear unto Abraham. cccc. year before
Argume^to prouyng our salvation in Christ.
the law was given, that we should be saved by Christ. Ergo, the law given
cccc. years after can not disanull that covenant, So dispute I: Christ when
he had suffered his passion, and was risen again and entered into his glory,
was sufficient for his Apostles, without any other mean or help, Ergo, the
holiness of no Saint since has diminished ought of that his power, but that he
is as full sufficient now: for the promise is as deeply made to us as to them.
Moreover the treasure of his mercy was laid up in Christ for all that should
believe, yer the world was made, Ergo, nothing that has happened sense has
changed the purpose of the inunuariable God.

Moreuer to exclude the blind imagination The false faith of the down falling
sinner.
falsely called faith, of them that give them selves to vice without
resistance, affirmyng, that they have no power to do otherwise, but that God
has so made them, and therefore must save them, they not entendyng or purposing
to mende their living, but sinning with whole consent and full lust, he
declares what faith he means ij. manner of ways. First by that he says, who
soever believes and is Baptized, shall be saved. By which words he declares
Faith in the promise between ^^od and(...)our souls.
evidently, that he means that faith, that is in the promise made upon the
appointment between God and us, that we should keep his law to the uttermost of
our power, that is, he that believes in Christ for the remission of sin, and
is Baptized to do the will of Christ, and to keep his law, of love, and to
mortify the flesh, that man shall be saved: and so is the imagination of these
swyne that will not leave wallowyng the^ selves in every mire and puddell,
clean excluded: for God never made Gods promises have couenau^tes annexed un
to them, the breakers* ^herof are ^luded (...) the promise.
promise but upon an appointment or covenant under which who soever will not
come can be no partaker of the promise. True faith in Christ, gives power to
love the law of God: for it is written John the first, He gave them power to be
the sons of God in that they believe in his name. Now to be the son of God,
is to love righteousness, and hate unrighteousness and so to be like thy father.
Have thou then no power to love the law? so have thou no faith in Christ's
blood. And Romans iij. We set up or maintain the law thorough faith, why so? for
the preaching of faith ministers the spirit. Gala. iij. And ij. Cor. iij. And
the spirit lowseth the bands of Satan, and gives power to love the law, and
also to do it.

For says Paul Romans viij. if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus dwell in
you, then will he that raised up Jesus quicke^ your mortal bodies by the
means of his spirit dwelling in you.

A well (will thou say) if I must profess An objection of our adversaries
against justification by faith.
the law and work, Ergo, faith alone saves me not. Be not deceived with
sophistry: but withdraw thine ears from words and consider the thing in
thine heart. Faith justifies thee: that is brings remission of all A
compendious declaration of our justification by faith.
sins, and sets thee in the state of grace before all works, and gets
thee power to work yer thou could work, but if thou will not go back
again, but continue in grace, and come to that salvation and glorious
resurrection of Christ, thou must work and join works to thy faith in will,
and deed to, if thou have time and leisure, and as often as thou fallest set thee
on thy faith again without help of works. And although when thou art
reconciled and restored to grace, works be required: yet is not that
reconcilyng and grace the benefit of the works that follow: but clean
contrary, that forgeuenes of thy sins and restoryng to favor deserve the
works that follow. Though when the king (after that sentence A similitude of an
earthly king pardonyng a condemned person.
of death is given upon a murderer) has pardoned him, at the request of some
of his friends, works be required of him that he henceforth keep the kings
laws, if he will continue in his graces favor, in which he now stands, yet
the benefit of his life proceeds not of the deseruyng of the works that
follow, but of the kings goodness, and favor of his fre^des, yea and that
benefit and gift of his life deserve the works that follow. Though the father
chastise the child, yet is the child no less bound to obey, and to do the
will of the father. If when the father pardons it, the works that follow
deserve that favor, then must the works that followed the correction have
deserved favor also: and then was the father unrighteous to chastise it. All
what soever thou art able to do, to please God with all, is thy duty to do,
though thou had never sinned, if it be thy duty how can it then be the
deseruyng of the mercy and grace that went before? Now that mercy, was the
benefit of God thy father through the deserving of yt Lord Christ, which has
bought thee with y^ price of his blood.

And again when he says that he purposes to bestow his good, to be accepted
as fruits of faith, it is evident that he means that living faith which
professes the law of God, and is the mother of all good works, yea and nurse
thereto.

An other ca^illation which they might make in the second part, where he
admits no other mediator but Christ only, nor will give of his goods, to
bind any man to any feigned obseruaunce for the help of his soul, when he
were whole in the kingdom of Christ clean delivered both body and soul from
the dominion of Satan (as the Scripture testifies all that dye in Christ to
be) is this, they will say, that he held that none should pray for him save
Christ, and that we be not bound to pray one for an other, nor ought to desire
the prayers of an other man: that he excludes, in that he says all other be
but petitioners. By The prayer of the faithful for his brother taking effect,
thanks therefore mu^^ wholly be attributed to the geuer.
which words he plainly confesses that other may and ought for to pray, and
that we may and ought to desire other to pray for us: but means that we may
not put our trust and confidence in their prayer, as though they gave of them
selves that which they desire for us in their petitions, and so give them the
thanks, and ascribe to their merits that which is given us in the name of our
master Christ, at the deservings of his blood. Christ is my Lord, and has
deserved and also obtained power, to give me all that can be desired for me.
And all that other desire for me: this is desired in Christ's name and given at
the merits of his blood. All the honor then, trust, confidence, and thanks,
perteyne to him also. Some will happily say, how should I desire an other to pray
for me, and not trust to his prayer. Verily even as I desire my neighbor All
our help is from above, for man can not help ^ut when God prepares his heart.
to help me at my need, and yet trust not to him. Christ has commanded us
to love each other. Now when I go or desire help, I put my trust in God, and
complain to God first, and say, Lo father, I go to my brother, to ask help
in thy name, prepare the heart of him against I come: that he may pity me and
help me for thy sake etc. Now if my brother remember his duty and help me, I
received it of God, and give God the thanks which moved the heart of my brother
and gave my brother a courage to help me and wherewith to do it, and so has
help me by my brother. And I love my brother again and say: Lo father I went
to my brother in thy name, and he has help me for thy sake: wherefore O father
be thou as mercyful to him at his need, as he has been to me for thy sake, at
my need. Lo now as my brother did his duty when he help me, so do I my duty
when I pray for him again: and as I might not have put my trust and
confidence in my brothers help, so may he not in my prayers. I am sure that
God will help me by his promise, but am not sure that my brother will help me,
though it be his duty, so am I sure that God will hear me what soever I ask
in Christ's name by his promise, but am not sure that my brother will pray for
me, or that he has a good heart to God.

No. But the Saints in heaven cannot but pray and be hard, no more can the
Saints in earth, but pray and he heard neither. Moses, Samuel, David, Noye,
Elias, Elizeus, Esayas, Daniell, and all the Prophets prayed and were heard:
yet was none of those wicked that would not put their trust in God, according
to their doctrine and preaching partaker of their prayers in the end. And as
damnable as it Praying to Saints is damnable.
is for the poor to trust in the riches of the richest upon earth, so damnable
is it also to leave the covenant made in Christ's blood, and to trust in the
saint of heaven. They that be in heaven know the elect that trust in Christ's
blood and profess the law of God and for them only pray: and these wicked
Idolaters which have no trust in the covenant of God, nor serve God in the
spirit nor in the Gospel of Christ's blood, but after their blind
Imagination, chosing them eueryman a sundry Saint to be their Mediator, to
trust to and to be saved by their merits, do the Saints abhor and defy.
And their prayers and offeringes, are to the Saints abhor the^ that pray
unto them.
Saints as acceptable and pleasant, as was the prayer and the offering of
Simon Magus to Peter. Act. viij.

Moreover the Saints in their most combraunce are most comforted and most able
to comfort other, as Paul testifies. i. Cor. i. In so much that S. Stephen
and S. James prayed for them that slew them, S. Martine preached and comforted
his desperate brethren even unto the last breath, and likewise (as stories make
mention) did innumerable mo. Yea and I have known of simple unlearned persons
and that of some that were great sinners which at the hour of death have
fallen flat on the blood of Christ, and given no rowme to other men's either
prayers or preachynges: but have as strongly trusted in Christ's blood, as ever
did Peter or Paul, and have thereto preached it to other, and exhorted other so
mightly that an angel of heaven could not mende them. Who then should resist
God that he might not give the same grace to M. Tracie, which was a learned
man, and M. Tracie studious in S. Austen.
better seen in the works of S. Auste^. xx. year before he dyed, then ever I
knew Doccour in England, but that he must then faint and shrincke, when most
need is to be strong, and fear the Popes Purgatory and trust to the prayer of
Priests dearly paid for? I dare say that he prayed for the Priests when he
dyed, that God would convert a great many of them, and if he had known of any
good man among them that had neded, he would have given, and if he had known
of any lack of priests, he would have given to maintain more: But now sense
there be mo then enough, and have more then every man a sufficient living, how
should he have given them but to hyre their prayers of pure mistrust in Christ's
blood? If robbyng of widows houses under pretense of long prayers be damnable.
Math. xxiij. Then is it damnable also for widows to suffer them selves to be
robbed by the long pattering of hypocrites, through mistrust in Christ's blood:
yea and is it not damnable to maintain such abomination? Now when this
da^uation is spread over all, how can we give the^ that have enough already, or
how can they that have enough already take more under the name of praying, and
not harden the people more in this da^uable damnation.

And concerning the burieng of his body he allegeth S. Austen, neither is there
any man (think I) so mad to affirm that the outward pomp of the body should
help the soul. Moreover what greater sign of infidelity is there, then to
care at the time of death, with what pomp the carcass shall be carried to the
grave? He denies not but Burials must be ce^^brated honorably for the hope of
our resurrection.
that a Christen man should be honorably buried namely for the honor and hope
of the resurrection, and therefore committed that care to his dear executours
his son and his wife, which he wist would in that part do sufficient, and
leave nothing of the use of the country undone, but the abuse.

And that best awyng of a great part of his goods (while be yet lived) upon
the poor, to be thankful for the mercy received, without bying and sellyng
with God, that is, without byndyng those poor unto any other appointed One
must pray for an other, and one help an other.
prayers then God has bound us already, one to pray for an other, one to help
an other, as he has helped us, but patiently abidyng for the blessings that
God has appointed unto all manner good works, trustyng faithfully to his
promise, thanking (as ye may see by his words) the blood of Christ for the
reward promised to his works and not the goodness of the works as though he
had done more then his duty, or all that: And assigned by writing unto whom an
other part should be distrubuted, and geuyng the rest to his executours, that
no strife should be, which executours were by right the heirs of all that was
left to the^: These things I say are signs evident A true Christian fears
not the Popes Purgatory.
not only of a good Christen man, but also of a perfect Christen man, and of
such a one as needed not to be aghast and desperate for fear of the paynfull
pains of Purgatory, which who so fears as they feign it can not but utterly
abhor death: seeing that Christ is there no longer thy Lord, after he has
brought thee thither, but art excluded from his satisfaction, and must satisfy
for thy self alone, and that with sufferyng pain only, or else taryeng the
satisfieng of them that shall never satisfy enough for them selves, or gapyng
for the Popes pardons, which have so great doubts and dangers, what in the
mind and intent of the graunter, and what in the purchaser, yer they can be
truly obtained with all due circumstau^ces, and much less certitude that they
have any authority at all. Paul thristed to be dissolved and to be with
Christ: Stephen desired Christ to take his spirit, the Prophets also desired
God to take their souls from them, and all the Saints went with a lusty
courage to death, neither fearyng or teaching us to fear any such crudelitie.
Where has the Church then gotten authority to bind us from being so
perfect, from having any such faith in the goodness of God our Father, and Lord
Christ, and to make such perfitues and faith of all heresies the greatest?

Salomo^ says in the xxx. of his Proverbs, three things are insaciable and
the fourth says never, It is enough. But there is a fifth called dame anarice,
with as greedy a gutte; as meltyng a Covetousness pretely described.
maw, as wide a throat, as gapyng a mouth, and with as rauenyng teeth as the
best, which the more she eats the hongryer she is. An unquiet evil never at
rest, a blind monster and a surmisyng beast, fearyng at the fall of every
leaf. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis, auri sacrafames? What does not that
holy hunger compel them that love this world inordinatly, to commit? might
that devils belie be once full, truth should have audience, and words be
constcued a right, and taken in the same sense as they be meant.

Though it seem not impossible happily that there might be a place, where the
souls might be kept for a space, to be taught and instruct: yet that there
should be fitch a Iayle as they Iangle, and such fashions as they feign, is
plain impossible and repugnaunt to the Scripture: for when a man is translated
veterly out of the kingdom of Satan, and so confirmed in grace that he can
not sin, so burning in love that his lust can not be plucked from Gods will,
and being partaker with us of all the promises of God and under the
commandments: what could God grants all things to the faithful.
be denied him in that deep innocence of his most kind father, that has
left no mercy vnpromised, and askyng it thereto in the name of his son Jesus,
the child of his hearts lust, which is our Lord and has left no mercy
undeserved for us? namely when GOD has sworn that he will put of
righteousness, and be to us a father, and that of all mercy, and has slain his
most dear son Jesus, to confirm his oath.

Finally seeing that Christ's love takes all to the best, and nothing is here
that may not be well understood (the circumstances declaryng in what sense all
was meant) they ought to have interpreted in charitably, if ought had been
found doubtefull or seemyng to sound amysse. Moreover if any thing had been
therein that could not have been taken well, yet their part had been to have
interpret it as spoken of idleness of the head, by the reason of sickness,
for as much as the man was virtuous, wise, and well learned, and of good fame,
and report, and sound in the faith while he was a live. But if they say he was
suspect when he was a live, then is their doing so much the worsse, and to be
thought that they feared his doctrine when he was a live, and mistrusted their
own part, their consciences testifyeng to them that he held no other doctrine
the^ that was true, seeing they then neither spoke nor wrote against him, nor
brought him to any examination. Besides that, some merry fellows will think,
that they ought first to have sent to him to wit whether he would have revoked,
yet they had so despitefully burnt the dead body, that could not answer for
it self, nor interpret his words, how he meant them, namely the man being of
so worshypfull and ancient a blood. But here will I make at end desiryng yt
reader to look on this thing with indifferent eyes, and judge whether I have
expounded the words of this Testament as they should seem to signify, or not,
judge also whether the maker thereof seem not by his work both virtuous and
godly: which if it so be, think that he was the worsse because the dead body
was burnt to ashes, but rather learn to know the great desire that hypocrites
have to find one craft or other to dase the truth with, and cause it to be
counted for heresy of the simple and unlearned people which are so ignorant
they can not spy their sutteltie, it must needs be heresy that touches
Papists burn both quick and dead if they touch their roten sores.
any thing their rotten byle they will have it so who soever say nay: only the
eternal God must be prayed to night and day to amend them in whose power it
only lies. Who also grant the^ once earnestly to thirst his true doctrine
contained in the sweet and pure fountains of his Scriptures and in his paths
to direct their ways.

AMEN. Here ends the Exposition of Master Tracies will, by William Tyndall.
A fruitful and godly treatise expressing the right institution and usage of
the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ. Compiled by William Tyndall.
TO understand the pith of y^ Sacraments, how they came up, and the very
meaning of them, we must consider diligently the manners and fashions of the
Hebrews, which were a people of great gravity and sadness, and earnest in all
their doings, if any notable thing chanced among them, so that they not only
wrote, but also set up pillars, and marks, and diverse Writings and monuments
preserve the memory of notable doings. Gene. 32.
signs to testify the same unto their posterity, and named the places where
the things were done, with such names as could not but keep the deeds in
memory. As Jacob called the place where he saw God face to face, Pheniell,
that is, Gods face. And the place where the Egyptians mourned for Jacob seven
days, the people of the country called Abell Miram, (that is) Gene. 50.
the lamentation of the Egyptians, to the intent that such names should keep
the gestes and stories in mind.

And likewise in all their couenaunts they not only promised one to another
and swear thereon, but also set up signs and tokens thereof, and gave the A sure
hand of all couena^tes amongst the Jews.
places names to keep the thing in mind. And they used thereto such
circumstaunces, protestations, solemn fashions and ceremonies, to confirm the
co^enau^tes, and to testify that they were made with great earnest advise and
deliberation, to the intent that it should be to much shame, and to much
abomination both before God and man, to break them ever after.

As Abraham Genes. 21. when he made a covenant of peace with Abimeleck Gene.
21.
king of the Philistines, after they had eaten and drunk together, and sworn,
he put seven Lambs by them selves, and Abimelecke received them of his hand,
to testify that he there had dug a certain well, and that the right thereof
pertained to him. And he called the well Beer Seba: the well of Swearyng, or
the well of sene^, The well of swearing or the well of seven.
because of the oath, and of the seven lambs, and by that title did Abraham his
children challenge it many hundred years after. And when Jacob and Laban made
Gene. 31.
a coue^aunt together Genes. 31. they cast up an heap of stones in witness,
and called it Giliad, the heap of witness, A heap of stones was a sufficient
band for all couenauntes.
and they bound each other for the^ and their posterity, that neither part
should pass the heap to the others countreyward, to hurt or conquer their
land: and Laban bound Jacob also, that he should take no other wives besides
his daughters, to vex them. And of all that covenant, they made that heap a
witness, calling it the witnesseheape, that their children should enquire the
cause of the name, and their father should declare unto them the history. And
such fashions, as they use among them selves, did God also use to themward in
all his notable deeds, whether of mercy in deliueryng them, or of wrath in
punishing their disobedience and tra^sgression, in all his promises to them,
and couenauntes made between them and him.

As when after the general floude Gene. 9.
God made a covenant with Noe and all mankind and also withal living
creatures, that he would no more drown the world he gave them the rain bow
The rainebow a pledge of Gods promise.
to be a sign of the promises, and for to make it the better believed, and to
keep it in mind for ever, he said, when I bring clouds upon the earth, I will
put my bow in the clouds, and will look on it, and remember the everlasting
covenant made between God and all living creatures.

And Abram, (which signifies an Gene. 17.
excellent father) he named Abraham, the father of a great multitude of people,
because he had promised to make him even so, and that his seed should be as
the Stars, and as the sand of the Sea innumerable, and that name gave The
blessing of God to Abraham.
he him as a seal of the promise to confirm it, and to strengthen the faith
of Abraham and his posterity, and to keep the promise in mind, that they
might have wherewith to bind God and to conjure him, as Moses and the holy
Prophets ever do, holdyng him fast to his own promise, and binding him with
his own words, and bringyng forth the obligation and seal thereof, in all
times of necessity and temptation.

After that he made a covenant with Gene. 17.
Abraham to be his God, and the God of his posterity, and their shield and
defender, and Abraham promised for him and his seed to be his people, and to
believe and trust in him, and to keep his commandments, which covenant God
caused to be written in the flesh of Abraham, and in the males of all his
posterity, commaundyng the males to be Circumcised the eight day, or to be
slain: which Circumcision was the Circumcision the seal of Gods covenant
with us.
seal and obligation of the said covenant, to keep it in mind, and to
testify that it was an earnest thing, whereby God challenged them to be his
people and required the keeping of his laws of them, and faith to trust in him
only and in no other thing for help and succor, and all that can be nedeful
and necessary for man, And whereby he condemned the disobedient and rebellious,
and punished them, and whereby also the godly challenged him to be their God and
father, and to help and succor them at need, and to minister all things unto
them according to all his promises.

And though the seal of this covenant were not written in the flesh of the
females, yet it served the womankynd, bound them to God, to trust in him, and
to keep his laws, as well as it did the men children, and the womankynd not
Circumcised in the flesh, yet through the help of the sign written in the
males loving Gods law, and trustyng wholly in him, were truly Circumcised in
the heart and soul before God. And as the maid children beleuyng and loving
God, whereunto the outward Circumcision bound them, were truly Circumcised
before God: Even so the males having the flesh Circumcised, yet not beleuyng,
nor loving God (whereunto the outward Circumcision bound them) were
uncircumcised before God, and God not bound to them, but had good right thereby
to punish them: so that neither Circumcision, or to be uncircumcised, is ought
worth (as S. Paul says Romans 2.) save for the keeping of the law Romans 2.
for if Circumcision help not to keep the law, so serves it for naught, but
for to condemn. And as the womankind uncircumcised were in as good case, as
the males that were Circumcised: even so the infa^tes of yt mayde^s, which dyed
uncircumcised, were in as good case, as the infantes of males which dyed
Circumcised. And in as good case by the same rule were the men children that
dyed before the eight day: or else let them tell, why the covenant made between
God and Abraham saved the manchilde as soon as it was borne, yea as soon as
it had life in the mothers womb for the covenant, that God would be God of
Abraha^s seed, went over the fruit, as soon as it had life and the^ there is
no reason, but that the covenant must needs pertayne to the males, as soon as
to the females. Wherefore the covenant must needs save the males unto the
eight day and then the covenant was, that the ruler should slay the males
only, if their fre^des did not Circumcise them, not that the Circumcision
saved them, but to testify the covenant only. And then it follows, that the
infantes that dye unbaptized of us Christen, that would baptize them at due
time, and teach them to believe in Christ, are in as good case as these that dye
Baptized, for as the covenant made to the Gods promise recheth to all Abraham's
posterity.
faith of Abraham, went over his seed, as soon as it had life, and before the
sign was put on them: even so must needs the covenant made to all that
believe in Christ's blood, go over that sede as soon as it has life in the
mothers womb, before the sign be put on it. For it is the covenant only,
and not the sign that saves us, though the sign be commanded to be put on
at due time, to stir up faith of the covenant that saves us: and instead
of Baptism to us is as Circumcision was to the Jews
Circumcision came our Baptism: where by we be received into the Religion of
Christ and made partaker of his passion, and members of his Church, and
whereby we are bound to believe in Christ, and in the father through him, for
the remission of sins, and to keep the law of Christ, and to love each other,
as he loved us, and whereby (if we thus believe and love) we calling God to be
our father, and to do his will, shall receive remission of our sins through
the merits of Jesus Christ his son, as he has promised. So now by baptism
we be bound to God, and God to us, and the bond and seal of the covenant is
written in our flesh, by which seal or writting God chalengeth faith and love,
under pain of just damnation. And we (if we believe and love) challenge (as it
is above rehearsed) all mercy, and what soever we need, or else God must be an
untrue God. And God has bound us Christen men to receive this sign for our
infirmities sake, to be a witness between him and us, and also to put this sign
upon our children not bindyng us to any appointed time, but as it shall seem to
us most convenient, to bring them to the knowledge of God the father, and of
Christ, and of their duty to God and his law. And as the Circumcised in the
flesh and not in the heart, has no part in Gods good promises: even so they
that be baptized in the flesh, and not in heart has no part in Christ's
blood. And as the Circumcised in the heart and not in the flesh, had part in
Gods good promises: Even so a Turk unbaptized (because he either knows not,
that he ought to have it, or cannot for tyra^nie, if he believe in Christ, and
love as Christ did and taught, then has he his part in Christ's blood.

And though the outward Circumcision, by the which God chalengeth them to do
him service, yea whether they would or not, and by the which they were taught
to believe in God, and in the seed of Abraham, that should come, and bless all
the world, and to love the law, and certified them also on the other side, of
the good will of God, if they so did, thought (I say) it was the chief and most
principal sign, (for so are such ceremonies called in the Hebrew, because
they yet signify other things, then appears to the outward sense,) yet God
gave the^ diverse other signs, both to stir up faith in the promise made
the^, and also to keep the benefit of the mercy of God in mind.

As in Exodus. 13. all the first borne both of man and beast are sanctified and
Axod. 13.
dedicated unto the Lord for a remembrance, that the Lord sieve all the first
borne of Egypt. This did God command to be observed, that their children
should ask why: and he commanded their fathers to teach their children, when
they should ask what was meant thereby.

Also Exodus. 20. the Saboth is commanded Exodus 20.
to be observed, to be a sign, and to testify that God had sanctified, and
dedicated or chosen them, that they should be his people to keep his laws, and
that he would be their God to keep them, and to testify also, that God has
created all things of naught in six days, and rested the seventh.

Also Nume. x. where almighty God Nume. 10.
commanded the children of Israel to blow a trompet, when they entered in to
battle against their enemies, and promised that they should be thought upon
before the Lord their God, and saved from their enemies.

And likewise in their solemn feasts God commanded them to blow trompettes
over the sacrifice, to be a sign unto them, that God would think on them
according to the covenant, made in the blood of the sacrifice. Lo the
tro^pets were commanded to be blown, not that God delighted in the noise of
the trompettes, but in the faith of his people.

Also Nume. 15. the Israelites are commanded to make yelow gardes upon Nume.
15.
their garments, to put them in remembrance to keep his commau^dements, that
they should do nothing after their own imagination, nor observe any fashion,
that pleased their own eyes. Whereby ye see that ceremonies are not a service
to God, but a service to man, to put him in mind of the covenant, and to
stir up faith and love, which are Gods spiritual sacrifices in man's heart etc.

And Iehosua 4. when the water of Joshua. 4.
Iordane had given place, to go over by dry ground, God commanded Iehosua, to
take xij. stones out of the bottom of Jordan, and to pitch them on the land, to
keep the deed in memory, and commanded when the children should ask what
the stones meant, that their father should teach them.

In the 3. of kings. 11. Ahiah the 3. Reg. 11.
Prophet tare the clock of Jeroboam in xij. pieces, and bad him take x. in
sign, that he should reign over x. of the tribes.

In 4. Reg. 13. Eliseus made Iohab 4. Reg. 13.
king of Israel open a window Eastward toward the Syrians, and made him to
shoot out an arrow, and said it is the arrow of victory thorough the Lord
against the Syrians: and that did he to stablishe the kings faith in God, that
he should with Gods help overcome the Syria^s, and then he bad the king smite
the ground with an arrow, and the king smote it thrice where by he prophesied
and certified the king that he should thrice overcome the Syrians.

And Esayas in his xij. chapter was Esaias. 12.
commanded to go naked and barefoote, to be a sign that Egypt, in who^ the
children of Israel trusted, should be so carried away of Nabuchadnezzar.

And Ieremias 27. comes among Ierem. 27.
the people with bonds and chains put about his neck, and shows them unto
all the kings of those countries, in token that they must be under the yoke of
Nabuchadnezzar king of Babilo^. God so used to give them signs, that they
would not believe without signs, as ye may see not only in the old Testament,
but also in the new. How the Jews asked Christ saying, what sign do thou
show us? etc.

And Paul. 1. Cor. 1. the Jews asked signs.

Also Zacharias John Baptistes father asked a sign, and the aungel gave Luke.
1.
it him.

Christ's mother also asked a sign, and the angel gave her Elizabeth to
Luke. 1.
a sign.

And unto the shepheardes gave the Luke. 2.
angel a sign, as ye read, Luke. 2. And Exodus xij. God gave the children
Exodus 12.
of Israel the sign of Pesah, which we call the Easter Lamb, for a sign that
the time was come, that the children of Israel should be delivered out of
Egypt. And therefore God sent Moses and Aaron to them, which wrought many
miracles among them, to stir up their faith to the promise of that
deliverance, against the manifold and sore temptations to the contrary,
thorough the most straight and grievous bondage and mercylesse oppression. And
in that most specially, that Pharao was waxed ten times worse to them, after
the coming of Moses and Aaron the^ before, yet in the last night in which he
had promised to smite the first borne of Egypt, both of man and of beast, and
Exodus 12.
to deliver them, he commanded them to take for every house a Lamb, or a
kidde, and to slay them, and to strike the door posts with the blood, to be
a sign to them, and a seal of the promise that God would deliver the^ that
night, both out of the hands of Pharao, and also from the smittyng of the
angel, that went about all Egypt and slew the first borne in every house.

And this sign Pesah, beside that it The institution of yt Pa^ch all lamb.
was a seal of the promise to be delivered the same night, to stablish ye
faith, and commanded to be observed ever after yearly, to keep the benefit
in memory, it was also a very prophecy of the passion of Christ, describyng
the very manner and fashion of his death, and the effect and virtue thereof
also. In whose stead is the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ come, as
Baptism in the room or stead of Circumcision.

To see how Christ was prophesied and described therein, consider and mark, how
that the kidde or Lamb must be without spot or blemish, and so was Christ
only of all mankind, in the sight of God and of his law. It must be taken up
the tenth day of the first month, which is ye x. day of ye first new mane in
March, for so count they their months from the new Moon, and there began in
(...) time of March with us. And the same day came Christ to Jerusalem, there
to be offered, and to suffer his passion.

It must be offered the xiiij. day of the same month at night, and the same
hour began Christ his passion, he was the same hour betrayed, and persecuted
all night, and taken in the morning early. The fear of death was the same
hour upon him, neither slept he any more after, but went immediately, as soon
as he had comforted his Disciples, into the place where he was taken, to abide
his persecuters, where also he sweet water and blood, of very agony conceived
of his passion so nighe at hand.

The blood stricken on the posts Christ's death figured by the Paschall lamb.
saved the^, that they were not plagued with the Egyptians, and delivered them
out of the captivity of Pharao. And the blood of Christ stricke^ on the posts
of our consciences, delivers us from the captivity of Pharao the devil, and
smitting of his angels etc. There might not a bone thereof be broken, no more
were there of Christ's, though the ij. that were hanged with him, had either of
them his legs and his arms broken.

Moreover that it was a very prophecy of ye death of Christ, and of the virtue
of his passion, it is made the more manifest by the words of Christ himself.
Luke. 22. for the night before his Luke. 22.
passion, when he had eaten Pesah with his Disciples, he said, I will no more
^ate of it henceforth, till it be fulfilled in the kingdom of GOD. As who
should say. This memorial, which we yearly have hitherto observed, was once
fulfilled in the kingdom of this world, when your fathers were delivered out
of bondage and servitude of the Egyptians. But it has yet an other Christ's
exposition of yt Paschall lamb.
signification hitherto unknown unto you, which must be fulfilled spirituallie
in the kingdom of God, by my passion that is at hand, and blood that now shall
shortly be shed, by the which ye shall be delivered out of the power of Satan,
sin, and hell, and made heirs of the kingdom of heaven. Neither was it the
lambs blood, that delivered you then. For what regard has God in the blood
of sheep and calves? but the blood of Christ, (whom that lamb figured, and
described his innocence, pureness, and obedience to his father, and compassion
to mankind ward, whose feeble nature he had put on with all the infirmities of
the same, (save sin) did then deliver you, to bring you to the faith of this
deliverance, and to make you through faith partakers thereof.

Many things there be in the Scripture The Scriptures of God (...) full of
hi^den mysteries.
which have a carnal fulfillyng, even there where they be spoken, or done,
and yet have an other spiritual signification, to be fulfilled long after in
Christ and his kingdom, and yet never known till the thing be done. As the
Serpent of Brass, which Moses Nume. 21. John. 3.
hanged up in the wilderness, though it took effect carnally in the wilderness,
yet it so describes the liftyng up of Christ upon the cross, and the virtue
of his passion, that no tou^g could better declare it to make the heart feel it.

If ye ask, why they may not be known, till they be done, and what prophecy
may help: I answer. If men did understand them before they were done, they
would endeavor to let the fulfillyng of them, and when the signification is
fulfilled, then to see how plainly it was described in the Scripture, does
excedyngly confirm the faith thereof, and make it better to be understand.

And when this Pesah was fulfilled (...) the (...)was spiritually fulfilled in
the kingdom of heaven.
spirituallie in the kingdom of heaven, by the death and blood ^heddyng of
Christ, it ended there. And in yt room thereof (concerning that spiritual
signification) came the sign of the Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Savior Christ, as Baptism came instead of Circumcision, things more easy,
and less (...) ^t^t, o^ of yt Sacrament of yt body and b^ of our (...) Christ.
paynefull and tedious to be observed, and more gentle to provoke and entise
the Heathen. For as the lamb describes the death of Christ to come, and the
manner of his passion, by which we should be delivered: even so does the
ceremony of the body and blood of The Paschall lamb (...) the death and sacr^
(...) (...)together.
Christ testify unto us, that he has given him self to death for us, and
redeemed us already, if we believe, and cleue (...) to the profession of our
Baptism,(...)th^^in, or will (if any tempest had (...) us out of the right
course) return to the right way again.

This to be so, the words of the Institu^^d declare, which are these. 1. Cor.
11. The Lord Jesus the night that he 1. Cor. 11.
was betra^ed, took bread and gave thanks and brake it and said: Take, eat,
this is my body that shall be given for you: this do in remembrance of me. And
likewise he took the cup when Supper was done, saying. This cup is the new
Testament in my blood, this do as often as ye shall drink it, in the
remembrance of me. Here ye see by these words that it was ordained to keep
the death of Christ in mind, and to testify, that his body was given and his
blood shed for us. And Luke. 22. This is my body that is given for you: do this
in remembrance of me. And this cup is the new Testament in my blood, which
shall be shed for you. Lo The chief and only cause of the institution of the
Sacrament.
here ye see again that it was instituted to keep yt death of Christ in mind,
and to testify wherefore he dyed, eue^ to save us from sin, death, and hell,
that we should seek none other means to be delivered with: for there is none
other name for us to be saved by, but only by the name of Jesus. Acts. 4.
Acts. 4.
And as the children of Israel stong of the fiery Serpents, could have none
other remedy to save them from present death, then to go and behold the brazen
Serpent hanged up by Moses in the wilderness, which lookyng on only healed
them: Even so if the styng of 1. Cor. 15.
death which is sin have wounded their soul, with the workyng of the law in
the consciences, there is none other remedy, then to run to Christ, which
shed his blood hangyng upon the Cross, and to his everlasting Testament, and
merciful promise, that it was shed for us, for the remission of our sins. If
thou be stong with conscience of sin, and the Cockatrice of thy poisoned
nature, has beheld her self in the glass of the righteous law of GOD, there
is none other salve for remedy, the^ to run to Christ immediately, and to the
father through him, And to say: In all afflictions we must reso^^ to Christ.
father I have sinned against thee and thy godly, holy, and righteous law, and
against my brother, whom I ought of all right to love for thy sake, as well as
my self, forgive me O father for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, according to
thy most merciful promises and Testament, and I will ask my brother
forgiveness (if the peace I mean be not made already) and will make to my power
such satisfaction to him as shall seem right in his eyes, if he be reasonable
or as the congregation shall assign, or faithful men thereunto appointed by
the congregation, or such as I and he will agree upon, and will endeavor my
self to do so no more with the help of thy grace. And will submit my self We
must be ordered by the congregation.
to the wholesome ordinance of the congregation, according the doctrine of thy
son Jesus and of his faithful Apostles. For there is none other name Only by
the name of Jesus Christ comes our salvation. Acts. 4.
given under heaven, whereby we shall be saved, but only the name of Jesus.

Hereof ye see, that the Sacrament is an absolutio^ of our sins, as often as
we receive it, where it is truly taught and understand, and received a right.

Hereof ye see also, that as the Hebrews The nature of the Sacrament of the
S^ppe^ of our Lord.
wrote their stories, in couenau^ts and signs, giuyng their signs such names
as could not but keep them in mind: so God the father did follow the example
of the people (or they followyng him) and commanded his Sacraments and
ceremonies were first ordained by God to keep his couenantes and promises in
remembrance.
promises, couenaunts, and prophecies to be written in gestures, signs, and
ceremonies, geuyng them names, that could not but keep his couenauntes in
mind. Even so Christ wrote the covenant of his body and blood, in bread and
wine, geuyng the^ that name, that ought to keep covenant in remembrance.

And hereof ye see, that our Sacraments Sacraments are as stories to keep
Christ's couenaunts in memory.
are bodies of stories only, and that there is none other virtue in the^, the^
to testify and exhibit to the senses and understanding the couenauntes and
promises made in Christ's blood. And here ye see that where the Sacraments or
ceremonies, are not rightly understand there they be clean unprofitable.

And as the Circumcision in the flesh, Circumcisio without faith auayled noching
their hearts still uncircumcised, hating the law of God and beleuyng in their
own imaginations, were Circumcised to their damnation.

And as the Baptized in the flesh Baptism with out faith avails nothing.
only, the heart still unclean, neither beleuyng in Christ for the forgeuenes
of their sins, neither loving their neighbor for Christ's sake, are Baptized
also unto their greater damnation. (For though God have right to al me^,
because he has created and made man: yet to all such persons by reason of the
sign and badge, and of their own consent, grant, and promise, he has more
right to the calling of them to the keepyng of his law, if they trust in him
only, or to damn them, because when they know their duty, or might if they
would, (the sign mouyng them and giuyng them an occasion to ask the rather)
and yet do it not.) Eue^ so all that come to the Sacrament for any other
purpose, then it was ordained and instituted for, (that is to say) to seek
absotion of their sins, with a set purpose to sin no more, as nigh as
they(...)to call to me (...) ye benefit of the passion of Christ, with yt
meditation to weaken the flesh, and to strength the spirit Against her, and to
give thanks again, (that is to say) to call to mind, how much he is bound
to love his neighbor, to help his need, and to (...) his infirmity and to
forgive him, (...) have offended, and desire forgeuenes, promising to amend,
whereunto Christ binds all that will be partakers of his blood. All such as are
not thus prepared, come to their greater damnation. I pass over with silence
the wicked (...) damnable doctrine of these servants of Mammon, which for
lucre pervert the true use of the Sacrament, and hide it from the people for
their gain, teaching it to be a sacrifice, instituted of God to help the
souls of the dead in Purgatory, and that it will make men rich, and bring them
to such promotion, as Christ never promised his Disciples, but forbad it them.

Some will say: This Sacrament Baptism and the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood are both necessary.
needed not, Baptism is enough, Baptism, is a receiuyng into Religion, and
there is the couenauntes made, what we shall do, and what we shall have. And
baptism is a sign, whereby God has right to us, and we to God, and to Christ,
and whereby every man has right to call other to do their duties, and to
rebuke them that will not. Neither our salvation so greatly stands in that or
any other Sacrament, that we could not be saved without them, by preaching the
word only. Nevertheless God has written his will, to have his benefits kept
in memory, to his glory and our benefit, and namely this benefit of all
benefits, wherein The Sacrament of Baptism what it works in us.
only the pith of our salvation rests: therefore though the effect of it be
signified by Baptism, and though we be baptized to believe in yt death of
Christ, and to dye with him, by the mortifieng of the flesh: yet does this
Sacrament The Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, what it works in us.
through yt rehearsing of the covenant, and breakyng of the bread, and powryng
out of wine, much more lively express the whole story, and kept it better in
memory, by daily repeatyng thereof, and has more might and vehemency to heal
the conscience stong with fresh sin. For the nature of man is so weak, so
feeble, and so frail, that he can not but sin, as there is no man that lives
and sins not. Mark. 10.


And when he is so fallen then the law looks upon him with so terrible The
law drives a sinner to desperatio^.
a countenance, and so thundereth in his ears, that he dare not abide, but
turns his back and to go, but the enemy still assayleth him on the other
side, The devil enemy to man.
to persuade him that GOD has cast him away, saying: they that be Gods have
power to keep his law, thou have not, but breakest them: Ergo, thou art a cast
away and a damned creature, and hell gapeth, and sets open her mouth to
devour him, and the flesh also wrestleth The flesh enemy to man.
with the spirit to keep him down, and to take prisoner, and to stop his
mouth that he cry no more upon her, that she might sin at pleasure without
all fear.

The careless swyne that consent unto The impe^ent and wilful sinner feels
not the wrath of God in his law.
sin, feel not these things neither the hypocrites that have put a visard
on their face of the law, and make her look with such a countenance as
pleases the^, but the poor folks that have the eyes open, and consent, and
feign would do the law, they feel that can not be expressed with tongue.
Neither is there living any man, that feels the virtue and power of the blood
of Christ, which has not first felt the strong pains of hell.

Seeing then that this man is so sick, The law, the flesh and the devil are
three great enemies unto man.
so prone and ready to fall, and so cruelly invaded, when he has sinned, of
the feende, the flesh, and the law, that he is often put to flight, and feared
and made to run away from his father. Therefore has the God of all mercy and
of his infinite pity and bottomless compassion set up this Sacrament, as a
Why the Sacraments were chiefly ordained by God.
sign on an high hill, whence it may be seen on every side a far and near,
to call again them that be fled and run away. And with this Sacrament he (as
it were) clocketh to them, as an hen does for her chickens, together them
under the wings of his mercy. And God has commanded his Sacraments to be
had in daily use and the cause why.
has commanded his Sacrament to be had in continual use to put them in mind
of mercy, laid up for them in Christ's blood, and to witness and testify it
unto them, and to be the seal thereof. For the Sacrament does much more
vehemently print lively the faith, and make it sink down into the heart, then
do bare words only. As a man is more sure of that he hears, sees, feels,
smells, and tastes then that he hears only.

Now when the words of the Testament The Sacrament of Christ's body, and blood
(...) to.
and promises are spoken over the bread. This is my body that shall be broken for
you. This is my blood that shall be shed, for you, they confirm the ke^ of
Christ's promise of our salvation in his death.
faith, but much more when the Sacrament is seen with the eyes, and the bread
broken, the wine poured out or looked on: and yet more when I taste it and smell
it. As ye see when a man makes promise to an other with light words between
them selves, and as they departed, he to whom the promise is made, begins
to doubt, whether the other spoke earnestly or mocked, and doubts whether he
will remember his promise to bide by it or not. But when any man speaks with
aduisement and deliberation, the words are the^ more credible: but yet if he
swear, it confirms the thing more, and yet the more, if he struck hands, if
he give earnest, if he call record, if he give his hand writing, and seal it:
so is the promise more, and more believed, for the heart gathers: Lo he spoke
with aduisement, deliberation, and good sadness, he clapped hands, called
records, and put to his hand and seal, the man cannot be so faint without the
fear of God, as to deny all this: Shame shall make him bide by his promise,
though he were such a man, that I could not compel him, if he would deny it.
If a young man break a ryng between him and a maid, does not the fact
testify, and make a presumption to all men, that his heart meant, as his words
spoke.

Manoha Sampsones father when Iudi. 13.
he had seen an angel, Iud. 13. he said to his wife, we shall surely dye,
because we have seen the Lord. But his wife gathered other comfort of the
circumstaunces, and said, if the Lord would kill us, he would not have received
such offerings of our hands, nor showed us such things as he has, nor told us
of things to come. Even so our hearts gather of the circu^staunces,
protestatio^s, and other miracles of God, good arguments and reasons, to
stablish our weak faith with all, such as we could not gather at bare words
only.

And this we dispute, God sent his A brief collection of the premises.
son in our nature, and made him feel all our infirmities, that move us to
sin, and named him Jesus (that is to say) Savior because he should save his
people from their sins. Math. 1. Math. 1.
And after his death he sent his Apostles to preach the things or tidings,
and to thrust it in at the ears of us, and set up a Sacrament of it, to
testify it to be a seal of it, to thrust it in, not at the ears only, by
the rehearsing of the promises and Testament over it, neither at our eyes only
in beholdynge it, but beat it in through our feelyng, tastyng and smelling
also, and to be repeated daily, and to be ministered to us. He would not (think
we) make half so much a do with us, if he loved us not, or if he would not
have us feign come, and be as merciful to us, as he was to his fre^des in the
old time, that fell and rose again. God so then used the Jews, (to whom all
ceremonies were first given, and from whom they came to us) even such fashions
as they used among them selves in all his promises and couenauntes, not for his
necessity, but for ours, that such things should be a witness and testimony,
between him and us, to confirm the faith of his promise, that we should not
waver nor doubt in them, when we look on the seals of his obligations,
wherewith he has bound him self. And to keep the promises and couenauntes
better in mind, and to make them the more deep sink in our hearts, and to be
more earnestly regarded, and that we should ask what such things meant, and
why God commanded them to be observed, that ignorance should not excuse, if
we know not what we ought to do and believe, for natural reason ought to teach
us, that yt outward, corporal and bodily thing can not help the spiritual
soul, and that GOD has not delectation in such fantasy. Now if we were
diligent to search for the good will of God, and would ask what such
ceremonies meant, It were impossible, but then God, (which has promised, Math.
7. If we seek we shall Math. 7.
find,) would send us true interpreters of his signs or Sacraments.

And he that being of a lawful age To an ignorant and unfaithful person the
Sacraments and ceremonies are sin.
observes a ceremony, and knows not the intent, to him is the ceremony not
only unprofitable, but also hurtful, and cause of sin. In that he is not
careful, and diligent to search for it, and he there observes them with a
false faith of his own imagination, thinking as all Idolaters do, and ever
Idolatry what it is.
have done, that the outward work is a sacrifice and service to God. The same
therefore sins yet more deeper and more damnable: Neither is Idolatry The
spiritual and right seruyng of God what it is.
any other thing then to believe that a visible ceremony is a service to the
invisible God whose service is spiritual as he is a spirit, and is none other
thing then to know that all is of him and to trust in him only for all things
and to love him for his great goodness and mercy above all, and our neighbors
as our selves for his sake: unto which spiritual seruyng of God, and to lead
us to the same, the old ceremonies were ordained.

These be now sufficient concerning the intent and use of the ceremonies and
how they came up. Now let us consider the words of this Testament and promises
as they be rehearsed of the three Evangelists Matthew, Mark, and Luke and of
the Apostle Paul. For John which wrote last touched nothing that was
sufficiently declared of other Math in the 26. thus says, when Math. 26.
Mark. 14. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
they were eating Jesus took bread and gave thanks and brake and gave his
Disciples, and said, take, eat this is my body: And he took the cup and
thanked The institution of the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood.
and gave it them, saying: Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood, which
is of the new Testament, that is shed for many for the remission of sins.
First ye see by these words that the body was given to death, and the blood
shed for the remiu^io^ of sins and that for many. But who are these many?
Verily Who they are that receive the benefit of Christ's death.
they that turn to GOD to believe in him only and to endeavor them selves to
keep his law from hence forth. Which many, yet in respect of the^ that love
not the law, are but very few, and even that little flock that gave them
selves wholly to follow Christ, wherefore if any man think he believe in Christ,
and have not the law written in his heart to consent, that his duty is to love
his brother for Christ sake as Christ loved him and to endeavor him self so to
do, The faith of that same man is vain and built upon sand of of his own
imagination and not upon the rock of Gods word: for his word unto which he
has bound himself is, that they only which turn to God to keep his laws
shall have mercy for Christ's sake. Drink of it all for it is The cup of the
blood of Christ what it is.
my blood of the new Testament, for it is (that is to say) the drink that is
in the cup, or if ye list the cup is my blood of the new Testament taking the
cup for drink, by a manner of speaking used in all tounges as when we say. I
have drunk a cup of wine, we take there the cup for the wine. My blood of
this new Testament, that is to say my blood for whose shedding sake this new
Testament and covenant is made to you, for the forgeuenes of sin.

The old Testament made between God and your fathers in mount Synai in which,
life was promised to the^ only that kept it, and to the breakers, death, wrath
and vengeance, and to be accursed, and no mention made of mercy which was
confirmed with blood, Exodus. 24. Exodus 24.
Moses offered half the blood to God and sprinkeled the people with the other
half to confirm the covenant and to bind both parties: neither was there
any covenant made that was not confirmed with blood as it is rehearsed Hebrews
the 9. Hebr. 9.
And as we see in the books of Moses, whose custom of bloushedding was not
only to confirm those, old couenauntes, but also to be a prophecy of the
blood that should be shed to confirm this Testament. That old cruel and
fearful testament, which drew ye people away, so that they durst not abide
the voice of thunder, nor the terrible sight of the fire, The great and
merciful difference between the old Testament and the new.
but went and stood a far of, was confirmed with the blood of calves. But
this new and gentle Testament which calls again and promises mercy to all
that will amend: And as it is a better Testament, so is it confirmed with a
better blood to make men see love, to love again, and to be a greater
confirmation of the love promised. For if he The great mercy of God to ma^kynd.
gave us his son what will he deny us? If God so loved us when we were
sinners and knew him not, that he gave his son for us, how much more loves
he us now when we love again and would feign keep his commandments? In the
old couenauntes the people were sprinkled with blood of calves without in
their bodies to bynd the^ to keep the law, else we were bound to just damnation
for the breakyng of it.

Here it is said, drink of it every one, that your souls within may be
sprinkled and washed thorough faith with the blood of the son of God for the
forgeuenes of sin and to be partakers of a more easy and kind Testament,
under which if you sin thorough fragilitie you shall be warned lovingly and
received to mercy if you will turn again and amend.

Mark. 14.
Mark in the. 14. And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to them and said, Take, eat, this is
my body: and he took the cup and when he had given thanks, he took it to
the^, and they al dra^ke of it: And he said to the^, this is my blood of ye new
Testament, which is shed for many. This is all one with Matthew as is aforesaid.

Luke. 22.
Luke in the 22. And he took bread and when he had given thanks, he brake it
and gave to them, saying. This is my body which is given for you, this do in
remembrance of me, Likewise also, when he had supped he took the cup, saying:
This cup is the new Testament in my blood which is shed for you.

The cause of the institution of ye Sacrament of Christ's body.
Here is also to be noted that yt cause of the institution was to be a memorial
to testify that Christ's body was given and his blood shed for us. And again
where Matthew and Mark said, this is my blood in the new Testament. Luke says,
This cup is the new testament in my blood which shall be shed for you. The sign
of the body of Christ is called by the name of Christ's body, which is there
signified.
This is a strange speaking and far from the use of our tongue, to call the
sign and confirmation by the name of the thing that is signified and
confirmed. The Testament is that Christ's blood is shed for our sins. And
Christ says. This cup is that testament, signifieng thereby that ye thing that
is meant by this ceremony is that we believe that his blood shedding is the
remission of our sins, which is the very Testament.

Paul. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 11.
says on this manner. That which I delivered unto you I received of the Lord.
For the Lord Jesus the same night in the which he was betrayed, took bread,
and when he had given thanks he brake it and said. Take ye and eat, this is
my body which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me: After the same
manner also he took the cup when he had supped saying. This cup is the new
Testament in my blood: this do as often as ye drink it in the remembrance of
me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup ye shall show
the Lords death until he come.

As Matthew and Mark agree in these words. So do Lucas and Paul. And as it is
above declared upon the words of Luke, and so here by often repeatyng one
thing. This do in remembrance of me. This cup is the new Testament in my
blood. This do as often as ye drink it in the remembrance of me. Again, as often
as ye shall eat of this bread and drink of this cup, so often ye must declare
the Lords death. By this often repeatyng (I say) ye may evidently perceive,
the cause, intent, and whole purpose of the institution of this Sacrament was
to testify and confirm the faith of the Testament made in the death of
Christ, how that for his sake our sins shall be forgeuen.

So, do this in the remembrance of me, that is to say, Take bread and wine and
rehearse the covenant, and testament over them, How that my body was broken
and my blood shed for many and the^ give them to the people to eat and drink
to be a sign and earnest, and the seal of the Testament, and cry upon them
without ceassing to believe in me only for the remission of sins and not to
despair how weak soever they be, only if they hang on me and desire power to
keep the law after my doctrine and example of my life and do morn and be sorry
because they cannot do that good thing which they would.

For says Paul who soever shall eat 1. Cor. 11.
of this bread or drink of the cup of the Lord unworthily shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord, that is to say, whosoever receaueth the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ with an unclean heart not forsaking the old lusts
of the flesh. Nor purposing to follow Christ, and to love his neighbor as only
Christ was to him merciful. The same sins against the body and blood of
Christ. In that he makes a mock of the earnest death of Christ, and as it is
written Hebrews the. 10. treads Hebr. 10.
Christ under foot and counts the blood of the Testament wherewith he was
sanctified as an unholy thing, and does dishonor to the spirit of grace.

Of this ye may perceive again What the Sacrament means and why the same was
instituted.
what the Sacrament means and what the intent of the ordinance was, and how
such ceremonies came up, and whence they had their beginning and what the fruit
thereof is, and what is therein to be sought: And though this were enough so
that I might here well cease, yet because the unquiet scrupulous and
superstitious nature of man wholly given to Idolatry has styrred up such
traditions about this one Sacrament most specially: I cannot but speak thereof
somewhat more and declare what my conscience thinks in this matter.

Ye shall understand therefore that There are iij. opinions about the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ.
there is great dissension and three opinions about the words of Christ where
he says in pronouncyng the testament over the bread This is my body: And in
pronouncyng it over the wine This is my blood. One part say, that these words
This is my body: The first opinion,
This is my blood compel us to believe under pain of damnation that the bread
and wine are changed into the very body and blood of Christ really. As the
water at Cana Galilee was turned into very wine,

The second part says, we be not The second opinion.
bound to believe that bread and wine are changed but only that his body and
blood are there presently.

The third say, we be bound by these The third opinion.
words only to believe that Christ's body was broken and his bloodshed for
the remission of our sins and that there is no other satisfaction for sin
then the death and passion of Christ.

The first say these words This is A declaration made by them of the first
opinion above mentioned.
my body: This is my blood compel us to believe, that things there showed, are
the very body and blood of Christ really. But bread and wine say they cannot be
Christ's natural body: there fore the bread and wine, are changed turned,
altered and transubstantiated, into the very body and blood of Christ, And they
of this opinion have busied them selves in seeking subtilties and similitudes
to prove how the very body and blood might be there under the similitude of
bread and wine only, the very bread and wine being thus tra^substantiated. And
these men have been so occupied in slaying, all that will not captive their wits
to believe them: that they never taught nor understood that the Sacrament is an
absolution to all that thereby believe in the body and blood of Christ.

The second part grant, with the A declaration of them of the second opinion
about mentioned.
first, that the words compel us to believe that the things showed in the
Sacrament are the very body and blood of Christ. But where the first say bread
and wine cannot be the very body and blood of Christ: There they vary and
dissent from them, affirming that bread and wine may and also is Christ's body
really and very blood of Christ: and say that it is as true to say that bread
is Christ's body and that wine is his blood as it is true to say Christ being a
very man is also very God. And they say, as the Godhead and manhood in Christ
are in such manner coupled togegether that man is very God and God very man:
Even so the very body and the bread are so coupled that it is as true to say
that bread is the body of Christ and the blood so annexed there with the wine,
that it is even as true to say that the wine is Christ's blood.

The first though they have slain so many, in and for the defense of their
opinion, yet they are ready to receive the second sort to fellowshyp, not
greatly striuyng with them or abhorryng the presence of bread and wine with the
very body and blood so that they ye by that means may keep him there still,
and hope to sell him as dear as before, and also some to bye him and not to
minish the price.

The third sort affirm, that the A declaration of the^ of the third opinion
about mentioned.
words mean no more but only that we believe by the things that are there
showed that Christ's body was broken and his blood shed for our sins, if we
will forsake our sins and turn to God to keep his law. And they say that
these sayings, This is my body: and This is my blood, showing bread and wine
are true as Christ meant them, and as the people of that country (to who^
Christ spoke) were accustomed to understand such words, and as the Scripture
uses in a thousand places to speak. As when one of us says, I have drunk a
cup of good wine, that saying is true as the man meant: that he drank wine
only and not the cup: which words happily, in some other nations ears,
would sound that he drank the cup. And as when we say of a child. This is
such a man's very face: the words are true as the manner of our land is to
understand them, that the face of the one is very like the other, And as when
we say he gave me his faith and his truth in my hand, the words are true as we
understand them that he stroke hands with me, or gave earnest in sign or
token that he would bide by his promise, For the faith of a man does always rest
in his soul, and cannot be given out though we gives signs and tokens of
them. Even so (say they) we have a thousand examples in the Scripture, where
signs are named with names of things signified by them. As Jacob called the
place where he saw the Lord face to face. Phenyell that Gene. 32.
is Gods face, when he saw the Lord face to face. Now it is true to say of that
field that it is Gods face, though it be not his very face. The same field was
so called to signify that Jacob there saw God face to face.

The chief hold and principal ancre that the two first have, is these words,
This is my body: This is my blood. Unto these the third answers as is above
said, other textes they allege for them selves, which not only do not
strength their cause, but rather make it worse. As in ye sixth of John which
they John. 6.
draw and wrest to the carnal and flesh ly eating of Christ's body in ye
mouth, Papists are the wresters of Scriptures.
when it only means of this eating by faith. For when Christ said except ye
eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood ye have no life in you.
This cannot be understood of the Sacrament. For Abraham had life and all the
old holy fathers, Christ's mother, Elizabeth, Zacharias, John Baptist, Symeon,
Anna, and all the Apostles, had life already by faith in Christ: Of which not
one had eaten his flesh and drunk his blood with their bodily mouths, But
truth it is, that the righteous lives by his faith: Ergo, to believe and trust
in Christ's blood is the eating that there was meant, as the text well
proves, if they say we grant that life comes by faith: but we all that
believe must be Baptized to keep the law and to keep the covenant in mind:
Even so all that lives by faith must receive the Sacrament. I answer. The
Sacrament is The Sacramente^ are confirmations to weak consciences.
a confirmation to weak consciences, and in no wise to be despised, howbeit
many have lived by faith in the wilderness, which in. 20. 30. or 40. years
have not received the Sacrament. Notwithstanding this Oration is nothing to the
purpose. For Christ spoke to the blind and unbelieving Jews, testifieng to
them that they could have no life, except they should first eat his flesh and
drink his blood: Ergo, this eating and drinkyng is meant only of that thing,
that first brings life Faith increases by the worthy receiuyng of the
Sacraments.
into the soul and that is faith by your own confession. And therefore must it
be understand of faith only, and not of the Sacrament.

And Matthew the last, I am with you always even unto the end of the world,
Math. 28.
which may well be understand, and so was it of old Doctors that by his
spiritual being with us by faith, and in his spirit and so may that text of
Matthew Math. 18.
18. be understand where two or three are gathered together in my name there am
I in the midst of them. There is many times ij. or three good men that mete
together in Christ's name where the Sacrament is not. And Ephe. 3.
Paul, Ephesians. 3. boweth his knees for the Ephesians to God, that he would give
the^ his riches to be strenghthened with his spirit that Christ may dwell in
their hearts thorough faith. Where the heart then believes in Christ, there
dwells Christ in the heart: though there be no bread in the heart, neither yet
in the maw. The old Doctors vary in their opinion of the Sacrament.


The two first parts taking the old Doctors to be on their side. I answer
many of the old doctors spoke so mystically that they sent sometimes to
affirm plainly that it is but bread and wine only concerning the substance.
And that it is a figure of the body and blood of Christ only and some time
that it is his very body and blood, therefore it were nedelesse to wade any
further herein.

And unto them of the second opinion In answer to them of the second opinion.
that the bread is his very body, I answer ye must remember that the old
Doctors, as earnestly call it a sacrifice as they do Christ's body. But that
ye deny: And say with the Epistle to the Hebrews that he was but once
sacrificed for altogether when he offered and sacrificed him self to the
father for our sins, and can now no more be sacriced. Christ dies no more
now and therefore is no more sacrificed. Neither do we properly offer him to
God. But he Christ once sacrificed is a sacrifice for ever.
in his mortal flesh offered him self for us to GOD the father and purchased
therewith a general pardon for ever.

And now does God the father profer The doctrine of the Papists.
him and gives him to us. And the Priests in Gods stead proferre him and give
him unto the people for a remission and absolution of their sins daily, if
they by the mouyng and styrryng of the Sacrament believe in the body and blood
of Christ.

Wherefore ye ought of no right to be Papists be agreued with ^uch as consent
not to their g^osse opi^on.
angry with them of the third opinion though they deny the Doctors, where they
seem to say that the Sacrament is the very body of Christ. As they be not
angry with you, when ye deny them, where they as earnestly affirm that it is
a sacrifice. Nevertheless they answer that Doctors call it a sacrifice
only because it is the memorial, the earnest and seal of that everlasting
sacrifice offered once for all. And even so say they that the Doctors called
the Sacrament the body and blood of Christ Signs commonly called by the name
of things signified thereby.
after the same manner only, because it is the memorial, the earnest and seal
of body and blood, as the use of Scriptures is to call signs by the names of
things signified thereby.

And unto them of the first opinion I answer with the same reason that it is
impossible that the Sacrament should be a very sacrifice. For neither the
sacrifices of the old law which prophesied the sacrifising of Christ, neither
yet our redemption was fulfilled at night. For if the Scriptures and prophecies
were then fulfilled and we the^ redeemed. Christ dyed on the morrow in vain and
false are the Apostles and Evangelists that preach his body breakyng and
blood sheddyng under Note this worthy and true argument followyng.
Pontius Pylate by the persecution of Cayphas and Annas, to be our redemption.

Moreover for all the breakyng and deuidyng of the Sacrament of his body among
his Apostles. His body abode still alive and for all the pouryng out of the
Sacrament of his blood of the pot into the cup, and out of the cup into the
mouths and belyes of his Disciples: he blede as fresh on the morrow, as though
he had blede then nothing at all.

He was verily much more easily sacrificed that night in the breakyng and
diuidyng of the bread and pouring out of wine, then he was on the morrow. The
Sacrament was that night no doubt but a description of his passion to come. And
it is now a memorial of his passion past. He instituted the manner of the
Sacrament then, and taught his Disciples also, that they after understood when
he was risen again, and not then, as they never had capacity to understand
him when he spoke of his death. For they then imagined carnally of Christ (as
the Jews yet do, that Christ should never dye as he did, not concerning his
Godhead but should live ever bodily as he now does concerning his resurrection.

Wherefore seeing that all the Doctors All the doctors with one accord call the
Sacrament a sacrifice.
with one accord call the Sacrament so earnestly a sacrifice they cannot
otherwise understand them that they so say after the use of the Scripture
only, but because it is the memorial of the sacrifice of his death and
blousheddyng. Why should they then of right be offended Papists should be
indifferent in judgments as Protestants are.
if we understand the Doctors after the same manner when they call it his body
and blood? And that they so call it after the use of the Scripture because that
it is only a memorial of his body and blood.

As concerning the transubstantiation: Transubciatio^ was a word used among
the old Doctors.
I think that such a speech was among the old Doctors though they that came
after understood the^ amiss. Their hearts were gross, through busiyng the^
selves to much with worldly business, for the bread and wine are but only bread
and wine till the words of the Testament be rehearsed over them, and then
they cease to be any more bread and wine in the hearts of the true beleuers,
for the heart after these words once spoken thinks only upon the covenant
made in the body and blood of Christ and through faith eats his body and
drinks his blood, though the eyes and other senses perceive nothing but bread
and wine. As when a man sometime seeks for a text in the Bible he sees paper
and iuke and the figure of letters: yet his heart not once thinks of any other
thing the^ on the words and sense of his text. And thereof no doubt came up
this transubstantiation through false understanding.

Another thing is this, none of those wicked heretics which denied Christ to
be very God, or any of them that denied Christ to be man or to have a very
body save a pha^tasticall body did cast the true beleuers in the teth at any An
effectual and good Argument.
time, of the faith of Christ's body present in their Sacrament every where,
which thing is not like but they would have done, if that opinion had the^ been
a general article of the faith.

Neither was there any heresy or The Pope confirming transubstantiation, did
purchase his own gain to the overthrow of the right use of Christ's Sacrament.
diversity of opinion or disputyng about the matter till the Pope had gathered
a Council to confirm this transubsta^ciation: wherefore it is most likely that
this opinion came up by the^ of latter days.

Furthermore all the law and Prophets, all the Christ did, or can yet do, is
to bring us to believe in him, and in God the father through him, for the
remission of sins, and to bring us unto that (which immediately follows out
of that belefe) to love our neighbors for his sake as he loved us. Wherefore if
Christ did put his bodily presence in the Sacrament and would we should believe
it: It is done only to bring us to this faith. Now is this faith no where
less had, then where that opinion is most strong neither so cruelly persecuted
of Jew or Turk, as of the^ that most fervently defend that opinion. True faith
makes a man to love his brother, but that opinion makes them to hate and slay
their brethren that better believe in Christ, then they of that opinion do, and
that murder do they for fear of losyng that they have gotten through that
opinion.

Item, they of this opinion instead of The common persuasion of Papists.
teaching us to believe in Christ, teach us to serve Christ with bodily
service, which thing is naught else but Idolatry. For they preach that all the
ceremonies of the Mass are a service to God, by reason of the bodily works to
obtain forgeuenes of sins thereby, and to deserve and merit therewith. And
yet Christ is now a spiritual substance with his father having also a
spiritual body and with the father to be worshypped, in spirit only. And his
service in the spirit is only to believe in him for the remission of sin, to
call upon him, and give him thanks and to love our neighbors for his sake.

Now all works done to serve man and to bring him to this point to put his
trust in Christ, are good and acceptable to God: but done for any other purpose
they be Idolatry and Imageseruice and make God an Idol or bodily Image.

Again seeing the faith of the Testament in Christ's blood is the life of the
righteous from the beginning of the world to the end: and for as much as the
Sacrament was instituted only to bring to this life: Now when they which
think not the body to be present in the Sacrament have by the preaching and
confirmation of the Sacrament obtained this life or steadfast faith in Christ's
blood, and by the daily use of the Sacrament are more and more hardened therein
and in the love that springs thereof? What reasonable cause have the contrary
part (which believe the body present and bread turned into the very body as
flesh bones, her^, sinews, nails and all other, as he was put on the cross
of length and quantity, I cannot tell what) to rail on us as heretics, hate
persecute and slay us most cruelly, as enemies? Christ says Qui contra me non
est, mecum est, He Mark. 9.
that is not against me is with me.

Now they that believe in Christ for Papists are cruel persecut^rs
the remission of their sins and for his sake love their foes are not
Christ's enemies Ergo, they be on Christ's side. Why then should they that
boast them selves to be Christ's trendes: slay the^? Faith in Christ's blood
and in the father thorough him is Gods service in spirit. And so have they
which believe not the bodily presence served God a long time, and there to been
helped by the Sacrament. The other part fallen The faithful are in good state
though the wicked judge the contrary.
there from through beleuyng the body present, seruyng God, with bodily service
(which is Idolatry) and to make God an Idol or Image, in that they trust in
the goodness of their works (as they which serve tyrauntes) and not in the
goodness of God through trust in the blood of Christ: Ergo, they that believe not
the bodily presence, (not a little thereto compelled through the wicked Idolatry
of the contrary belefe) are not to be thought so evil as the other would have
them seem to be.

Paul teaches. 1. Cor. 13. that if a 1. Cor. 13.
man had all other gifts that God can give man and had not charity to love
his neighbor, it helps not. For all other gifts and the remission in
Christ's blood also are given him of God to bring him to love his neighbor
(which thing had) a man has all, which not had, a man has nothing.

And Phil. 2. how swetely and how Phil. 2.
vehemently co^iureth he them to draw all one way to be of one accord and one
mind or sentence, And to do nothing of strife or of vain glory, that is to
say of hate or disdain one of another, or of affection to him self for to
seem glorious, but each to prefer other through mekenes and to have his
opinion suspect, and to fear least he has not obtained the understanding,
rather the^ of presumption to his own wit to despise and hate the contrary
party and persecute as a tyrant. And in the third of the same Paul says, let
as many as be perfect (that is to say be truly taught) and know the law truly
and her office and the office and effect of faith, and know which be good
works before God, and what the intent of them is, let (says he) so serve as
we be come, proceed in one rule, that we may be of one accord.

Now hitherto we be all come, and Faith only justifies what it is to say.
this general rule have we gotten that faith only instifieth that is to say
that the sin is forgiven only for Christ's sake: and again that our duty
is to love our neighbors no less then Christ loved us, wherefore let us
proceed forth in this rule and exhort each other to trust to Christ and to love
each other as Christ did, and in this where in we all agree let us bewise only
and fervent and strive who shall be greatest and go foremost.

And in this which is not opened to all parties, let us be meek sober and cold
and keep our wisdom secret to ourselves and abide pacie^tly till God open it
to other also.

The cause why the third part say that this word (is) compels us not to
believe the bodily presence of Christ to be there is this. The Jews (say they)
are wont ever to name the memorial and signs of things with the very name of
the thing signified that the very name might the better keep the thing in
mind. As when Jacob Gene. 32. turned home again out of Gene. 32.
Mesopotamia saw the angels of God come against him he called the place where
he saw the^ Mahanaim: An host, because his posterity in time to come, when
they hard the field which was none host yet so called should ask why it was
so named, yt their elders might thereby have an occasion to teach that Jacob
saw there an host of angels.

And again in the same chapter when the angel that wresteled with him had
blessed him and was departed, Jacob called the name of the place Pheniell Gods
face, that the people in time to come should ask why it was called Gods face
and their Elders should answer because Jacob saw there GOD face to face that
the name should keep the thing in mind.

And again in the 33. where he had Gene. 33.
made boughtes, or houses of boughs for his beasts he named the place
Sucoth, that is Boothes.

Item Gene. 33. He bought a parcel of land and built there an alter and called
it, the mighty God of Israel.

Item Gene. 35. the God of Bethell, Gene. 35.
and Genesis the last chapter Joseph held a lamentation for his father seven
days and the people of the country called the name of the place Abell Masrayn
the lamentation of the Egyptia^s. Now the place was not the lamentation, but so
called to keep the lamentation in memory.

Item Exodus xij. the lamb is called Exodus 12.
Pesah, a passing by, because the angel did pass by the houses and hurted
not where it was slain, and the blood stricken on the posts: that the name
should keep the thing in memory.

Item Exodus 29. and Leuit. 8. almost every where the beast offered for sin is
called sin, which use of speaking Paul uses Romans 9. and 2. Cor. 5. and
calls Christ sin, when Christ is neither sin nor sinful, but an
acceptable offering for sin, and yet he is called our sin, because he bare
our sins on his back, and because our sins are consumed and made no sin
in him if we will forsake our sins and believe in Christ for the remission
thereof. Christ is also called our righteousness to certify us that when we have
no righteousness of our own, yet that his righteousness is given us to make
satisfaction for our unrighteousness, if we will believe it.

Item Exodus the 30. The sin or Exodus 30.
sin offering is called Atoneme^t, and it was yet but a sign certifi^ng the
conscience, that the aronement was made and that God had forgiven the sin.

Item Iudicum 10. They called the Iudi. 10.
name of a certain Horna, as it were an utter destruction. Because that they
had utterly destroyed man woman and child and all that bare life.

Item Iudicum 15. the place where Iudi. 15.
Sampson killed me^ with an Ass iawe was called Lehy that is Iaw bone, to keep
the act in mind.

Item Iudic. 19. There went a company Iudic. 19.
out of the tribe of Dan and pitched besides Kyriath Iearym, in Judah, and the
place was called ever after, the host of Dan, only to keep the thing in mind.

Item 1. Reg. 6. A great stone where 1. Reg. 6.
God slew fifty thousand was called the great lame^tation. In so much that the
text says they put the Arc on the great lamentation.

Item. 1. Reg. 7. Samuel pitched a 1. Reg. 7.
stone on an end, and called it the help stone, because God had there helped
them and given them a great victory of the Philistines.

Item the last of the 3. of kings Sedechias 3. Reg. 22.
came to Achab with a couple of horns on his head, saying, With these horns
shall thou slay the Assyrians he meant not that Achab should take those horns
and gore at the Assyria^s: But would that he should believe only that as a
beast scatters a cock of hay with his horns so should Achab scatter the host
of the Assyrians, with his host.

Item Numeri the. 6. he that voweth Nume. 6.
abstinence must let his hear grow to keep his abstinence in mind, and when
his abstinence is out, he is commanded to shave the head of his abstinence,
and to offer such offeryngs as are there appointed after that he has shaven of
his abstinence. Lo here, the hear is called his abstine^ce, and is yet but a
memory of his abstinence.

Item Iere. 7. The Prophet was commanded Ierem. 7.
to shere of his abstinence and to cast it away, which abstinence is but his
hear.

Also Ezechiell 12. God commanded Ezech. 12.
the Prophet to remove withal his goods after such manner as conquerers carry
away the people captine from country to country, and when he had done. The
Lord said unto him, this prophecy is the Captain or Prince of Jerusalem, when
it was but an example to him how he should be served. A short and effectual
collection of the former arguments.


Finally where Matthew and Mark say. This cup is my blood of the new Testament.
Paul and Luke say This cup is the new Testament in my blood. Now must the
sense of the words of the two first Matthew and Mark be all one with the
senses of the words of the ij. last Luke and Paul. The words of Luke and
Paul are. This cup is the new Testament made in my blood, or for my blood sake.

Now the Testament is that his blood was shed for our sins, but it is
impossible that the cup or his blood should be that promise. Wherefore the sense
must be needs that it is the memorial and seal of the Testament only. And
therefore where Matthew and Mark say. This cup is my blood of the new
Testament, the sense must needs be also. That it is the memorial and seal
thereof, only calling after the use of the Hebrews the sign with yt name of
that which is signified that is to say, calling the wine which only
signifies the blood with the name of the blood. And then it follows that the
bread is called his body after the same manner because it is the sign of his
body.

These and like examples move the third part to affirm that we be not bound to
believe that the bread is the very body of Christ. Though it be so called, nor
that the bread is transubstantiated into the body. No more the^ the things here
rehearsed are that they be called or transubstantiated into the very things
which they be called.

The other will answer, though An objection made by yt Papists.
this memorial were not the things whose names they bear yet it will not
follow that it should be so here in the Sacrament: for they that gave such
other names had no power to make the things so to be: But Christ is very God
and has power to make his body to be every thing and every where.

I answer, that God cannot make An answer to you former objection.
every of his creatures God, neither ca^ it be proved less repugnaunce that a
creature should be every where then that he should be God.

Moreover, though God where he appeared to Jacob had pitched a stone on an end
and called it Gods face, yet had he not been any more bound to believe that it
had been the very face of God then if Jacob had done it. The almightynes of GOD
stands not in that he is able to do all that our foolish leude thoughts may
Imagme. But because all power is his and of him and that he does all he will
and has made all of naught, and can bring all to naught again. And can do all
that includes not contrary to the truth and verity that God has put in his
creatures: and because he can do things impossible for man or any other
creature to do or to think how they should be done, therefore he is called the
Lord almighty, but because to braule about such possibility, or impossibility
is the lust of Sophisters, and also the desire of the devil to quench the
profession of our Baptism and to wipe out the Image of Christ out of our
hearts, and a thing endelesse: Therefore I compte it wickedness to wade forth in
it, and to give them that seek an occasion perpetually to scold. The negative
may a man hold till they can prove the affirmative.

Moreover, if bread be the very body of Christ, whether abidyng the very body
still or transubstantiated, and enjoy the glory of the soul of Christ and
also of the Godhead.

It seems impossible to be avoided but that Christ was made man and dyed: Also
bread, which seems to some a great inconvenience. Howbeit that great
proclamation of bread and also that high power of Priests above all angels I
admit also to anoide all braulyng but one reason I have unto which I cleave
somewhat and it is this.

All that is between God and man In excellent argument.
in the Scripture is for man's necessity and not for any need that GOD has
thereof: And other spiritual profit can none have by that faith in the
Sacrament, then to be taught thereby to believe in Christ our Savior and to do
good to his neighbor now is that belefe and love had as well and rather better
as is above proved without such faith with it, Ergo, where the Scripture
compels to no such believe it is wickedness to make it a necessary article of
our faith, and to slay them that ca^ not think that it ought to be believed.

Notwithstanding all these reasons and the damnable Idolatry which the
Papists have committed with the Sacrament: yet whether they affirm the body
and blood to be present with the bread and wine or the bread and wine to be
turned and transubstantiated into the body and blood, I am therewith content
(for unities sake) if they will there cease, and let him be there only to
restifie and consirme the Testament or covenant made in Christ's blood and
body, for which cause only Christ instituted the Sacrament. But and if they
will rage further with their blind reasons of their subtle sophistry and
deuilish Idolatry, and say, where Christ's blood is, there is his body and
where his body is, there is his soul, and where his soul is, there is his
godhead and the trimty, the father, the son, and the holy ghost and there men
ought to pray and say. O father which art present with thy son Christ under
bread and wine, or in form of bread and wine. If (I say) they so rave, the^ as
the old Prophet for like Idolatry demeth God to dwell in the temple or to have
pleasure in sacrifice of blood of goats, sheep and calves: Eue^ so deny I the
body of Christ to be any more in the Sacrament then God was in the golden
calves, which Ieroboham set up to be prayed to, the one in Bethell and the
other in Dan for though God be present every where, yet if heaven of heavens
can not compass him to make him a dwelling place (as the Scripture testifies,
and much less the temple that was at Jerusalem, how should he have a dwelling
place in a little wafer or crome of bread. God dwells not in the temple
neither did our fathers, which were of the true faith in the old Testament pray
to God as present in the temple, but the name of God only was in the temple 3.
of the Kings 8. and his law and 3. Reg. 8.
couenauntes and wonderful deeds were therein written in signs and were there
preached and testified continually of the true Priests and Prophets unto the
people the fathers of the true faith came thither.

Furthermore of the seruent love which they had toward the laws and
couenauntes of God. For the which Prophets. Salomo^ prayed so earnestly unto
the Lord God saying. Here thou O God in heaven thy dwelling place and do all
that the stranger calls to thee for: that all nations of the earth may know
the and fear thy name, as do this people Israel etc.

Read the third book of kings the 3. Reg. 8.
8. chapter when God delighted only in the faith of the offerer, which
believed in God only for all mercy, taking the sacrifice for a sure token and
earnest of the mercy of God, certified by that sign, that God loved them, and
was at one with them for Christ's sake to come. As we should be certified by
the Sacrament of God with us for Christ's death that is past. And Christ
taught us in our prayers to look up to heaven and say, Our father which ar^ in
heaven, and he him self in all his prayers did lift up his eyes to heaven to
his father, and so did he when he instituted the Sacrament and rehearsed the
words of the covenant over bread and wine as it is written Matthew. 26. Mark.
14. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11. in these Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
words Jesus took bread. etc.

Christ though he affirm him self to be the son of God and his father to be
in him, yet he taught not his Disciples to direct the prayer to the father in
him but up to the father in heaven neither lift he up his eyes or prayer to his
father in the Sacrament but to his father in heaven. I know diverse, and diverse
me^ know me which love me as I do the^, yet if I should pray them when I mete
the^ in the street openly they would abhor me, but if I pray the^ where they
be appointed to mete me secretly they will here me and accept my request. Eue^
so though gods presence be every where yet will he be prayed so, up to the
place only where he shall see him, and where he would have us for to long for
to be.

Moreover if I grannt you that the blood of Christ is in the cup, it will follow
that his body is there also, neither when I grant that his body is in the
bread, or under the form of bread, will it follow that his soul is there to.
Christ made ye bread the Sacrament of his body only wherefore as the bread is
no similitude of his blood. So am I not bound or ought to affirm yt his blood
is there present. And he did institute the wine to be the Sacrament of his
blood only. And happily it was red wine, yt more lovely to represe^t it. Now
as the wine in no similitude does represe^t the body, so am I not bound or
ought to affirm that his body is there present.

Ye say that Christ is so mighty, that though he stood mortal before his
Disciples eyes, yet he was able to make ye same body yt same time to be in the
Sacrament immortal, and to be under every little piece of bread or of the
Sacrament though it be no greater the^ a mote in the son and that as long as
great and thick as he stood before them. If he wereso mighty, why is he not
as mighty to make his blood to be alone and his body alone? his blood, body,
and soul were each alone at his death, and while the body lay in the sepulcher.

Finally Christ said this is my blood that shall be shed: Ergo, it is true now,
this is my blood that was shed. Now the blood of Hayles and the blood that is
in many other places men say is the blood that was shed, Ergo, that blood is in
the Sacrament if any be, but I am not bound to believe or ought to affirm, that
the blood that is at Hayles is anymate with the soul of Christ, or that his
body is there present.

Wherefore to avoid this endless braulyng which the devils no doubt has stirred
up to turn yt eyes of our souls from the everlasting covenant made us in
Christ's blood and body and to nossell us in Idolatry, which is trust and
confidence in false worshippyng of God and to quench first the faith to
Christward and the^ the love due to our neighbor therefore me thinks that the
party yt has professed ye faith of Christ, and the love of his neighbor ought
of denty to bear each other as long as the other opinion is not plain wicked
through false Idolatry nor contrary to the salvation that is in Christ, nor
against the open and manifest doctrine of Christ and his Apostles nor contrary
to the general articles of the faith of the general Church of Christ, which
are confirmed with open Scripture. In which articles never a true Church in
any land dissenteth.

There be many textes of the Scripture and therefore diversely expounded of holy
doctors and taken in contrary se^ces, when no text has contrary se^ces in
deed or more the^ one single sense and yet that hurts not, neither are ye
holy doctors therefore heretics, as the exposition destroys not the faith in
Christ's blud nor is contrary to the open scripture or general articles. No
more does it hurt to say that the body and blood are not in the Sacrament.
Neither does it help to say they be there, but hurt excedingly, if ye infer
yt the soul is there to, and that God must be there prayed to when as our
kingdom is not on the earth, eue^ so we ought not to direct our prayers to any
God in earth but up where our kingdom is. And whether our redemer and savior
is gone and there sits on the right hand of his father to pray for us, and
to offer out prayers unto his father and to make the^ for his sake acceptable:
neither ought he yt is bound under pain of da^natio^ to love his brother as
Christ loved him, to hate to persecute and to slay his brother for blind zeal
to any opinion that neither lets nor hinders to salvation that is in
Christ: As they which pray to God in the Sacrament not only do: but also
through that opinion, as they have lost love to their neighbors: even so have
they lost the true faith in yt covenant made in Christ's blood and body. Which
covenant only is yt which saves. And to testifis this was the sacrament
institute only.

FINIS.
A Letter sent from William Tyndall, unto John Frith, being prisoner in the
Tower of London.
THe grace and peace of God our father and of Jesus A letter of Master Tyndall
to M. ^r^^h.
Christ our Lord, be with you Amen. Dearly beloved brother John. I have heard
say, how that hypocrites now that they have overcome that great business which
let the^ at the least way, have brought it at a stay, they return to their
old nature again. The will of God be fulfilled, and that which he has
ordained to be ere the world was made, that come, and his glory reign over all.

Dearly beloved, how ever the matter be, commit your self wholly and only
unto your most loving father, and most kind Lord, and fear not men that
threat, nor trust men that speak fair: but trust him that is true of promise,
and able to make his word good. Your cause is Christ's Gospel, a light that
must be fed with the blood of faith. The lamp must be dressed and snuffed
daily, and that oil poured in every evening and morning, that the light go
not out. Though we be sinners, yet is the cause right. If when we be busteted
1. Pet. 2.
for well doing, we suffer patiently and endure, that is acceptable to God: for
to that end we are called. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps, who did no sin. Hereby have we
perceaned 1. Ioh. 5.
love, that he laid down his life for us: Therefore we ought also to lay
down our lives for the brethern. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward
in heaven. Math. 5. Romans 8. Phil. 3.
For we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him: Who shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body,
according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all things unto him.

Dearly beloved, be of good courage, and comfort your soul with the hope of
this Boldness of spirit.
high reward, and bear the Image of Christ in your mortal body, that it may
at his coming be made like to his, immortal: and follow the example of all
your other dear Weunde not conscience.
brethren, which chose to suffer in hope of a better resurrection. Keep your
conscience pure and undefiled, and say against that nothing. Stick at
necessary things, and remember the blasphemies of the enemies of Christ,
saying: they find none but that will Standing upon things necessary.
abjure rather then suffer the extremity. Moreover, the death of the^ that
come again after they have once denied, thouh it be accepted with God, and all
that believe, yet is Death after denying, evil spoken of by the adversaries.
it not glorious, for the hipocrites say, he must needs dye, denying helps
not: But might it have helped, they would have denied five hundred times: but
seeing it would not help them, therefore of pure pride, and mere malice
together, they speak with their mouths, that their conscience knows false.
If you give your self, cast your self, yield your self, commit your self
wholly and only to your loving father: then shall his power be in you and make
you strong, and that so strong, that you shall feel Obedience of God.
no pain: which should be to an other present death: and his spirit shall
speak in you, and teach you what to answer, according to his promise. He
shall set out his truth by you wonderfully, and work for you above all that
your heart can imagine: Yea, and you are not yet dead, though the hipocrites
all, with all they can make, have sworn To look for no ma^s help, brings
Gods help.
your death. Vna salus victis nullam sperare salutem: To look for no man's
help, brings the help of God to them that seem to be overcome in the eyes
of the hipocrites: Yea it shall make God to carry you through thick and thin
for his truethes sake, in spite of all the enemies of his truth. There falls
not an hear till his hour be come: Conslancie in standing. Patience in
suffering.
and when his hour is come, necessity caryeth us hence though we be not
willing. But if we be willing, then have we a reward and thank.

Fear not threatening therefore, neither be overcome with sweet words: with
which twain, the hipocrites shall assail you. Neither let the persuasions of
worldly wisdom bear rule in your heart: No, though they be your friends that
counsel you. Let Bilney be a warning to you. Let not their visure beguile
your eyes. Let not your body Bylney.
saint. He that endures to the end shall be saved. If the pain be above your
Perseueraunce to the end. Math. 21.
strength, remember: Whatsoever, you shall ask in my name, I will give it you.
And pray to your father in that name, and he will ease your pain, or shorten
it. The Lord of peace, of hope, and of faith, be with you. Amen. William
Tyndall.

TWo have suffered in Antwarpe, In die sancta Crucis, unto the great glory of
the Two Martyrs at Antwerpe. Four martyrs in Flanders, and one at Luke.
Persecution at Ro^ne. Five Doctors at Paris taken for ye Gospel.
Gospel: four at Riselles in Flaunders, and at Luke has there one at the
least suffered, and all ni ye same day. At Roan in France they persecute. And
at Paris are five doctors taken for the Gospel. See, you are not alone: Be
cherefull and remember that among the hard hearted in England, there is a number
reserved by grace: for whose sakes if need be, you must be ready to suffer.
Sir if you may write, how short so ever it be, forget it not, that we may know
how it goes with you, for our hearts ease. The Lord be yet again with you,
with all his plenteousnes, and fill you ye you flow over. Amen.

If when you have read this, you may send it to Adrian, do I pray you, that he
may know how that our heart is with you.

George Joy at Candelmasse being at Barrow, Printed two leaves of Genesis in a
great form, and sent one Copy to the King, and an other to the new Queen,
with a letter to N. for to deliver them: and to purchase license, ye he might
so go through all the Bible. Out of that is sprung the noise of the new Bible:
and out of that is the great seeking for English books at all Printers and
Book bynders in Antwarpe, and for an English Priest ye should Printe. This
chanced the ix. day of May. Sir your wife is well content with the will of
God, and would not for her sake, have ye glory of God hindered.

William Tyndall.

An other notable and worthy Letter of master William Tyndall sent to the said
John Frith, under the name of Jacob.
The grace of our Savior Jesus, his patience, mekenes, humblenes,
circumspection, and wisdom be with your heart. Amen.
Dearly beloved brother In other Letter of M. Tyndall.
Jacob, mine hearts desire in our Savior Jesus is, that you arm your self
with patience, and be cold, sober, wise and circumspect, and that you keep you
allow by the ground, auoydyng high questions that pass the common capacity.
High questions to be avoided.
But expound the law truly, and open the veil of Moses to condemn all flesh,
and prove all me^ sinners, and All deeds before they be justified by faith
are sin.
all deeds under the law, before mercy have taken away the comdemnation there
of, to be sin and damnable. And then as a faithful Minister, set abroch the
mercy of our Lord Jesus, and let the wounded consciences drink of the water of
him. And then shall your preaching be with power, and not as the doctrine of
the hypocrites: and the spirit of God shall work with you, and all
consciences shall bear record unto you, and feel yt it is so. And all
doctrine Preaching the law of God, and mercy of Christ.
that casts a miste on those two, to shadow and hyde them, I mean the law of
God and mercy of Christ, that resist you withal your power. Sacraments without
signification refuse. If they put Sacraments without significations to be
refused.
significations to them, receive them, if you see it may help though it be
not necessary.

Of the presence of Christ's body in M. Tynball he^e bears with time.
the Sacrament, meddle as little as you can, that there appear no division among
us. Barnes will be whote against you. The Saxons be ^ore on the affirmative,
whether constant or obstiuate, I omit it to God. Philippe Melancton is said to
be with the French king. There be in Antwerpe that say, they saw him come into
Paris with an c. and l. horses, and that they spoke with him. If the Frenchmen
receive the word of God, he will plant the affirmative in them. By the affir^
he ^neth the ^on which M. Luther and the ^axo^s be hold of the Sacrament.
George Joy would have put forth a treatise of the matter, but I have stopped
him as yet, what he will do if he get money, I wotte not. I believe he would
make many reasons little seruyng to the purpose. My mind is, that nothing be
put forth till we hear how you shall have speed. I would have the right use
preached, and the presence to be an indifferent M. Tyndall a^ bears with time.
thing, till the matter might be reasoned in peace at laysure, of both parties.
If you be required, show the phrases of the Scripture, and let them talk what
they will. For as to believe yt God is every where, hurts no man that worship
him no where but within, in the heart, in spirit and verity: eue^ so to believe
that the body of Christ is every where (though it can not be proved) hurts no
man that worshippeth Vbiquetie can not be proved.
him no where save in the faith of his Gospel. You perceive my mind: how beit
if God show you otherwise, it is free for you to do as he moves you.

I gessed long ago that God would send a dasing into the head of the
spirituality, to be catched the^ selves in their own subtlety, and I trust it
is come to pass. And now me thinks I smell a counsel to be taken, little for
their profits in time to come. But you must understand, that it is not of a
pure heart and for love of the truth, but to aduenge the^ Eating the whores
flesh, is to spoil the Popes Church* only for y^ pray and spoil there of.
selves, and to eat the Whores flesh, and to suck the marow of her bones.
Wherefore cleave fast to the rock of the help of God, and commit the end of
all things to him: and if God shall call you, that you may then use the
wisdom of the worldly, as far as you perceive the glory of God may come
thereof, refuse it not: and ever among, thrust in, that Worldly wisdom so
far as it may serve to Gods glory, may be used.
the Scripture may be in the mother tongue, and learning set up in the
Universities. But and if ought be required contrary to the glory of God and his
Christ, the^ stand fast, and commit your self to God, and be not overcome of
men's persuasions, which happily shall say: we see no other way to bring in the
truth.

Brother Jacob, beloved in my heart, there lives not in whom I have so good
hope and trust, and in who^ mine heart reioyseth and my soul comfort her
self, as in you: not the thousand part so much for your learning, and what
other gifts else you have, as that you will crepe allow by the ground, and Low
wa^kyng.
walk in those things that the conscience may feel, and not in the
imaginations of the brain: in fear and not in boldness: in open necessary
things, and not to pronounce or define of hyd secrets, or things that neither
help or hinder whether they be so or no: in unity and not in seditious
opinions: in so much that if you be sure you know, yet in things that may
abide laysure, you will defer, or say (till other agree with you) me think
the text requires this sense or understanding: yea and that if you be sure
that your part be good, and in other hold the contrary, yet if it be a thing
that makes no matter, you will laugh and let it pass, and refer the thing
to other men, and stick you stiffly and stubburnely in earnest and necessary
things. And I trust ye be persuaded eue^ so of me. For I call God to The
upright handlyng in the translation of M. Tyndall.
record against ye day we shall appear before our Lord Jesus, to give a
recknyng of our doings, that I never altered one syllable of Gods word against
my conscience, nor would this day, if all that is in the earth, whether it be
pleasure, honor or riches, might be given me. Moreover I take God to record
to my conscience, that I desire of God to my self in this world no more, then
that without which I can not keep his laws.

Finally, if there were in me any gift that could help at hand, and aid you
if need required: I promise you I would not be far of, and commit the end to
God: my soul is not faint, though my body be weary. But God has made me evil
favored in this world, and without grace in the sight of me^, spechles and
rude, dull and slow witted: your part shall be to supply that lacks in A low
heart makes a man high with God.
me, remembryng, that as lowlynes of heart shall make you high with God, even so
mekenes of words shall make Authority is the glory of age.
you sink into the hearts of men. Nature gives age authority, but mekenes is
the glory of youth, and gives Meekenes is the glory of youth.
the^ honor. Abundance of love makes me excede in bablyng.

Sir as concerning Purgatory, and many other things, if you be demanded, you
may say, if you err, the spirituality has so le^ you, and that they have
taught you to believe as you do. For they preached you all such things out of
Gods word, and alleged a thousand textes, by reason of which textes you
believed as they taught you. But now you find the^ liars, and that the textes
mean no such things, and therefore you can believe no longer, but are as you
were before they taught you, and believe no such thing. Howbeit you are ready to
believe, if they have any other way to prove it. For without proof Purgatory
has no proof by Scripture.
you can not believe the^, when you have found them with so many lies. etc. If
you perceive wherein we may help, other in being still, or doing somewhat, let
us have word, and I will do mine uttermost.

My Lord of London has a servant called John Tisen with a red beard, and a
black reddish head, and was once my scholar, he was seue in Antwerpe, but
came not among the Englishmen: whether he is gone an Ambassador secret, I
wot not.

The mighty God of Jacob be with you to supplant his enemies, and give you the
favor of Joseph: and the wisdom, and the spirit of Stephen, be with your
heart and with your mouth, and teach your lips what they shall say, and how to
answer to all things. He is our God if we despair in ourselves, and trust
in him: and his is the glory. Amen. William Tyndall.

I hope our redemption is nigh.

This letter was written. an. 1533. in the month of January. Which letter
although it do pretend the name of Jacob, yet understand (good reader) that it
was written in very deed to John Frith, as is above told thee. For more proof
and evidence whereof read Frithes book of the Sacrament, and there thou shall
find a certain place of this Epistle repeted word for word, beginning this: I
call God to record, against the day, we shall appear before our Lord Jesus to
give a rekening of our doings, that I never altered one syllable of Gods word
against my conscience etc. Which Epistle John Frith him self witnesses that
he received from Tyndall as in his testimony above appears.

The end of all M. William Tindals works, newly Imprinted, according to his
first copies, which he himself set forth.
Gods name be blessed for ever. Amen.
Here follows a short and pithy treatise touching the Lords Supper, compiled,
as some do gather, by M. William Tyndall, because the method and phrase agree
with his, and the time of writing are concurrent, which for thy further
instruction and learning (gentle Reader) I have annexed to his works, le^t the
Church of God should want any of the paineful travels of godly men, whose only
care and endeavor was to advance the glory of God, and to further the
salvation of Christ's flock committed to their charge.

The Supper of the Lord. After the true meaning of the vi. of John and the xi.
of the first Epistle to the Cor. And incidently in the exposition of the Supper
is confuted the Letter of Master More against John Frith.
Anno. 1533. the v. day of April.
WHen Christ saw those glottons seeking their bellyes flockyng, so fast unto
him, after his wo^ted manner (the occasion taken to teach and preach unto them
of the thing now moved) he said. Verily verily I say unto you: ye John. 6.
seek me not because ye have seen my miracles, but because ye have eaten of
the loaves and were well filled. But as for me, I am not commen into this world
only to fill men's bellyes: but to feed and satisfy their souls. Ye take
great pains to follow me for the meat of your bellyes: but oh sloughardes,
work, take pains and labor rather to get that meat that shall never perish.
For this meat that ye have sought of me hitherto, perishes with your bellyes:
but the meat that I shall give you, is spiritual, and may not perish, but
abides for ever, giuyng life everlasting. For my father has consigned and
confirmed me with his assured testimony, to be that assured saving health and
earnest penny of everlasting life. When the Jews understood not The Jews were
blind and ignorant, and understood not the words of Christ.
what Christ meant, biddyng them to work and labor for that meat that
should never perish, they asked him, what shall we do, that we might work the
works of God? supposing that he had spoken of some outward work required of
them. Wherefore Jesus au^swered, saying. Eue^ this is the work of God, to
believe and trust in him who^ the father has sent. Lo, here may ye see The true
work that is acceptable before God.
that work of God which he requires of us, even to believe in Christ. Also
consider again what this meat is, which he bad them here prepare and seek
for, saying: work, take pains and seek for that meat etc. and thou shall
see it none other meat then the belief in Christ: wherefore he concludes, that
this meat so often mentioned, is faith: of the which meat (^ayth the Prophet)
the Abacuk. 2.
just lives. Faith in him is therefore the meat which Christ prepares and
dresseth so purely: poulderyng and spicyng it with spiritual Allegories in all
this Chapter following, to give us everlasting life through it.

Then said the Jews unto him. The Jews desire a sig^e or token whereby they
might believe that he was Christ.
What token do thou whereby we might know that we should believe in thee? Do
somewhat that we might believe in thee? what thing workest thou that we might
know thee to be God? Thou know well enough that our fathers did eat bread
or Ma^na in the deserte, as it is written, he gave them bread from above.
Jesus answered. Verily verily I say unto you: Moses gave ye not that bread
from heaven: for Psalm. 7.
though it fell down from the air: yet was it not heavenly food for it did
but feed the belly: but this bread of God that is descended from heaven (whom
my father gives) refreshes the soul so aboundauntly, that it gives life un
to the world. When the Jews understood not this saying, which was naught
else then the declaryng of the Gospel (for by the eating of this bread he
meant that belefe of this his Gospel) they said. Sir, give us this bread
evermore. Jesus said unto the^. Christ required of the Jews to have faith and
trust in him.
I am the bread of life, and who so comes to me, shall not hunger: and who so
believes in me shall never thyrst. When the Jews hard Christ say, the bread
that descended from heaven should give life to the world: they desired to have
this bread given them for ever. And Jesus perceiving that they understood not
the sense of this Gospel: he expounded Christ explaneth and shows him self
to the Jews.
unto them who was this so lively bread that gives life to all the world,
saying. I am the bread of life, and who so comes to me, that is to say, who
so is graffed and joined to me by faith, shall never hunger, that is, who so
believes in me is satisfied. It is faith therefore that stancheth this hunger
and thyrst of the soul. Faith it is therefore in Christ that fills our hungry
hearts, so that we ca^ desire none other, Faith only apprehe^deth Christ and
all his benefits.
if we* once eat and drink him by faith, that is to say, if we believe his
flesh and body to have been broken and his blood shed for our sins. For then
are our souls satisfied and we be justified.

Over this, it follows: But I have told you this, because ye look upon me,
and believe me not, that is, ye be offended that I said, he that comes to me
shall neither hunger nor thyrst, seeing that your selves being present, be yet
both hungry and thyrstie. But this Christ rebukes the incredulity and lack
of faith in the Jews
comes because ye have seen me with your bodily eyes, and yet see me and
believe not in me: but I speak not of such sight nor coming, but of the sight
of faith, which who so has, he shall have none other desire, he shall not
seek by night to love an other before whom be would lay his grief. He shall not
run wandering here and there to seek dead stocks and stones: for he is
certified by his ^ayth to whom he shall cleave, he is coupled by faith unto me
his very spouse and lively food, the only treasure of his soul, never more
to thyrst for any other. This light of faith ye have not, for ye believe not nor
trust in me: wherefore ye understand not how I am the very bread and meat of
your souls, that is to say, your faith and hope. And the cause of this your
blyndnes is All that the father draw come unto Christ
(I will not say over hardly to you) that the father has not drawn you in to
the knowledge of me, or else ye had received me. For all that the father gives
me, must come unto me. And as for me, I cast out no man that comes to me: For
I am not come down from heaven to do my will, which ye attribute unto me as
unto each any other man, for I am verily a very man: and according to that
nature I have a special proper will: but much more obedient to my father, then
one of you. For your Christ came from heaven into earth to fulfill the will of
his father.
will often resists and repugneth Gods will, but so does mine never. I am
therefore come down to do his will that has sent me. And to do you to wit
what his will is. This (I say) is my fathers will yt has sent me. That of all
that he has given me, I lee^e none: but must raise him up again in the last
day: and to be plain. This is the will of him that sent me. That who so sees
(that is to know) the son and believes in him, he shall have life
euerlalastyng: and I shall stir him up in ye last day. Here may ye see what
meat he speaks of. God sent his son into this world, that we might live
thorough him. Who lives by him? They that eat his flesh and drink his blood.
Who eat his flesh and drink his blood? He. y^ believes Christ's death to be
for the remission of his sins the same cateth y^ flesh and drinks the
blood of Christ.
They that believe his body crucified and his blood shed for their sins: these
clea^e unto his gracious favor. But how could they clean thus unto him except
they knew him? And therefore he added saying. Every man that sees the son,
that is to say, understands wherefore the son was sent into this world and
believes in him shall have everlasting life.

Here it appeared to the carnal The cause of ye Jews murmur.
Jews that Christ had taken to much upon him self, to say: I am the bread of
life, which am come down from heaven to give life to the world wherefore the
flesh, that is to say the Jews now murmured, and no^ marvelled (as M. More
shows his own dream to an other text following which I shall touch anon)
they murmured at this saying of Christ. I am the bread which am come from
heaven, saying, Is not this Jesus Iosephes son whose father and mother we
know well enough? How then says he, I am come from heaven? Jesus au^swered
saying, Murmour Christ reproves the murmuryng of the Jews.
not among your selves: Heard ye not what I told you even now? All that my
father gives me, come to me? your unbelief (whereof follows this false
understanding of my words spiritually spoken) compels me to tell you one
thing more the^ once or twice. This therefore it is: No man may come to me the
only earnest penny and pledge* of your salvation, unless my father that sent
me draw him: and who^ he draws unto me, that is, joins unto me by faith,
him shall I stir up in the last day. I wonder that ye take my words so
straungely, beleuyng them to be some hard r^dels, or dark parables, when I say
nothing else, the^ that is written in your own Prophets, both in Esaias, and
Jeremy, saying, that Esaias. 54. Ierem. 31.
all shall be taught of the Lord. Since eue^ your Prophets testify this
knowledge to be given you of my father: what can be spoken more plainly then to
say: what my father gives me, that comes to me? or this, no man may come to
me, except my father draw him. And yet have it more manifestly. Who so has
heard my father, and is learned of John. 6.
him, he comes to me as unto the very only anchor of his salvation. Not that
any man has seen the father, lest peradnenture ye mistake these words to
hear, and to learn, as though they pertemed to the outward senses, and not
rather to the mind and inward illuminyng of the soul. For no man ever saw the
father, although he work secretly upon his heart, so that what so ever he
wills, we must hear and learn. No man (I say) sees him, but he that is
sent of God, as I said before of my self, he it is that sees the father. Now
therefore say I unto you, verily, All that believe and hope in Christ have
everlasting life.
verily, as plainly, yt who so believes and trusts in me, he has life
everlasting. Now have ye yt sum of this my doctrine, eue^ my very gospel ye
whole tale of all my legacy and message wherefore I am sent into the world. Had
M. More M. More had not the understanding of the scriptures. 1. Cor. 11.
understood this short sentence, (who so believes in me has life everlasting)
and known what Paul with the other Apostles preached: especially Paul being a
year and a half among the Corinthia^s, determinyng not, neither presumyng to
have known any other thing to be preached them (as him self says) then Jesus
Christ, and that he was crucified. Had M. More understand this point, he should
never have thus blasphemed Christ and his sufficient Scriptures, neither have
so belyed his Eua^gelistes and holy Apostles, as to say, they wrote not all
things necessary for our salvation, but left out things of necessity to be
believed, making Gods holy testament insufficient and imperfect. First reveled
unto our fathers, written often sense by Moses, and then by his Prophets, and
at last written both by his holy Evangelists and Apostles to. More is a mocker.


But turn we to John again and let More mock still and lie to. I am y^ bread
of life says Christ. And no man denies y^ our fathers and elders did eat
Manna in the desert, and yet are they dead. But he that eats of this bread:
that is to say, believes in me, he has life everlasting. For it is I that am
this lively bread, which am come from heaven, of whom who so eat by faith,
shall never The eating or the bread of Christ is only to believe in Christ's
^eath.
dye. Here therefore it is to be noted diligently y^ Christ means, as every
man may see, by y^ eating of this bread none other thing then the belefe in him
self, offered up for our sins: which faith only justifies us. Which
sentence to declare more plainly, and that he would have it noted more
diligently, he repeteth it yet again, saying: It is I yt am the lively bread
which am come down from heaven: who so eats of this bread, shall live
everlastingly. And to put you clear out of doubt, I shall show you in few
words, what this matter is, and by what ways I must be the Savior and
redemer of the world, to give it this life so often rehearsed: and therefore now
take good heed. This bread which I How the bread signifies and shows
Christ's ^esh.
speak of so much and shall give it you: it is mine own flesh: which I must
lay forth and pay for the life of y^ world. Here it is now manifest, that he
should suffer death in his own flesh for our rede^ptio^ to give us this life
everlasting. Thus now may ye see how Christ's flesh, Christ's flesh is the
spiritual food of ou^ souls.
which he called bread, is the spiritual food and meat of our souls. When
our souls by faith see God the father not to have spared his only so dear
beloved son, but to have delivered him to suffer that ignominious and so
paynefull death, to restore us to life: the^ have we eaten his flesh, and
dronken his blood, assured firmly of the favor of God, satisfied and
certified of our salvation.

After this communication, that he said. The bread which I shall give you is
my flesh, which I shall pay for the life of the world: yet were the carnal
Jews never the wiser. For their The obstinate and wilful blyndnes of the
Jews.
unbelief and sturdy hatred, would not suffer the very spiritual sense and
mind of Christ's words to enter into their hearts. They could not see that
Christ's flesh broken and crucified, and not bodily eaten, should be our
salvation, and this spiritual meat: as our souls to be fed and certified of
the mercy of God, and forgiveness of our sins thorough his passion: and not
for any eating of his flesh with our teeth. The The malice of the Jews,
toward our Savior Christ.
more ignorant therefore and fleshly they were, the more fierce were they full
of indignation, striuyng one against an other, saying. How may this fellow give
us his flesh to eat it? They stoke fast yet in his flesh before their eyes:
those fleshly Jews. Wherefore no marvel though they abhorred the bodily eating
thereof: although our fleshly Papists (being of the Jews carnal The carnal
Papists cease not still to offer him. Hebr. 10.
opinion) yet abhor it not, neither cease they daily to crucify and offer
him up again, which was once for ever and all offered as Paul testifies. And
even here, since Christ came to teach, to take away all doubt, and to break
strife, he might (his words otherwise declared, then he has and will here
after expound them) have soluted their question: saying, if he had so meant as
More means, that he would have been conuayed and conuersed (as our iugglers
sleighly can conuaye him with a few words) into a singyng loaf: or else (as
the Thomisticall Papists Thomistes be y^ schole Doctors.
say) been invisible with all his dimensioned body under the form of bread
transubstantiated into it. And after a like Thomisticall mystery, the wine
transubstantiated to, into his blood so that they should eat his flesh and
drink his blood after their own carnal understanding, but yet in an other
form, to put away all grudge of stomach. Or since S. John (if he had
understood his masters mind, and took upon him to write his words) would
leave this Sermon unto the world to be read: he might now have delivered us and
them from this doubt. But Christ would not so satisfy their question: but
answered. Verily verily I say unto you: except ye eat the flesh of the son
of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have that life in your selves. He
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has life everlasting: Christ in
saying y^ his flesh is very meat does not say that bread shall be
transubsta^^ated into his flesh.
and I shall stir him up in the last day: for my flesh is very meat and my
blood the very drink. He says not here that bread shall be transubstanciated or
converted into his body, nor yet the wine into his blood. But now co^ferre this
saying to his purpose at the beginning: where he had them work for that meat
that should never perish tellyng them, that to believe in him whom God has
sent, was the work of God. And who so believes in him should never thyrst nor
hunger, but have life everlasting. Confer also Christ's words are spiritual
and not carnal.
this that follows and then shall see it plain, that his words be understand
spiritually of the belefe in his flesh crucified, and his blood shed, for which
belefe we be promised everlasting life: him self, saying. Who so believes in
me has life everlasting. Here therefore their question (how may this man give
us his flesh to eat it) is soluted: even when he gave his body to be broken,
and his blood to be shed. And we eat and drink it in deed, when we believe
steadfastly that he dyed for the remission of our sins: Austen and Tertullian
to witness.

But here makes More his argument against the young man. Because the Jews
maruelle^ at this saying: My flesh is very meat, and my blood drink. And not
at this: I am the door, and the very vine: therefore this text (says he) My
flesh is etc. must be understand after the litterall sense, that is to wirte:
eue^ as the carnal Jews understood it, murmuring at it, being offended, going
their ways from Christ, for their so carnal understanding thereof. And the
other textes. I am the door. More declares his ignorance and wilful blyndnes.
etc. must be understand in an Allegory and spituall sense, because his hearers
marvelled nothing at the manner of the speech. Lo Christen Reader, here have
thou not a ^ast: but a great tun full of Mores mischief and pernicious
peruertyng of Gods holy word: and as thou seist him here falsely and
pestilently destroy the pure sense of Gods word, so does he in all other
places of his books. First where he says they marueiled at this Christ's
saying. My flesh is very meat. etc. that is not so, neither is there any such
word in the text, except More reports the Scriptures untruly.
More will expound Murmurabant, idest, mirabantur, they murmured, that is to
say, they marueiled, as he expounds. Oportet, idest, expedit and conuenit. He
must dye, or it behooves him to dye, that is to say, it was expedient and of
good co^gruence that he should dye. etc. Thus this Poet may make a man to
signify an Ass, and black white to blere the simple eyes. But yet for his
Lordly Mores first reason is co^fute^.
pleasure, let us grant him that, they murmured, is as much to say, as they
meruayled: because perchance the one may follow at the other. And then do I
ask him: whether Christ's Disciples and his Apostles heard ^im not, and
understood him not when he said. I am the door and the vine: and when he
said. My flesh. etc. If he say no, or nay: John. 6. 10. 15.
the Scripture is plain against him. If he say yea, or yes: then yea do I
ask him whether his Disciples and Apostles thus hearing and understanding his
words in all these three Chapters wondered and meruayled (as More says) or
murmu^ed (as has the text) at their masters speech? What think ye, More must
answer here? Here may ye see whether this old holy vpholder of the Popes
Church is brought: even to be taken in his own trappe. For the Disciples and
his Apostles Christ's Disciples murmured not at his saying.
neither murmured, nor mer^ayled, nor yet were offended with this their master
Christ's words and manner of speech: for they w^ainted with such ph^red their
master Christ when h^ ^e, will ye also go hence fr^me* Lord said they to whom
shall we go? thou have the words of everlasting ly^e: and we believe that thou
ar^ son of the living God. Lo M. More, they neither meruailed, nor murmured.
And Christ's ^s w^ in all things to be spiritually understand.
why? For because as ye say the^ understood i^ in an Allegory (...), ^^d
perceived well that he meant not of his material ^ody to be eaten with their
teeth, but he meant (...) of him self to be believed, to be very God and very
man having flesh and blood as they had, and yet was he ^he son of the living
God. This belefe gathered they of all his spiritual sayings as him self
expounded his own words, saying. My flesh profits nothing, meaning, to be
eaten: but it is the spirit that gives this life. And the words that I
speak unto you are spirit and life: so that who so believe my flesh to be
crucified and broken, and my blood to be shed for his sins, he eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, and has life everlasting. And this is the life
Abacuk. 2.
wherewith the righteous live, even by faith.

The second argument of More.
AFter this text thus wisely proved to be understand in the litterall sense,
with carnal Jews, and not in the Allegorike or spiritual sense with Christ
and his Apostles: the whole su^me of Mores confutation of the young man
stands upon this Argument. (...) Posse ad Esse. That is to wit, God may do
it, Erg^, it is done Christ may make his body in many, or in all places at
once, Ergo, it is in many or in all places at once. Which manner of
argumentation, how false and naught it is every sophister, and every man that
has wit perceives. A like argument. God may The confutation of his ij.
argument.
show More the truth and call him to repentance, as he did Paul for
persecutyng his Church: Ergo, More is converted to God. Or, God may let him run
of an indurate heart with Pharao, and at last take an open and soden vengeance
upon him for persecutyng his word, and burning his poor members: Ergo, it is
done already. M. More Christ in that he is God may do all things that he will,
but yet he will not falsefye his holy Scriptures.
must first prove it us by express words of holy Scripture, and not by his
own unwritten dreams, that Christ's body is in many places, or in all places
at once: and then though our reason can not reach it, yet our faith measured
and directed with the word of faith will both reach it, receive it, and hold
it fast to: not because it is possible to God, and impossible to reason: but
because the written word of our faith says it. But when we read Gods words
in mo then xx. places contrary, that his body should be here. More must give us
leave to believe his unwritten vanities (verities I should say) at laysure. Here
may thou see Christen reader wherefore More would so feign make thee believe,
that the Apostles left out certain things unwritten, of necessity to be
believed, eue^ to stablish the Popes kingdom, which stands of Mores unwritten
vanities. As of the presence of Christ's body and making thereof in the bread.
Of Purgatory, of invocation of Saints, worshyppyng of stones and stocks,
pilgrimages, halowyng of bows and belles, and crepyng to the cross etc. If ye
will believe what so ever More can feign without the Scripture: then ca^ this
Poet feign you an other Church the^ Christ's, and More is a great sette^orth
of unwritten ve^ities.
that ye must believe it what so ever it teaches you, for he has fained to
that, it ca^ not err, though ye see it err and fight against it self a
thousand rymes. Yea if it tell you black is white, good is bad, and the devil
is God: yet must ye believe it, or else be burned as heretics. But let us
return to our purpose.

To dispute of Gods almighty absolute Although ye Pope da^e ^ot take upon him
to be God* yet he is contented to be named and taken for half a God
power, what God may do with his body, it is great folly and no less
presumption to More, since the Pope which is no whole God but half a God by
their own decrees have decreed, no man to dispute of his power. But Christen
Reader be thou content to know that Gods will, his word, and his power be all
one and repugne not. And neither wills he, nor may not do any thing includyng
repugnaunce, imperfection, or that should derogate, minish or hurt his glory
and his name. The glory of his Godhead is to be present and to fill all places
at once essencially presently with his almighty power, which glory is denied
to any other creature, him self saying by his Prophet: I will not give my
glory to Esaias. 42.
any other creature: now therefore sith his ma^head is a creature, it ca^ not
have this glory only which is appropried to the Godhead. To attribute to his
manhood that property which only is appropried to his Godhead is to
confound both the natures of Christ. What thing so ever, is every where after
the said manner, that must needs be infinite, without beginning and end, it must
be one alone, and almighty: which properties only are appropried Christ ^s
touching his manhood occupies at one ^y me but one place, but his Godhead is
in all places at once. John. 14. John. 10. Hebr. 11.
unto the glorious majesty of the Godhead. Wherefore Christ's body may not be
in all or in many places at once. Christ him self saying as concerning his
manhoo^. He is less then the father, but as touching his Godhead, the father
and I be both one thing. And Paul recityng the Psalm affirms: Christ as
concerning his manhood to be less then God: or less then angels as some text
has it? Here it is plain that all things that More imagines and fayneth are
not possible to God, for it is not possible for God to make acreature equal
unto him self, for it includes repugnau^ce and derogateth his glory. God
promised and swore that all nations should be blessed in the death of that
promised seed which was Christ. God had determined and decreed it before the
world was made: Ergo, Christ must needs have dyed, and not to expou^de this
word Oportet, as More mynseth it. For it was so necessary that the contrary was
impossible, except More would make God a liar, which is impossible. Paul
concludes that Christ Hebr. 9.
must needs have dyed, vsyng this Latin term Necesse. Saying: where so ever
Christ's must needs dye, for God had so promised before.
is a Testament, there must the death of the Testament maker go between: or else
the Testament is not ratified and sure, but righteousness and remission of
sins in Christ's blood is his new Testament, whereof he is mediator: Ergo,
the Testament maker must needs have died. Wrest not therefore (M. More) this
word Oportet (though ye find Potest for Oportet in some corrupt copy) unto
your unsavory sense. But let Oportet signify, he must or it behooves him to
dye. For he took our very mortal nature for ye same decreed counsel: himself
saying. Oportet exaltari filium hominis. etc. John. 2. and 12.
It behooves, that the son of man must dye, that every one that believes in
him perish not etc. Here may ye see also yt it is impossible for God to break
his promise. It is impossible to God God may not be fou^d^.
which is that verity, to be found contrary in his deeds and words: as to
save them whom he has damned, or to damn them whom he has saved, wherefore
all things imagined of M. Mores brain are not possible to God.

And when More says, that Christ had power to let his life and to take it
again, and therefore not to have dyed of necessity: I wonder me, that his
scholemaister here sailed him, so cunnyng as he makes him self therein: which
grau^teth and affirms (as true it is) that with the necessary decreed works
of Gods forsight and providence stands right well his free liberty. But M.
More More would have believed Christ if he had talked with him, what soever he
had said to him.
says at last, if God would cell me that he would make each of both their
bodies two (meaning the young man's body and his) to be in fiften places at
once, I would believe him, that he werable to make his words true in the bodies
of both twain, and never would I so much as ask him whether he would
glorify them both first or not: but I am sure glorified or unglorified, if he
said it, he is able to do it. ^o here may ye see what a ^erue^t faith this old
man has, and what an earnest mind to believe Christ's words if he had told
him: but I pray you M. More, what and if Christ never told it you, nor said it,
nor never would: would ye not be as hasty not to believe it? If he told it you:
I pray you tell us where you spoke with him, and who was by to bear ye
record: and if you bring as false a shrew as your self to testify this thing:
yet by your own doctrine, must ye make us a miracle to confirm your tale, ere
we be bound to believe you: or yet to admit this your argument, God may make his
body in many places at once, Ergo, it is so. Sir ye be to busy Gods almightye
power is not to be to busely deal withal.
with Gods almighty power, and have taken to great a burden upon your weak
shoulders, ye have ouerladen your self with your own harness and weapons: and
young David is likely to prevail against you with his sling and stone. God
has infatuated your high subtle wisdom. Your crafty conueyaunce is spyed.
God has sent your Church a mete cover for such a cup, eue^ such a defender as
ye take upon your self to be, that shall let all their whole cause fall
flat in the myer unto both your shames and utter confusion. God therefore be
praised ever. Amen.

Then says M. More, though it seems repugnaunt both to him and to me, one
body to be in two places at once: yet God sees how to make them stand
together well enough. This man with More does but scoff out the matter.
his old eyes and spectacles sees far in Gods sight, and is of his preuey
Council: that knows belike by some secret revelation how God sees one body
to be in many places at once, includyng no repugnaunce. For word has he none
for him in all Scripture no more the^ one body to be in all places at once. It
implies first repugnaunce to my Matters of ^ayth are repugnau^t to reason.
sight and reason, that all this world should be made of nothing: and that a
virgin should bring forth a child. But yet, when I see it written with the
words of my faith, which God spoke: and brought it so to pass: the^ implies
it no repugnaunce to me at all. For my faith reaches it and receives it
steadfastly. For I know yt voice of my herd man: which if he said in any place
of Scripture that his body should have been contained under the form of bread
and so many places at once here, in earth, and also abidyng yet still in heaven
to. Verily I would have believed him, as soon and as firmly as M. More. And
Gods blessed will is declared in his Scriptures.
therefore even yet, if he can show us but one sentence truly taken for his
part, as we ca^ do many for the contrary, we must give place. For, as for his
vnwritte^ verities, and the authority of his Antichrists sinagoge, unto which
(yt scripture forsaken) he is now at last with shame enough compelled to flee:
they be proved stark lies and very deuelry.

Then says he, that ye wot well that many good folk have used in this matter
many good fruitful examples of Gods other works: not only miracles, written
in Scripture. Vnde versus? (where one I pray ye?) but also done by the common
course of nature here in earth. If they be done by the common More trauc^leth
in his Poetry.
course of nature, so be they no miracles. And some things made also by man's
hand. As one face beholded in diverse glasses: and every piece of one glass
broken into twenty. etc. Lord how this ponti^icall Poet plays his part.
Because (as he says) we see many faces in many glasses: therefore may one body
be in many places, as though every shadow and similitude representing the body,
were a bodily substance. But I ask More, when he sees his own face in so
many glasses, whether all those faces that appear in the glasses be his own
very faces having bodily substance, skin, flesh and bone, as has that
face, which has his very mouth nose eyes etc. wherewith he faceth us out the
truth thus falsely with lies? And if they be all his very faces, Mores
similitude of faces in the glass proves no faces in substance.
then in very deed there is one body in many places, and he him self bears
as many faces in one hode. But according to his purpose, eue^ as they be no
very faces, nor those so many voices, sownes and similitudes, multiplied in the
air, between the glasses or other object and the body (as the Philosopher
proves by natural reason) be no very bodies: no more is it Christ's very
body: as they would make thee believe in the bread, in so many places at once.
But the bread broken and eaten in the Supper monisheth and puts us in By
^ayth we must eat and drink Christ's body and blo^d spiritually.
remembrance of his death, and so exciteth us to thanks giuyng to land and
praise: for the benefit of our redemption, and thus we there have Christ
present in the inward eye and sight of our faith. We eat his body and drink
his blood, that is, we believe surely that his body was crucified for our
sins and his blood shed for our salvation.

At last note (Christen reader) that M. More in the third book of his
confutation of Tyndall the. CCxlix side, to prove S. John's Gospel imperfect and
insufficient (for leaving out of so necessary a point of our faith, as he
calls the last Supper of Christ his Mau^dy) says, that John speak nothing
at all More writes against him self.
of this Sacrament. And now see again in these his letters against Frith, how
him self brings in John the vj. chap. to impugn Frithes writing, and to
make all for the Sacrament, eue^ thus. My flesh is verily meat, and my blood
drink. Belike the man had there over shot him self foul: the young man
here causing him to put on his spectacles and poor better and more wisely with
his old eyes upon S. John's Gospel to find that thing there now written, which
before he would have made one of his unwritten verities. As yet if he look
narowly he shall espy that him self has proved us by Scripture, in the
xxxvij. leaf of his Dialogue of quoth he and quoth I, our Ladies perpetual
virginity expoundyng non cog^osco, id est, non cognoscam, which now written
unwritten verity he numbereth a little before among his vnwritte^ vanities.
Thus may ye see how this More an vpholder of unwritten verities.
old holy vpholder of the popes church, his words fight against him self
into his own confusion, in findyng us forth his unwritten written vanities,
verities I should say. But return we unto the exposition of S. John.

When the Jews would not understand the spiritual saying of the eating of
Christ's flesh and drinkyng of his blood, so often and so plainly declared: he
gave them a strong stripe and made them more blind, for they so deserved it
(such are the secret judgments of God) addyng unto all his sayings thus,
who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood: abides in me and I in him. These
words were spoken unto these unbelievers into their farther obstinatio^, but
unto the faithful for their better instruction. Now gather of this the
contrary, and say, who so eats not my flesh and drinks not my blood:
abides not in me, nor I in him, and join this to the foresaid sentence.
Except Abacuk. 2.
ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life
in you, let it never fall from thy mind (Christen reader) that faith is the
life of the Faith is y^ life of the righteous.
righteous, and that Christ is this living bread whom thou eatest, that is to
say, in who^ thou beleuest. For if our Papists take eating and drinkyng here
bodily, as to eat the natural body of Christ under the form of bread, and to
drink his blood under the form of wine: the^ must all young children that
never came to Gods board departed, and all lay men that never drancke his 1.
John. 4.
blood be damned. By love we abide in God and he in us, love follows faith in
the order of our understanding and not in order of succession of time, if thou
look upon the self gifts and not on their fruits. So that principally by
faith, whereby we cleave to Gods goodness and mercy, we abide in God, and God in
us, as declare his words following, saying, as the living father By faith we
eat and drink Christ, and so he abides in us and we in him.
sent me, so live I by my father. And even so he that eats me shall live
because of me, or for my sake. My father sent me whose will in all things I
obey, for I am his son. And even soverely must they that eat me, that is
believe in me, form and fashion them after my example mortifying their flesh
changing their living: or else they eat me in vain and dissemble their
belief. For I am not come to redeem yt world only, but also to change their
life. Christen religion is faith, and a life corresponde^t.
They therefore that believe in me shall tra^sforme their life after my example
and doctrine, and not after any man's traditions. This is the bread yt came from
heaven, as the effect it self declares, who^ who so eats shall live ever.
But he yt eats bodily bread lives not ever, as ye may see of your fathers yt
eat Ma^na, and yet are they dead. It is not therefore any material bread nor
bodily food that may give you life eternal.

These words did not only offend them that hated Christ, but also some of
his Disciples. They were offended (said the text) and not merueyled as More
trifleth out the truth) which said. This is an hard saying: who may here this?
These Disciples yet stoke no less in Christ's visible flesh, and in the bark
of his words, then did the other Jews: and as does now More, believing him to
have had spoken of his natural body to be eaten with their teth. Which offense
Christ seeing, said: does The Jews and also the disciples of Christ were
offended at his words.
this offend you, what then will ye say, if ye see the son of man ascend
thither where he was before? If it offend you to eat my flesh while I am here,
it shall much more offend you to eat it when my body shall be gone out of your
sight, ascended into heaven there sittyng on the right hand of my father until
I come again, as I went, that is to judgment. Here might Christ have
instructed his disciples in the truth of the eating of his flesh in form of
bread, had this ben his meaning. For he left them never in any perplexity or
doubt: but sought all the ways by similitudes and familiar examples to teath
them plainly. He never spoke them so hard a parable, but where he perceived
their ^eble ignorance, anon he helpte them and declared it them. Yea and
sometimes he prevented their askyng with his own declaration, and think ye
that he did not so here? yes verily. For he came to teach us, and not to leave
us in any doubt and ignorance, especially in the chief point of our
salvation, which stands in the belefe in his death for our sins. Wherefore,
to put them out of all doubt as concerning this eating of his flesh, and
drinkyng of his blood, that should give everlasting life: where they took it
for his very body to be eaten with their teeth: he said. It is the spirit
that gives this Here Christ does plainly show that it is the spiritual
eating, and not the fleshly eating of his body that profits.
life, my flesh profits nothing at all, to be eaten as ye mean so carnally.
It is spiritual meat that I hear speak of. It is my spirit that draws
the hearts of men to me by faith and so refreshes them ghostly. Ye be
therefore carnal, to think that I speak of my flesh to be eaten bodily, for
so it profits you nothing at all. How long will ye be without understanding?
It is my spirit I tell you that gives life. My flesh profits you nothing
to eat it: but to believe that it shall be crucified and suffer for the
redemption of the world it profits. And when ye thus believe, then eat ye my
flesh and drink my blood, that is, ye believe in me to suffer for your sins.
The verity has spoken these words. My flesh profits nothing at all: it
can not therefore be false. For both the Jews and his Disciples murmured and
disputed of his flesh how it should be eaten, and not of the offering thereof
for our sins as Christ meant. This therefore is the sure anchor to hold us by
against all the objections of the Papists for the eating of Christ's body (as
they say) in form of bread. Christ said: My flesh profits The eating of
Christ's flesh profited nothing.
nothing: meaning to eat it bodily. This is the key that solueth al their
arguments and opens the way to show us all their false and abominable
blasphemous lies upon Christ's words, and utters their sleigh iuggling over
the bread to maintain Antichrists kingdom therewith. And thus when Christ
had declared it and taught them that it was not the bodily eating of his
material body: but the eating with the spirit of faith: he added saying. The
words which I here The words of Christ were spirit and life.
speak unto you are spirit and life. That is to say, this matter that I here
have spoken of with so many words must be spiritually understand, to give you
this life everlasting. Wherefore the cause why ye understand me not is, that ye
believe not. Here is lo the conclusion of all this Sermon. Christ very God and
man, had set his flesh before them to be received with faith that it should be
broken and suffer for their sins, but they could not eat it spiritually,
because they believed not in him. Wherefore many of his Disciples fell from him
and walked no more with him. And then he said to the twelve. Will ye go away
to? And Simon Peter answered: Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words
of everlasting life, and we believe and are sure, that thou art Christ the son
of the living God. Here is it manifest what Peter and his fellows understood by
this eating and drinkyng of Christ. For they were perfitely taught that it
stood all in the belefe in Christ as their answer here testifies. If this
matter had stand upon so deep a miracle, as our Papists feign without any
word of God, not comprehended under any of their common senses, that they
should eat his body being under the form of bread as long, deep, thick, and
as broad as it hanged upon the cross, they being yet but feeble of faith, not
confirmed with the holy ghost, must here needs have woundered, stoned and
staggerde, and have been more inquisitiue in and of so strange Christ's
disciples understood Christ to speak spiritually and believed.
a matter then they were. But they neither doubted nor marueiled nor murmured,
nor were any thing offended with this manner of spech, as were yt other that
slipped away, but they answered firmly. Thou have the words of everlasting
life: and we believe. etc. Now to the exposition of the words of our Lords
Supper.

Among the holy Evangelists, writing the story of Christ's Supper: John
because the other three had written it at large, did but make a mention thereof
in his. xiij. Chapter Matthew, Math. 26. Math. 24. Luke. 24.
Mark and Luke declaryng it clearly, orderly and with just number of words.
With whom Paul agrees, thus writing unto the Corinthians. Our Lord 1. Cor. 11.
Jesus, y^ ^ame night he was betrayed: he took the bread, and after he had
given thanks: he brake it, saying: Take ye it, eat it. This is my body,
which is for you broken. Here is now to be noted the order of this action or
act. First The order of the act^
Christ took the bread in his hands, secondaryly he gave thanks, thirdly he
brake it: fourthly he taught it them saying, take it, fifthly he had them eat
it. At last after all this he said. This is my body which is for you broken,
this thing do ye into the remembrance of me. Here ye see, yt this bread was
first broken delivered them, and they were commanded to eat it to: ere Christ
said. This is my body. And for because it is to suppose verily, y^ they took
it at his hand as he had them, and did eat it to, when they had it in their
hands their master (whose words they did ever obey) co^mmau^ding the^. It
must needs follow (if these be the words of the co^secratio^) that they were
houseled with unconsecrated bread, or else now eaten, or at lest wise part of
it, ere Christ consecrated it, yea it follows that it was out of Christ's
hands and in they^ mouths when Christ consecrated it, and so to have
consecrated it when it was now in his disciples hands or in their mouths or
rather in their bellyes.

Here it is manifest that Christ consecrated Christ consecrated no bread, but
delivered it to his Apostles to eat.
no bread, but delivered it to his Disciples, and bad them eat it. In so much
that S. Thomas their own Doctor, that made their transubstantiation
confesses that some there were, that said that Christ did first consecrate
with other words, ere he now reachyng the bread to his Disciples said. This
is my body. etc. And yet calls he it no heresy so to say. Now since in all
this act and Supper, there be no words of consecration, but of the
deliueryng of the bread broken after thanks giuyng with a commandment to
eat it: bring us your words of consecration, and show us by what words God
promised you and gave you power to make his body. There is neither
commandment, nor yet any words left in all the Scripture to There is left
unto us no words of consecration, whereby we should alter and change the
nature of bread into his body.
make or to consecrate Christ's body, to bring it into the bread. But there be
the words of God left in the first chapter of Genesis, whereby he made all the
world: with which words, all be it we yet have them: yet is it denied us to
make that thing that he made with the^. Now, since we having his words of the
creation, can not yet make any new creature of nothing: how then shall we
without any words of consecration and making, make the maker of all things?

Unto this action or supper or deliuerau^ce of the bread, he added a reason and
signification of this sign or Sacrament, and what also is the use thereof: The
use of the Supper.
as though any should ask the^ thereafter: what Sacrament, Religion, or rite is
this? They should answer even in a like manner of spech as it was commanded
their fathers to make answer to their children at the eating of the old
passover, whereof this new passover was the verity, and that the figure,
saying. When your children ask you what Religion is this? ye shall answer
them. It is the sacrifice of the passing by of the Lord. etc. Lo here the The
paschal lamb.
lamb that signified, and did put them in remembrance of that passing by in
Egypt (the Israelites spared, and the Egyptians smitten) was called in like
phrase the self thing that it represented, signified, and did put them in
remembrance of: none otherwise then if Christ's Disciples, or any man else,
seeing in that Supper, the bread taken, thanks given, the bread broken,
distributed and eaten: should have asked him. What Sacrament or religion is
this? He had to answer them that Christ said. This is my body which is for
you broken. This thing do ye The true meaning and signification of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.
in remembrance of me, that is to say, so often as ye celebrate this Supper,
give thanks to me for your redempcio^. In which answer he calls the
outward sensible sign or Sacrament, that is the bread with all the other
action, even the same thing that it signifies, represents, and puts such
eaters of the Lords Supper in remembrance of. For when he said, which is
broken for you, every one of them saw that then it was not his body, that was
there broken: but the bread for as yet he had not suffered, but the bread
broken was denided in pieces every one of the twelve taking and eating a piece
before he said. This is my body. etc.

Now since M. More will stick so fast in his litteral sense upon these words.
This is my body. etc. Then do I ask Mores litterall sense ^s lost.
him, what thing he shows us by this first word and pronoune demonstratiue
Hoc, in English (this.) If ye show us the^ bread: so is the bread Christ's
body, and Christ's body the bread, which saying in the litterall sense is an
high heresy after them. And for this saying they burned the Lord Cobham Also I
ask whether Christ speaking these words. This is my body. etc. had then the
bread in his hands wherewith he houseled his Disciples or no? That he had it
not, but had now delivered it them: and had commanded them to eat it to, the
order and words of the text plainly prove it, as is declared before. Mark.
14.
And S. Mark tells the story also in this order. The cup taken in his
hands, after he had given thanks, he gave it them, and they all drank
thereof. And he said to them. This is my blood of the new Testament: which is
shed for many. Here it is manifest that The words of consecration were spoken
after Christ had delivered y^ bread and the cup.
they had all dronken thereof first ere he said the words of consecration (if
they be the words of any consecration.) Besides this: if ye be so sworn to
the litterall sense in this matter, that ye will not in these words of
Christ. This is my body. etc. admit in so plain a speech any trope (for
allegory there is none, if ye knew the proper difference of them both, which
every Grammarian can teach you) the^ do I lay before your old eyes and
spectacles to, Christ's words spoken of the cup both in Luke. 22.
Luke and Paul saying: this cup is the new Testament through my blood 1. Cor.
11.
which is shed for you. Here Christ calls the wine in the cup the self cup
which every man knows is not the wine. Also he calls the cup the new
Testament, and yet was not the cup nor yet the wine contained therein the new
Testament, and yet calls it the new Testament established and confirmed with
his blood here ye see he called not the cup his blood but the Testament.
Where is now your litterall sense that ye would ^o feign frame for your
Papists pleasure? If ye will so sore stick to the letter: why do your faction
leave here the plain letter: saying that the letter slayth: going about the
bush with this exposition and circumlocution, expoundyng. This is my How the
Papists wrest the words of Scripture.
body, that is to say, this is converted and turned into my body, and this
bread is transubstantiated into my body? How far lo, M. More is this your
strange Thomisticall sense from the flat letter? If ye be so addictt to the
letter, why fray ye the common people from the litteral sense with this bugge,
tellyng the^ the letter slays? but there is neither letter nor spirit that
may bridle nor hold your stiff necked heads.

Also ye shall understand that Christ John. 6.
rebuked the Jews for their litterall sense and carnal understanding of his
spiritual words, saying: My flesh profits you nothing at all to eat it.
etc. And their litteral taking of his spiritual words was the cause of their
murmr. etc. For even there (as also like in other places) to eat Christ's
flesh. etc. after the common phrase of the Scripture, is not else, the^ to
believe that Christ suffered death, and shed his blood for us. Read ye Paul. Our
fathers did 1. Cor. 10.
all eat the same spiritual meat and drink the same spiritual drink that
To eat Christ's flesh is to believe in him.
we now eat and drink: Here I think M. More must leave his litterall sense
and material meat, or else deny Paul, and deny to that our fathers did eat
Christ and drink his blood, which all here Paul says, for to eat and to
drink this spiritual meat and drink, was as him self declares to eat and
drink Christ. They drank of the stone (says The manner of Saint Paul's
speaking.
Paul) that went with them. Which stone was Christ. And we eat and drink
the very same stone. Which is nothing else, then to believe in Christ. They
believed in Christ to come, and we believe in him come^, and to have suffered,
where is now think ye M. Mores litterall sense for the eating of Christ's
material body? Our fathers were one, and the same Church with us, under the
same Testament and promise, and even of the same faith in Christ. And even as
they eat him and drank his blood even the same spiritual meat and drink
that we do eat and drink: so do we now in the same faith. For what else was
signified by this manner of spech, our fathers did eat and drink Christ, then
that they believed in Christ Math. 15.
to be incarnated and to suffer death? what else meant the poor woman of
Lanane by eating, then to believe? when she answered Christ, saying. Ye say
soth my Lord. But yet do the little whelps eat of the crummes that fall
from their masters table. This did An allegoticall spech well allowed and used
of Christ.
she answer in an allegory according to Christ's first answer unto her, she
meaning by yt eating of the crummes, the belief of his words and Gospel to
be scattered among the Gentiles as Christ aunsweryng, confirmed her meaning,
saying: O woman great is thy faith. He said not, thou art a great eater and
deuourer of bread. Here it is plain that to eat in the Scripture is taken to
believe: as Christ him self expounds John. 6.
it, so often, and so plentuously. And I am here compelled to inculke and iterate
it with so many words, to satisfy (if it were possible) this carnal
fleshvowerer and fleshly Jew.

Now to examine and to discuss this The old passover compared with the
Supper of our Lord.
matter more depely and plainly. I shall compare the old passover, with the
new and supper of the Lord. And to show you how the figures correspond their
verities: I will begin my comparison at Baptism comparyng it with Baptism
compared with Circumcision.
the Lords Supper, which be the two Sacraments left us now under the grace of
the Gospel. And afterward (to set forth both these Sacraments plainly) I will
compare Circumcision with Baptism: and the pass lamb with Christ's Supper.

We (by Baptism) as we testified un 1. Cor. 10. 11. and 12. Romans 6. Ephesians. 4.
to the congregation our entryng into the body of Christ (take here Christ's
body, as does Paul for his congregation) to dye, to be buried, and to rise
with him, to mortify our flesh, and to be revived in spirit, to cast of the
old man, and to do upon us the new: even Eucharistia thanks giuyng. 1. Cor.
10. and 11.
so, by the thanks giuyng (for so did the old Greek doctors call this Supper)
at Gods bourde, or at the Lords Supper (for so does Paul call it) we testify
the unity and communion of our hearts, glued unto the whole body of Christ in
love: yea and that such love as Christ at this, his last Supper expressed: what
time he said, his body should be broken, and his blood shed for the remission
of our sins. And to be short. As Baptism is the badge of our faith, so is
the Lords Supper the 1. Tim. 1.
token of our love to God and our neighbors: where upon stands the law and
the Prophets. For the end of the precept, is love out of a pure heart, and good
conscience and faith unfeigned. So that by baptism we be initiated and
co^signed unto the worship of one God in one faith: And by the same faith and
love at the Lords Supper, we show our selves to continue in our possession, to
be incorporated and to be the very members of Christ's body.

Both these Sacraments were figured Baptism was figured by Circumcision, and
the Lords Supper by the paschall lamb.
in Moses law. Baptism was figured by Circumcision: and the Lords Supper, by
the eating of the passelambe. Where like as by Circumcision, the people of
Israel were rekened to be Gods people, several from the Gentiles, so be we now
by Baptism rekened to be consigned unto Christ's Church several from Jews,
paynyms etc. And as their passover, that is to say, their solemn feast
yearly in eating their passelambe, was an outward token of their perseueraunce
in their religion, and in remembrance of their passage out of Egypt into the
land of Chanaan: so is now the eating of the Lords Supper (which Christ and
Luke. 12. 1. Cor. 5.
Paul called our passover) a token of our perseueraunce in our Christen
profession at Baptism: and also thanks giuyng with that joyful remembrance
of our redemption from sin, death, and Exodus 12.
hell by Christ's death. Of the figure of this Supper: our new passover: thus
it is written. After ye be entered into that land, which the Lord God shall
give you according to his promise: ye shall keep this ceremony. And when your
children ask you what Religion is this? ye shall answer them. It is the
sacrifice of the passing over of the Lord, when the Lord passed forth by the
houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, smiting the Egyptia^s and
delivering our houses. This eating therefore of the pass lamb was the figure
of the Lords Supper* which figure when the hour was come y^ he would it to
cease and give place unto the verity, as the shadow to vanish away at the
presence of the body: He said thus, with a fervent desire do I long to eat
Luke. 22.
this passover with you ere I suffer.

Again, let us compare the figure with the truth, the old passover with the
new, and diligently consider the property of speaking, in and of either of
the^. Let us expende the succession, imitation, The Paschall lamb eaten and
the Sacrament instituted.
and time, how the new succeding the old mediator Christ between both sitting
at the Supper celebrating both with his presence: did put out the old and bring
in the new. For there is in either of them such like composition of words,
such affinity and proportion of spech, such similitude and property in them
both, the new so correspo^dyng in all things to the old, that the old
declares the new, what is it, wherefore it was instituted, and what is the very
use thereof. And to begin at Circumcision Two things to be considered in the
Sacraments.
the figure of Baptism, ye shall un derstand, that in such rites and
Sacraments there are two things to be considered, that is to wit. The thing,
and the sign and of thing. The thing is it wherefore the sign is instituted
to signify it: as in Circumcision, the thing is the covenant to be of the
people of God, and the sign is, the cuttyng of the foreskinne of the preuy
member. In the passover, the thing was, the remembrance with thanks giuyng
for the deliverance out of the hard servitude of Egypt: but the sign was, the
lamb roasted with such ceremonies as were there prescribed them. So in
baptism: The matter and substance of of the Sacrament and the signs of the
(...)*
The thing is, the promise to be of the Church of Christ: the sign is, the
dippyng into the water with the holy words. In our Lords Supper, the very
thing is Christ promised and crucified, and of faith with thanks giving unto
the father for his son given to suffer for us. But the sign is, the dealyng
and distributing or reaching forth of the bread and wine, with the holy words
of our Lord spoken at his supper, after he had thus dealt the bread and wine,
unto his Disciples.

And here is it diligently to be noted: The sign is called the thing.
That in all such rites, ceremonies, or Sacraments of God thus instituted:
these two things (that is to wit the thing signified, and the sign that
signifies) be concurraunt and inseparable. It is the common use and property
of spech in the Scripture, to call the sign, the thing. As is Circumcision
called the covenant. Every manchild Gene. 17.
must be circumcised that my covenant might be in your flesh for a perpetual
band. And yet was it only but the outward sign and seal of the covenant,
that the sede of Abraham should be his especial chosen people, and that he
would be their God. The lamb, that was Exodus 12.
but the sign, was called the passover: and yet was not the lamb the passing
over, but the sign only excityng and monishing them to remember that
deliuerau^ce by the angel pasling by the Israelites in Egypt, sinityng the
Egyptians. And since this trope or manner of spech the Scripture did use with so
great grace in the old rites and ceremonies that figured our Sacraments: why
may it not with like grace, for that analogy and proper congruence of the
figures with their verities, use the same phrase and manner of spech in their
verities? If the Scripture called the The scripture calls the sign by the
name of the thing that it signifies.
sign the thing in Circumcision and the passover: why should we be offended
with the same spech in our Baptism and in the Lords Supper? Since such manner
of spech have no less grace and fulness here then there to bring the thing
signified into our hearts by such outward sensible signs. For when that sign
of Circumcision was given the child: the^ were they certified (as an outword
token may certify) that the child was of the people of Israel. And therefore
did the signs the^, as they do now bear the names of things which they
signified as the lamb eaten in the passover was called the sacrifice and the
self passover, none otherwise then in our new passover, that is the Lords
supper, The bread in the Sacrament called the body of Christ and the wine
called the blood of Christ.
the bread broken etc. is called the body of Christ, and the wine poured forth
and distributed to each man, the blood of Christ because the bread so broken and
dealt signifies unto the receivers and puts them in remembrance of the
sacrifice of his body on the altar of the cross, and of his blood poured
forth for our redemption. So that this manner of spech in the administration
and use of the Supper of our Lord: to say. This is my body, and this is my
blood: is as much to say as, this signifies my body, this signifies my blood.
Which Supper is here celebrated to put us in remembrance of Christ's death,
and to excite us to thanks giuyng.

Neither let it offend thee (O Christen reader) That est, is taken for
significat: ^st, is taken for significat.
that is to say. This is that, is as much to say, as this signifies that. For
this is a common manner of spech in many places of Scripture, and also in our
mother tou^g: as when we see many pictures or images, which ye know well are
but signs to represent the bodies whom they be made like, yet we say of the
Image of our Lady. This is our Lord, and of S. Katheriue, this is S. Katherine,
and yet do they but represent and signify us, our Lady or S. Katherine. And as
it is written. The in. branches are three days. The three baskets Gene. 40.
are three days, which was not else but they signified three days. Also in the
The figurative speches used in the scripture.
xxviij. chapter. Jacob said. This stone which I have set up an end, shall be
Gods house, which stone yet was never Gods house nor never shall be: but only
did signify gods house to be builded in that same place. Again Pharao dreamed
to have seen vij. fair fat Oxe^, and eftsoons vij. poor lene Oxe^, which
Joseph expoundyng said: The vij. fat Oxe^ are vij. ple^tuous years, in which
phrase or manner of spech every man since that the Oxe^ were no years: but they
signified such years. Marvel not therefore though est, likewise in this
sentence: Hoc est corpus meum, be taken for significat, as much to say, as this
signifies my body. And yet for because the Scriptures conferred together
expound them self as says S. Austen: And Peter. (...). Pet. 2.
That we have before a firm and sure prophetical spech unto which if we attend
as unto a light set up in a dark place, we do well: I shall show you a like
phrase in Ezechiell where the destruction of Jerusalem was thus figured. God
commaundyng Ezechiell to Ezech. 5.
take a sword as sharp as a raser, and shave of his head and beard, and then
take a certain weight of the hears divided into three parts: The one, he
should burn in the mids of the City. An other he should cut round about,
and cast the third up into the wind. etc. which done he said: Thus says the
The manner of speaking in the scripturo.
Lord God. This is Jerusalem. Which act and deed so done, was not Jerusalem.
But it signified and preached unto the beholders of it, Jerusalem to be
destroyed: none otherwise the^ the breakyng and distributing of the bread and
wine called Christ's body and blood signifies and preaches us the death of
Christ, the figure and sign bearyng the name of the thing signified, as in the
Prophets spech, saying: This is Jerusalem: which did but signify Jerusalem.
When Christ did breath into his Disciples, saying: Take ye the holy John. 3.
ghost: the same breath was not the holy ghost, but signified and represented
them the holy ghost, with a thousand like manner of spech in the Scripture.

In the old passover thanks were given for the slaughter of the first
begotten, wherein the kings posterity of Egypt fell away. (The Hebrews
spared, passover, and delivered.) But in the new passover, thanks were given
that the only begotten son of the most highest was crucified, whereby all
faithful are spared, passed over, and not smitte^ with the sword of damnation,
but delivered and saved in the lambs blood that has taken away the sin of
the world. In the old passover. The lamb or feast is called the Lords
passover, and yet was neither the lamb nor the feast his passing over: but
the sign and commemoration of his passing by. And eue^ so is it now in the new
Supper of our Lord. It is The natural body of Christ is not in the Sacrament*
there called the body of our Lord, not that there is any thing, wherein his
very natural body is contained so long and broad as it hanged on the cross,
for so is it ascended into heaven and sits on the right hand of the father:
but that thing that is there done in that Supper, as the breakyng and dealyng
and eating of the bread, and the whole like action of the wine, signifies,
represents, and puts into our hearts by the spirit of faith this
co^memoration, joyful remembrance, and so to give thanks for that
inestimable benefit of our redemption, wherein we see with the eye of our faith
presently his body broken and his blood shed for our sins. This is no small
Sacrament, nor yet irreuere^tly The Sacrament is to be received with thanks
geuyng.
to be entreated: but it is the most glorious and highest Sacrament, with all
reverence and thanks geuyng to be ministered, used received, preached and
solemnly in the face of the congregation to be celebrated: of whose holy
administration and use I shall peradventure speak in the end of this Supper.

But in the mean season (Christen reader) let these sensible signs signify
The use of the supper.
and represent his death, and print it in thy heart geuyng thanks incessantly
unto God the father for so incomparable a benefit, that has given thee his
own only so dearly beloved son our Savior Jesus Christ to dye for thy
sins yea and that when we were not his children but his enemies. Christ's
disciples said to the man where is Luke. 22.
this gest chamber where I might eat the passing by with my disciples? and
they prepared the passover. And yet Christ eat not the passover, but the
lamb with his disciples, where it is plain, ye sign to do on the name of the
thing.

At last, consider unto what eude all Note here the whole circumstaunce of the
manner and institution of the Sacrament of Christ's body.
things tended in that last supper, how the figure teached the verity, the
shadow the body, and how the verity abolished the figure, and the shadow gave
place to the body. Look also with what congruence, proportion, and similitude
both in the action and the spech, al things were consummate and finished, and
all to lead us by such seusible signs from the figure unto the verity, from
the flesh unto the spirit. And take thou here this infallible and assured
saying of Christ never to fall fro thy mind in this last supper, do ye this
into the remembrance Luke. 22.
of me. And also of Paul, saying. So often as ye shall eat this bread (lo this
heretic 1. Cor. 11.
calls it bread eue^ after the words of the Popes co^secratio^) and drink of
this cup, praise, declare and give thanks for the death of the Lord until he
shall come again to judgment. Remember thou also: what Christ said to the
carnal Jews taking the eating of his flesh and drinkyng of his blood so
carnally, aunsweryng them. My flesh profits not, meaning to eat it bodily
John. 6.
but the spirit makes life. And to this set the Prophet Abacukes sentence.
The Abacuk. 2.
just lives of his faith.

And now (Christen reader) to put thee clean out of doubt, that Christ's body
is not here present under the form of bread (as the papists have mocked us
many a day) but in heaven, even as he rose and ascended. Thou shall Christ
declared to his disciples that he would leave this world (...) go to his father
in heaven.
know that he told his Disciples almost twenty times between the xiij. and
xviij. chap. of John that he should, and would go hence, and leave this world.
Where to comfort them again for that they were so heavy for his bodily
absence, he promised to send them his holy Ghost to be their comforter,
defender, and teacher: in whom and by whom, he would be present with them and
all faithful unto the worlds end. He said unto his Disciples. I go
Scriptures are many that show Christ as touching his natural body is gone and
is not here. Acts. 2.
hence, I go the father, I leave the world, and now shall I no more be in the
world, but ye shall abide still in the world. Father I come to thee. Poor men
have ye ever with you: but me shall ye not always have with you. And when he
ascended unto heaven, they did behold him and saw the cloud take his body out
of their sight: and they fastnyng their eyes after him, the two men clothed in
white, said unto them. ye men of Galile, wherefore stand ye thus lookyng up
into heaven? This is Jesus that is taken up from you into heaven, which shall
so come again, even as ye have seen him going hence.

Here I would not More to flitte from Christ ascended into heaven.
his litterall plain sense. All these so plain words be sufficient, I trow,
to a Christen man to certify his conscience that Christ went his way bodily
ascendyng into heaven. For when he had told his disciples so often of his bodily
departing from them: they were marvelous heavy and sad. Unto who^ Christ said.
Because I told you that I John. 14. and. 16.
go hence, your hearts are full of heaviness. If they had not believed him to
have spoken of his very bodily absence: they would never have so mourned for
his going away. And for because they so understood him, and he so mean as his
words sowned: He added (as he should have said) be ye never so heavy or how
heauely so ever ye take my going hence, yet do I tell you truth. For it is
expedient for you that I go hence. For if I should not go hence, that
comforter should not come unto you. But and if I go hence, I shall Christ
^^playne words declares his bodily departure out of this world.
send him unto you. And again in the same chap. I am come from the father, and
am come into the world, and shall leave the world again and go to my father.
What mystery, think ye, should be in these so manifest words? Did he speak
them in any dark parables: Did he mean otherwise the^ he spoke? Did he
understand by going hence so often repeted, to tarry here still? or did he mean
by forsakyng and leauyng the world to be but invisible being still in the world
with his body? No surely. For he meant as faithfully and as plainly as his
words sowned, and even so did his Disciples without any more maruelyng
understand him. For they answered him, saying: Lo, now speak thou apertly:
neither speak thou any proverb. But what a dark proverb and subtle ridle
had it been: if he had meant by his going hence to have ^aryed here still? and
by forsakyng the world, to abide still in the world? and by his going hence to
his father by his very bodily Ascension, to be but invisible? Who would
intrepret this plain sentence thus? I go hence, that is to say: I tarry here
still. I forsake the world and go to the father, that is to say, I will be but
invisible and yet here abide still in the world bodily? For as concerning his
Godhead, which was ever with the father, and in all places at once, he never
spoke such words of it. When Christ said (his death now Christ plainly
showed unto the disciples that he must depart from this world to his father in
heaven.
was at hand) unto his Disciples: now agayne^ I forsake the world and go to my
father, but ye shall tarry still in the world. If they will expound by his for
sakyng the world, to tarry here still bodily, and to be but invisible: why do
they not by like exposition interpret the tarying here still of the Disciples
at that time, to be gone hence bodily and to be here visible? For Christ did
set these contraryes one against an other to declare each other. As if to tarry
here still, did signify to the Disciples that they should abide in the world,
as it does in deed: then must needs his going hence and forsakyng the world
signify his bodily absence as both the words plainly lowne, Christ meant, and
they understood them. But in so plain a matter what need these words? Be
thou therefore sure (Christen reader) that Christ's glorified body is not in
this world, but in heaven, as he thither ascended in which body he shall
Christ's ^rified body is in heaven.
come even as he went gloriously with power and great majesty to judge all the
world in the last day. Be thou therefore assured, that he never thus iuggled nor
mocked his so dearly beloved Disciples so full of heauynes now for his bodily
departing. For if he had so meant as our Papists have perverted his, saying,
his Disciples would have wondered at so strange manner of spech, and he would
have expressed his mind plainly, since at this time he was so full set to
leave them in no doubt but to comfort them with his plain and comfortable
words. And Christ's (...) scention was witnessed by many.
if he would have been but invisible and still bodily present: he would never
have covered him self with the cloud showing them and testifying also by
those ij. men his very bodily Asce^tion out of their sightes. We may not make
of his very bodily Ascentio^, such an invisible iugglyng cast as our Papists
feign. Fashionyng and fayning Christ a body now invisible, now in many places
at once, and the^ so great, and yet in so little a place, not decerned of any of
our senses now glorified, now unglorified, now passible, and then impassible,
and I wot near what they imagine and make of their maker, and all without any
word, yea clean against all the words of holy Scripture. For surely, in
this their imagination and so saying they bring in a fresh, the heresy of that
great heretic Marcian, which said The here (...) of Marc^ what it was?
that Christ took but a fantastical body. And so was neither verily borne
nor suffered, nor rose, nor ascended verily, neither was he very man. Which
heresy Tertulian confuteth: Christ took verily our nature such a passible and
mortal body as we bear about with us, save that he was without all manner of
sin. In such a body he suffered verily, and rose again from death in such a
glorified body now immortal etc. as every one of us shall rise at the general
judgment. It is appropried only to his Godhead to be every where and not to
be circumscribed nor contained in no one place. And as for our Papists
profane void voices, his body to be in many places at once, indifinitiue
incircumscriptiue, non per modum qua^ti neque localiter etc. which includes in
it self contradiction, of which Paul warned Timothe 1. Timo. 6. 2. Timo. 2.
calling them the oppositions of a false named science (for that their
Scholasticall Divinity must make objections against every truth, be it never
so plain with pro and contra: which science 1. Timo. (...).
many that profess it (says Paul) have erred from the faith, as for this
contention and battle about words profitable for nothing else; but to subvert
the hearers, I care not for them. For I have the almighty testimony of the
everlasting word of God ready to soil all their mad and unreasonable
reasons, to wype them clean away, and to turn them into their own confession.

And for because they hold them so fast by Paul. I shall loose their hold, 1.
Cor. 11.
expoundyng the Lords Supper after Paul, which adds immediately unto the
cup, this yt Luke there left forth: Do ye this into my remembrance. This
does Paul repete so often to put The Supper of the Lord is the commem^ration
and memorial of Christ's death.
us in mind, that these thanks giving and Supper is the co^memoration and the
memorial of Christ's death. Wherefore after all he repeteth it yet again the
third time saying. So often as ye shall eat this bread (he calls it still
bread even after the Popes consecration) and drink the cup (he says not
drink this blood) see that ye give thanks, be joyous and preach the death of
the Lord, for so much signifies, An^^^ciate, in this place, until he come
that is to say, from the time of his death and Ascension until he come again
to judgment. Furthermore (says S. Paul calls the Sacrament bread after
the consecration.
Paul) who so eats this bread (he calls it still bread) or drink of the
cup of the Lord unworthily: is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. The
body and blood of the Lord Paul calls here the congregation assembled
together to eat the Lords Supper. For they are his body and blood which are
redeemed with his body and blood, as he said in the x. chapter before. The cup
of thanks giuyng which we receive with thanks: is it not the fellowship of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the fellowship of the
body of Christ? For we being many together are one bread, and one body. Lo
here Paul expoundyng him self uses the same form of spech that is used in
these words. This is my body, taking is, for signifies. We are By one loaf
of bread, we are fignified to be one body in Christ.
one bread and one body, that is to say, we are signified by one loaf of bread
to be one body, he shows the cause, addyng because we be all partakers of one
lofe or piece of bread. And in the xij. chapter following, he says plainly, ye
be the body of Christ and his particular members, and in the first to the
Ephesians. God did set Christ to be the head over all unto his congregation
which is his body. etc.

And because the comparison in the x. chapter between the Lords board and his
cup, and the devils board and his cup, do declare this matter. I shall The cup
of the Lord, (...) the cup of
recite Paul's words, saying: ye may not drink the cup of the Lord, and the
cup of the devil both together. Ye the devil, how they differte.
may not be partakers of the Lords board and the devils board both at once.
The devils board and his cup was not his body and blood, but the earing and
drinkyng before their images and Idols as did the heathen in the worship and
thanks of their Gods. Of the which thing thou may gather what Paul meant by
the Lords board and his cup. Now let us return to Paul in the x^. chapter.
They eat this Who they are that eat of the bread and drink of the cup
unworthily.
bread, and drink of this cup unworthily, that come not unto this board with
such faith and love as they professed at their Baptism. They eat unworthily
that thrust them selves in among this congregation having not the love that
this Sacrament and sign of unity teaches and signifies. Which manner of
people Paul in ye same chapter rebukes, and bends all his Sermon against
them: for that they were conte^tious, and came together not for the better but
for the worse. So that their coming together which should have been a token
of faith, and love, was turned into the occasion and matter of disscution and
strife: because every man did eat (as Paul says) his own supper and not the
Lords supper: wherein the bread and drink is common as well to the poor as
to the rich. But here the rich disdayned the Every (...) did eat his own
supper and not the Supper of the ^^rd.
poor and would not tarry for them. So that some (as the rich) went their way
dronken and full: and the poor departed hungry and dry, which was a token of
no equal distribution of the bread and drink: and that the rich contemned the
poor, and so became sclau^derous and guilty of the body and blood of Christ:
that is to wit, of the poor congregation redeemed with Christ's body and
blood. Thus they that came together appearyng to have had that love which the
Supper signified and had it not, uttered them selves by this conte^tious and
vnlouyng dealyng not to be members of Christ's body, but rather guilty and
hurtful unto them. As if a soldier of our adversaries part should come in
among us with our Lords badge, having not that heart faith and love to our
captain that we have, we would (if we espied it by any token) take him for a
spy and betrayer We must first examine out stlues, and the^ come to the table
of the Lord.
rather then one of us.

Let a man therefore (says Paul) prove him self well before, whether he has
this faith to Christ and love to God and his neighbor which all he professed
at Baptism, and this Supper signified: and so come in among the congregation
to eat of this bread and drink of this cup (he calls it still bread and
wine: and neither his body nor blood.) For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation: because he discerns not
the Lords body. He calls still the Lords body the congregation redeemed with
Christ's body as he did before, Look more of this in the Epistle to the reader.
and also in the chapter following fetching his analogy and similitude at the
natural body. In which although there be diverse members one excelling an
other, one inferior, vyler and more co^temptible then an other, yet may not
the body want them: but must cover them reverently, and hold them in honor.
Again, in the body, though there be diverse members of diverse offices: yet is
there no discord among them: but every member be it never so, low and vile:
yet does it minister and serve an other, and all together hold up and help the
whole body. This consideration with these co^parisons so eloquently, so
plenteously, so lively does Paul set forth in that xij. chap. that no man
ca^desire any more. And all to bring us into the consideration and discretion
of the body of Christ which is his congregation: without which consideration
and discretion, if we thrust our selves If we come not thankfully and
charitably unto yt Lords board, we eat and drink our damnation.
in with his sign and recognisance faynedly: we be but hypocrites and eat and
drink our own judgment. For this cause many are sick among you, and many
are a sleep, that is, are dead. Here it seems some plage to have bencast upon
the Corinthians for this abuse in the eating of the Lords Supper. For both the
law and the Prophets threatened us plagues, as pestilence, famine, and sword
for our sins. For if we had judged our souls, that is, if we had diligently
examined our own living and repented: we should not have been judged, that is
to say, punished of yt Lord. But while we be punished, we be corrected of the
Lord lest we should be condemned with the world. Wherefore my brethren, when ye
come together to eat, tarry one for an other. Here is the cause of all this
dissension wherefore Paul rebukes them. But here might some of them object and
tell Paul. Sir we come thither hungry and may not tarry so long: whereunto Paul
answers as he did before: saying. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in?
Do ye contemn the congregation of God, and shame them that have none? Here S.
Paul calls the poor the Church of God.
he calls the poor the church of God, whom afterward he called the body of
the Lord: and now at last he says. If any man be so hu^gry, let him eat
somewhat at home, and so delay his hunger that he may the better tarry for the
pore, lest ye come together unto your condemnation. And as for other things
This place the Papists allege to prove unwritten be ritie.
I shall dispose and set in order when I come. These other things were
concerning this Supper and such as were out of frame among them which if ye
read the whole Epistle are easy to see: and that they were no necessary
truths for their salvation. For all such truths Paul had preached them
before and written them to. Neither were these other things, Lent, Fast, the
Assumption of our Lady, halowyng of bows, Belles, and Ashes, halowyng of
Vestimentes, and crepyng to the Cross, with such other unwritten vanities, as
M. More lysteth to lest and tryful out the truth.

Now have ye the very pure sense of these Christ's words, this is my body, that
is to say. This signifies or represents my body taking Est, for significat.
As M. More him self uttered it in his Dialogue put forth in William Barlowes
name, recityng the opinions of Oecolampadius and Zwinglius: saying, this is my
body, is as much to say as this signifies my body, where he says that
Oecolampadius alleges for him More belyeth Decolamp^dius; and Zuingitus.
Tertulian, Chrysostom and Austen, but falsely sometime addyng more to their
words, sometime taking away from their sentences. Which saying is plain false
and he belyeth the man now departed, for first his incomparable learning and
very spiritual judgment would not suffer him to be ignorant in the
understanding of these old holy Doctors (whom I dare say he under stood as
well as More. And his couscience and faythfulnes would not suffer him falsely
to pervert them as M. More belyeth and peruerteth Christ and Paul and all holy
Scripture. And if this man had thus dealt with these Doctors sayings: Luther
against whom he did co^tende in this matter would not have left it untold him.

But (Christian reader) to put thee out Look more of this in the Epistle to the
reader.
of doubt have here these doctors own words both in Latin and English. And
first hear Tertulian, where thou must first understand that there was an
heretic called Marcion, saying that Christ took not to him the very body of
man, but an imagiued and a fantastical body, to put of, and on, when he
lysted: and so not to have been borne verily of the virgin Mary nor yet to have
suffered verily death etc. against whom, thus writes Tertulian in his fourth
book.

Professus itaque se concupiscentia concupisse Tertulian.
edere pascha, vt suum acceptum panem and distributum Discipulis corpus suuni
illum fecit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo: id est figura corporis mei. Figura
autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. Caeteru^, vacua res, quod est
phantasma, figuram capere non posset. Which words are thus in English spoken
of Christ. Which acknowledgyng him self with how fervent desire he longed to
eat the passover, as his bread taken and distributyng to his Disciples: made
it his body, saying: This is my The wor^es of Tertulian.
body: that is to say, the figure of my body. For figure had it been none,
except it were a very body. For a void thing which is a fantasy can receive
no figure. Here it is plain, that this is my body after the old holy Doctor,
is as much to say, as this is the figure or sign that represents or
signifies my body.

Also, thus says Austen. Lex dicit non esse manducandu^ sanguinem, quod anima
sit sanguis: Quod lex dicit, sanguis Auste^ cap. xij. against, ^dim^nt.
est anima: esse positum dicimus, sicut alia multa and pene omnia Scripturarum
illarum Sacramenta signis and figuris plena futurae predicationis, quae iam per
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum declarata est. etc. Possum etiam interpretari
praeceptum illud in signo esse positum. Non enim dubitauit Dominus dicere. Hoc
est corpus meum, quum signum daret corporis sui. Sic est enim sanguis anima,
quomodo petra erat Christus. Nec tamen quum haec diceret, ait: petra
significabat Christum, sed ait: petra erat Christus. Quae rursus ne carnaliter
acciperetur, spiritualem illam vocat, id est spiritualiter intelligi docet.
Which words be thus in English. The law says that blood should not Gene.
6. Leui. 7. Deuteronomy. 12.
be eaten, because the life is blood. Which precepte of the law and because
that blood is life: we affirm it to be set like as many other almost
innumerable sacraments of those Scriptures, full of signs and figures of the
preaching to come: which now is declared by our Lord Jesus Christ etc. And I
may interpret that precept to be laid in a sign. For the Lord doubted not
to say. This is my body: when he gave the sign of his body. And even so is
the blood life, and the stone was Christ. Austen calls Sacrament the sign of
his body.
And yet when he said these words: he said not the stone signified Christ: but
he said, the stone was Christ, which lest they should be taken carnally, he
calls it spiritual, that is to say, he teaches it to be understand
spiritually. Where is now Mores litteral sense, and material meat?

Now shall ye hear Chrysostom. Hom^. 83. operiti^ imperfect^.
Nihil sensibile tradidit Christus: licet dederit panem and vinum: non quod
panis and vinum non sint sensibilia, sed quod in illis mentem haerere noluit.
Nam in suum corpus, quod est panis vitae, subuehit dicens. Hoc est corpus meum:
perinde ac dicat. Hoc licet panis sit, significat tamen tibi corpus. Thus it is
in English. Christ geuyng bread and wine, gave no sensible thing: not that
bread and wine be not sensible: but that he would not our mind to stick still
in them. For he lifted us up into his body, Chrysostom calls the sacrament
the sign of Christ's body.
which is the bread of life: saying. This is my body: as though he should say.
Though this be but bread, yet it signifies unto thee, my body. Now judge thou
(Christian reader) whether M. More reports right, of this man that alleges
these holy Doctors, or no.

Now have ye the pure understanding The confutatio^ of the Papists gloses.
of the words of the Lords supper confirmed with the old holy Doctors. That,
this is my body, is as much to say, as this signifies my body. And this is my
blood: is, this signifies my blood. But yet was there never such manner of
speaking in the scripture. This is that: that is to say. This is converted and
transubstanciated into that. Or this is contained in that: the thing converted
and changed keeping still her form, qualities, quantities etc. As to say. This
is my body, The Papists are wre^ters and peruerters of the scriptures.
that is to say. This bread is converted into my body, the bread abydyng still
in his fashion, taste, color, weight. etc. For Christ when he converted water
into wine, did not leave the form, color, and taste still in the water. For
so had it been no chaungyng. But let our covetous conuerters choppe and change
bread and wine till we there feel, see, and taste neither bread nor wine, and
then will we believe them so they bring for them the word of God. For as for
their false iugglyng we feel it at our fingers end: we see it, had we but
half an eye: we taste it at our tou^gs end, and know it with all our wits and
understanding so manifestly, that we perceived them openly long ago, to be the
very Antichrists, of whom Christ and his Apostles warned us to come in this
last time.

And if they say. That this conversion The Papists say that the tra^
substantion is done by miracles.
is made by miracles. Then must every one of them as he say a Mass, make us
many a miracle the very marks of M. Mores Church. For it is oue great miracle
that Christ's body should come so suddenly invisible and so often out of heaven,
and that such a miracle as the word of God never knew. An other that so great
a body should be contained in so little a place, and that one body should be at
once in so many places and two bodies in one place. An other that it is eaten,
neither the cater feelyng it, nor the body eaten sufferyng nor feelyng the
teeth of the eater. With as many more marvelous and like miracles or rather
absurdities of the bread and wine, that there must be the form, color, taste,
wayght, broken etc. and yet neither to be bread nor wine in our belefe except
we will be burned of the^ because we believe not their iugglyng castes. O
mischievous miracle makers. O cruel conuerters: O bloody butchers.

But hark (Christen reader) and I shall learn thee to know Christ's plain
and true miracles, from the sleighty iuggling of these crafty co^neyers. Christ
would never have done miracle had men believed him only by his words, but
when he said first these words. This is my body, no man doubted at them, no
man was in any unbelieve of them, wherefore these words must needs be plain
single and pure without miracle, as these. The iij. branches are three days:
without any subtle transubstantiation, such insensible conversion, or any
false miracle. All true miracles are done to let forth the glory of God.
Christ wrought all his miracles for the glory of God to declare him self both
God and man, so that all Christ's miracles were comprehended under man's senses
or common wits, which bring in such knowledge unto the understanding. As when
he changed water into wine, the miracle was first received with the sight,
open at the eye, tasted with the mouth and so conuayed unto the understanding.
And now though Christ did miracles to declare him self to be both God and man.
we neither see nor taste that miracle, yet we hear it, see it, read it, and so
understand that it was once a miracle done of Christ? when he restored the
sight to the blind, healed the lame, cleansed the leprose, reared the dead: all
was seen, heard, and so comprehended under our most sweet senses: that his very
enemies were compelled to coufesse them for miracles. But our miracle makers,
that make daily so often and so many, are so far from this clear point, that
their miracles in this matter, be not, neither shall be contained nor
comprehended (...)
under any of our five wits, but they rather delude and deceive both sight,
taste, feelyng, hearing, and smellyng: ye our faith and understanding to. Beware
therefore of these mischievous miracle makers for their own glory and profit
and will kill thee to, if thou beleuest not their lies. Beware I say of those
Merchants that will sell the wares, which they will not suffer thee to see,
nor to taste, nor to touch but when they show the white, thou must believe it is
black: If they give (...)
the bread, thou must believe it without any word of thy faith, that it is
Christ's body, and that of their own making. If thou taste, see and feel it
bread yet thou must say it is none though the Scripture calls it bread xx.
times. Beware, beware I say of Antichrist: whose coming says Paul (He is
come already says John, now are there 1. These. 2. 1. John. 2.
many Antichrists) shall be after the workyng of Satan with an almighty
power, with false signs and wouders lying miracles, and with all deceit of
unrighteousness. etc.

To be to curious in so plain a Sacrament and sign, to cavil Christ's clear
words with sophistical so^mes, and to tryfull out the truth with tauntes and
mockes, as M. More does, is no Christen manner. And if our Papists, and
Scholasticall Sophis^^r^ will object and make answer to thus Supper of the
Lord, bringyng ^o ^or them, their vnwritte^ words, deeds, and dreams (for we
have compelled More (...) scriptures.
with shame to flitte from the Scripture) strewed with their vame strange
terms which Paul damneth, and gives Timothe warning of: I shall by gods grace
so set the almighty word of God against them, that all Christen shall see
falshead and deceit in this Sacrament: and so disclose their deuilish doctrine
and fleighty iugglyng, that all that can read English, shall see the troth of
Gods word openly bear down their unwritten lies. For it is verily the thing
that I desire, even to be written against in this matter, for I have the
solutions of all their objections ready, And know right well, that the more
they stir this Sacrament, the brother shall their lies be spread, the more
shall their falsehead appear and the more gloriously shall the troth triumph:
as it is to see this day by long contention The conte^tious and wicked doctrine
of y^ Papists has provoked the light of gods truth to be set forth to the
understanding of the people.
in this same, and other like Articles: which the Papists have so long abused,
and how More his lies utter the truth every day more and more. For had he not
come beggyng for the Clergy from Purgatory, with his supplication of souls,
and Rastel and Rochester had they not so wisely played their parts: Purgatory
peradventure had served them yet another year: neither had it so soon have
been quenched, nor the poor soul and Proctour there been with his bloody
Bishop Christian ^atte, so far coniured into his own Vtopia with a sachell
about his neck to gather for the proud Priests in Synagoga Papistica.

When Christ was ascended into heaven: and had sent his Apostles the spirit of
truth to lead them into all truth perteinyng unto our salvation, even unto him
that said: I am the truth of which truth he instructed them after his
resurrection. Luke. xxiiij. and they had preached the same truth now at
Jerusalem Acts. ij. at which preaching there were that received their words
How the (...).
and were Baptized, about iij. M. his Apostles remembryng how their maist^^
Christ at his last Supper did institute and leave them this holy Sacrament of
his body and blood to be cele^^ated and done in his remembrance among such as
had received his Gospel, were Baptized, had professed his faith, and would
persevere in his Religion: did now in this first congregation celebrate the
Lords Supper breakyng the bread and eating it as Christ did teach them, which
Supper, Luke and Paul called afterward the breakyng of the bread. As Acts.
ij. saying. That they which gladly had now received Peter's act, and were
baptized: were perseuering in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in the
communion, and in the breakyng of the bread, and in prayer, which Sacrament
was now a token of the perseueraunce in their Christen Religion now professed.
Of this breakyng of bread, Luke writing of Paul coming unto Troades, says
also, A^ ^2.
that their upon a Sabbath day, when the Disciples were come together unto the
breakyng of the bread: Paul made a Germon during to mydnight etc. And that
this was no common nor profane use but an heavenly Sacrament and a reverent
rite and usage, the circumstaunces of the action declare, both in Luke and
Paul, shewyngit to be the very institution that Christ ordained at his Supper.
Paul thus recitynge this breakyng of the break: saying. The bread which we
bread, is it not the fellowship of the body of Christ? yt is to say, does it
not signify us to be the body of Christ that is his congregation and people,
as does the words following declare? Paul addyng the cause saying. For we
being many are all together siguified by the one loaf to be one body: for that
we be partakers of the same bread. Also before, he calls in the same Supper,
the cup of thanks geuyng the fellowship of the blood of Christ: that is to say,
the congregation redeemed with Christ's blood.

The holy Sacrament therefore, The Sacrament is not used in these days as it
was in the time of the Apostles.
would God it were restored unto the pure use, as ye Apostles used in it their
time. Would God, the secular princes which should be the very pastors and head
rulers of their congregations committed unto their cure, would first command
or suffer the true preachers of Gods word to preach the Gospel purely and
plainly with discrete liberty: and constitute over each particulare Parish
such Curates as ca^ and would preach the word, and that once or twice in the
Week, appoyntyng unto their flock certain days after their discretion and
zeal to Godward, to come together to celebrate the Lords Supper. At the which
assemble the Curate A good doctrine for all such ministers as have cure of
souls, to use to his flock.
would propone and declare them first this text of Paul. i. Corinthians. xj.
So often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of this cup: see that ye be
joyous, praise, and give thanks preaching the death of the Lord etc. which
declared, and every one exhorted to prayer, he would preach them purely Christ
to have dyed and been offered upon the altar of the Cross for their
redemption: which only oblation to be sufficient sacrifice to peace the
fathers wrath, and to purge all the sins of the world. Then to excite them
with humble diligence, every man unto the knowledge of him self and his
sins: and to believe and trust to the forgyuenesse in Christ's blood: and for
this so incomparable benefit of our redemption, (which were sold bondemen to
sin) to give thanks unto God the father for so merciful a deliverance
through the death of Jesus Christ, every one, some singyng, and some saying
devoutly, one or other Psalm or prayer Thanks geuyng.
of thanks gyuyng in the mother tongue. Then the bread and wine set before them
in the face of the Church upon the table of the Lord purely and honesty laid:
let him declare to the people the significations of those sensible signs, what
the action and deed moves, teaches and exhorts them unto: and that the
bread and wine be no profane common signs: but holy Sacraments reverently to
be considered The bread and wine are not profane but Sacraments to holy use.
and received with a deep faith, and remembrance of Christ's death and of the
shedyng of his blood for our sins, those sensible things to represente us
the very body and blood of Christ, so that while every man beholds with his
corporal eye those sensible Sacraments: the inward eye of his faith may see
and believe steadfastly Christ offered and dying upon the Cross for his sins,
how his body was broken and his blood shed for us, and has given him self
whole for us, him self to be all ours, and what soever he did to serve us, as
to be made for us of his father our righteousness, our wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
holiness, redemption, satisfaction. etc.

Then let this preacher exhort them A wholesome and good lesson namely for all
ministers.
louyngly to draw near unto this table of the Lord, and that not only bodily,
but also (their hearts purged by faith, garnished with love and innoceney)
every man to forgive each other unfeignedly, and to express or at least wise to
endeavor them to follow that love which Christ did set before our eyes at his
last Supper when he offered him self willyngly to dye for us his enemies:
Which incomparable love to commend, bring in Paul's Arguments, so that this,
his flock Romans 5.
may come together, and be joined into one body, one spirit, and one people.
This done let him come down: and accompanied honestly with other Ministers
come forth reverently unto the Lords table, the congregation now set round
about it, and also in their other At the ministration of the Sacrament let the
minister exhort all men to have faith and lone and to pray for grace.
convenient scates, the pastor exhorting them all to pray for grace, faith and
love, which all this Sacrament signifies and puts them in mind of. Then
let there be read apertely and distinctly the vi. Chapter of John in their
mother tongue: Whereby they may clearly understand, what it is to eat Christ's
flesh and to drink his blood. This done, and some brief prayer and praise song
or read, let one or other minister read the xj. chapter of the first to the
Corinthians, that the people might perceive clearly of those words the
mystery of this Christ's Supper, and wherefore he did institute it.

These with such like preparations I good and necessary exhortation to be mate
to y^ people of the t^ they receive the communion.
and exhortations had, I would every man present should profess the Articles
of our faith openly in our mother tongue, and confess his sins secretly unto
God, praying intierly that he would now vouchsafe to have mercy upon him,
receive his prayers, glewe his heart unto him by faith and love, increase his
faith, give him grace to forgive and to love his neighbor as him self, to
garnish his life with pureness and innocence, and to confirm him in all goodness
and virtue. Then again it behooves the curate to warn and exhort every man
deeply to consider and expende with him self, the signification and
substance of this Sacrament, so that he sit not down an hipocrite and a
dissembler, since God is searcher of heart and raines, thoughts and affectes:
and see that he come not to the None may come to the commu^ without y^ weddyng
germent (...) ^ayth.
holy table of the Lord without that faith which he professed at his
Baptism, and also that love which the Sacrament preaches and testifies unto
his heart, lest he now, found gilty of the body and blood of the Lord (that is
to wit a dissembler with Christ's death and sclaunderous to the
congregregation, the body and blood of Christ) receive his own damnation. And
here let every man fall down upon his knees saying secretly with all devotion
their Pater noster in English, their Curate as example kneelyng down before
them. Which done, let him take the bread and eft the wine in the sight of the
people hearing him with a loud voice, with godly gravity, and after a
Christen religious reverence rehearsyng distinctly ye words of the Lords
Supper in their mother tongue. And the^ distribute it to the ministers, which
taking the bread with great reverence. will divide it to the congregation every
man breakyng and reaching it forth to his next neighbor and member of the
mistike body of Christ, other ministers following with the cups pouring forth
and dealing them the wine, all together thus ^^yng now partakers of one bread
and one cup, the chyng thereby signified and preached printed fast in their
hearts. But in this mean^ while must the minister or pastor be readyng the
communicatio^ that Christ had with his Disciples after his Supper, beginning at
the washing of their feet: so readyng till the bread and wine John. 13.
be eaten and dronken and all the action done. And then let them all fall down
on their knees giving thanks highly Thankesgeuyng to God.
unto God the father, for this benefit and death of his son, whereby now by
faith every man is assured of remission of his sins, as this blessed
Sacrament had put them in mind, and preached it them in this outward action
and Supper. This done, let every man commend and give them selves whole to God
and depart.

I would have hereto put my name, (good Reader) but I know well that thou
regardest not who writes, but what is written: thou estemest the word of the
verity, and not of the author. And as for M. More, whom the verity most
offends, and does but mock it out when he cannot soil it: he knows my
name well enough. For the devil Those words of his are in his book that he
made for yt pore souls in Purgatory.
his guardian, as him self says: comes every day into Purgatory, (if there
be any day at all) with his heinous and envious laughter, gnashing his teeth
and grynnyng, tellyng the Proctour with his Popes prisoners, what soever is
here done or written against them, both his person and name to. And he is now,
I dare say, as great with his guardian, as ever he was.

If any man tell ye, lo here is Christ, or there is he, believe him not: For
Mark. 42.
there shall arise false Christ's false anointed giuyng great miracles. Take heed, I have told ye before, if they therefore tell ye: lo, he is in the
desert, go not forth, lo he is in the preuy pixe, believe it not.

FINIS.
A diligent, and necessary Index, or Table of the most notable things,
matters, and words contained in these works of Master William Tyndall. The
letter A. signifies the first column, and B. the second column of the same
side.
A.
A Aron added nothing to Moses law. Represents Christ, and every true
preacher 125. a Abbottes and Bishops keep Monks in ignorance. 361. a
Abominable blasphemy. 330. a Abiectes from God, who? 25. a Abraham 303. his
children have his faith. 45. a. and are the children of faith. 63. a Abraham
how justified. 334. a Abstine^ce outward is hypocrisis. 76. b. for common
wealth sake is conunendable. 228. a Abstainyng from Images. 22. a Absolutio^ of
the Popes Legate 181. b Abuse of Abbeyes. 359. b. of confirmation. 277. a. of
Images. 271. a. of scriptures and Sacraments by Papists 13. b. 339. b. 427. b.
365. b. in prayer. 249. b Actual sin washed away in Christ's blood. 32. a
Adam must be overthrown, and Christ put on. 90. b Adelstone king. 102. b
Admonition. 207. b. to blind guides, to rulers. 341. a. to ministers. 427. b.
to More. 251. a. to al subjectes. 376. b to votaries. 21. a Adrian the first
Pope. 349. a Adrian the ij. and iij. 351. a Advancement of the Pope. 348. b.
of the Clergy. 347. a Aduengers rob God of his honor. 178. b Aduoutry. 205.
a Adultery of David. 169. b Adversaries to Christ known by their deeds. 102.
a Adversity how profitable. 120. a Affinity of the passover, and Christ's
Supper. 467. a Afflicted in this World wherewith comforted. 190. a (...). 253.
a Age, to be preferred before youth. 311. a. to be honored. 345. b Agreement in
doctrine between Papists, and Phariseis. 17. b. and in Scriptures. 265. a
Albe. 277. b Alchouse a pulpit for Papists. 2. a Allegories. 166. a. not
agreeable to the text are false. 167. b. their right use. 167. a. they prove
nothing. cause blindness. Well to be weyed. How to be understood. 14. a. they
are no sense of Scripture. 167. a Almosse. 217. a. and 228. a. What in
signifies. 83. b. How truly bestowed. 74. b Almose of the poor become Peter's
patrimony. 352. b Altar. 277. b Alteration of Gods word intolerable. 23. a
Alteration of bread into Christ's body not proved by any scripture. 465. b
Alteration of things for the abuse thereof. 299. b Ambition. 290. b. alters
her masters message. 201. a Ambitious persons have neither faith, nor can do
good message. 141. b Amendment of life follows true faith. 303. b. the same
to be wished for. 177. b Amendment may, be in all things. 393. a Amice. 277.
b Anger, how no sin. 203. a Anchor of our salvation. 188. b Annoyntyng. 408. b
Annoyntyng of the head. 227. a. and of Priests sincerely. 133. a Answer of
the Popish Church. 292. b. of Cloysterers to the poor. 243. a Answer to the
Papists by Paul concerning justification. 44. b Anselmus the Popes Chapleine.
362. b Antichrist. 406. b. What it signifies. 60. a. who it is. 407. b
Antichrist is known. 286. b Antichrist his Church. 290. a. his properties.
60. b Antichrist believes Christ to be commen in the flesh. 415. a. wresteth
Scriptures. 357. a Antichrist sends his soorth with false names and signs.
134. a Antichrist has reigned among us long time. 60. b. 407. a. subuerteth
all things. 162. b. turns the root upward. 130. a Antithesis between
Christ, and the Pope 175. b. between the Popes Church and Christ's. 292. b
Antioch Peter's see. 358. b A poena, and culpa. 151. a Apostles allege not
their own authority. 344. a. their faith rayled on by Papists. 422. b. all
had like authority of Christ. 257. b. all sent out. 358. a Apostles how they
blessed us. 157. a. gave us no blind ceremonies. 129. a Apostles doubtful.
261. a. their ignorance. 26. a Apostles how they first celebrated the Lords
Supper. 476. a. neither shaven, shorn, nor anointed. 133. a. knew not the
Popes usurped authority. 392. b Apostles taught things they write not. 255.
b. they taught obedience. 340. preached Christ, and not Peter. 125. b. their
doctrine is firm. 256. b. must be clea^ed unto. 40^. a Apostles preached
repentau^nce to the Jews. 28. a. made heretics of the pope with their master
Christ. 265. a Apparaunt godliness in Popish Decrees. 312. a Appearaunce of
godlynes. 291. a Application of vows. 21. a Arguments Popish to be noted
260. a. to know false Prophets by. 403. a Arguments prouyng our salvation in
Christ. 432. a. Worthy notyng touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 447.
b Aristotle. 103. a believed of Papists before Christ. 61. b Aristotle and
Plato cannot understand the Scriptures. 88. a Armor of the Popish
spiritualty. 176. b. of a Christian man. 423. a Arms sent into France. 371. b
A true story. 369. a Attrition a new seyned word. 148. b Avarice. 405. a
Angels bound of the Pope. 150. a Authority of Peter. 358. b. of his successor
only is to preach. 173. b. not above the rest. 343. b Authority of the Pope.
149. b. challenged over God and man. 150. a Auricular contession opened all
secrets. 116. b. stands not with Gods Testament. 155. b Austen, his opinion
of the Sacrament. Calls it a sign of Christ's body. 474. b Austen his place
of the Church expounded. 266. a. he complayneth one his time. 277. b
B.
BAdges of sundry fashions among the shauelynges. 140. a Badge of love. 417. b
Baggages superstitious. 271. b Baggage all the Popes doctrine. 248. b Balaam.
251. a. 254. b Balaam an example. 306. a Baptism. 14. b. 187. b. 226. a.
description thereof. 14. b Baptism figured by Circumcision. compared with
Circumcision. 467. b. is everlasting. 148. a. to us, as Circumcision to the
Jews. 437. b Baptism inward of the soul what. 187. b* Baptism to what end.
411. a. teaches repentance. 14. b. what it woorketh in us. 441. b. without
faith not auaylable. ibidem. Baptism (...) yt Sacrament of Christ's Supper are
most necessary. 467. b Barren faith, without love. 332. b B^le between the
spirit and the flesh. 46. a Beauty of the tabernacle. 9. a Beggars in times
past not suffered to run abroad. 133. b Beggars Friars. 355. a Beginning of
penance and Purga to^ 97. b. of the Popes authority 352. b Behavior in
readyng Scriptures and Doctors. 106. b Bele^ in Christ what. 131. a. in God
and contempt of the world. 7. b. of Christ's humanity and divinity. 390. b
Belefe in Gods promise justifies. 117. b. in Christ. 390. b Belefe must be
taken heed to. 286. b Be^ of the resurrection is an article (...) our faith.
431. b Belefe in Christ and that he dyed not al^^e. 130. b Belefe in God. 238.
b Beleuers in God, whom. 287. b. in man cursed. 267. a Beleuers in Christ must
follow him. 132. b Believing remission of sins in Christ 321. a Belly Gods
reproved of Christ 457. a Bells christined. 152. a Benefit of Christ's death of
whom received. 443. b Beren garius king of Lombardy. 352. a ^wyng of benefices
wickedly. 360. a Bibles searched for to be burned. 454. b (...) strange word
to Popish Curates. 102. a (...) warnyng to y^ godly. 454. b Byndyng and
lowsing. 123. by the meaning thereof. 174. a. and 150. a. and. b Byndyng and
lowsing comes thoro^chyng. 15. a. are of one (...). 174. a B^ 1^4. a. and
^4^. b. ouerse(...). (...). a. why ordained. 251. b Bishop described. ^4. a
Bys^ of France. 114. b. of ^yn (...). b. (...) Al^e. 114. b. of(...)^^essed
down the (...). 1^. a (...) of Rome (...) the prove(...)Their of^ in
primitive(...)346. b (...) must not be ^^gitiue. 2^2. a. (...) should be (...),
and not (...). 285. b B^^hops(...)all (...). b. they perse^ 114. b (...) not
sw^ (...) kings, but(...)to them. (...). b. they (...). 141. a (...) th^^
(...), or reach false doctrine none of Gods anointed. 135. b Bishop of Durham.
374. a Birds and beasts examples of security. 334. a Blasing of arms. 113.
a. and of hypocrites. 291. b Blasphemy of Christ's death by papists. 16. b
Blessed who. 34. b Blessedness through whom. 394. a Blessyng. 110. a. of God to
Abraham 436. b. of Bishops. 157. a Blessyng what it means. 145. a Blindness
through Allegories. 14. a. of the Jews. 457. a. of our nature. 44. a Blood of
Christ in whom lost. 132. b Blood of faith feeds Christ Gospel. 453. b Blood
of Christ washes away actual sin. 32. a. makes perfect our works. 31. a
Blood sacrifices. 424. b Bodyly exercise. 280. a Bodyly service satisfies not
God. 184. b. and 284. a. nor purges the soul. 306. b Bodyly eating of Christ
profits not. 464. b Body of Christ spiritual in the Sacrament. 310. b.
naturally not in the Sacrament. 316. b Body and blood of Christ how to be
received. 316. b Body subject to the Prince, soul to God. 271. b Boldness of
spirit in Christ's cause brings immortality. 454. a Bones not to be
wor^hypped. 281. b Boniface the third. 347. b Boots. 134. b Borne of God all
that love him. 416. a Borrowed spech. 397. a Bountifulnes toward our neighbor.
383. a Brazen Serpent. 274. b. it was not God. 299. a Bread. 323. a. not
consecrate by Christ 467. b. how it signifies Christ's flesh. 59. a Bread and
wine are Sacraments to holy uses. 477. a Bread and wine in the Sacrament
called the body and blood of Christ 469. a Breakyng of promise. 290. b Breakyng
the Sacrament among Princes. 295. b Bribetaking a pestilence in Judges. 123. a
Brothers weakness must be considered. 40. b Buildyng of Abbeyes. 351. b
Buildyng on sand. 246. a. 35. a Burbon the Emperors chief Capi^ayne. 37^. a
Burden of spiritual Lawyers. 140. a Burtals are to be celebrated honorably,
and why? 434. a
C.
CAlil what kind of sacrifice. 291. b Candles. 280. a. 277. b Canonization.
297. b Captivity of the Israelites. 97. b Captious Papists how to be
answered. 268. b Cap of maintenance. 114. b Carnal man. 293. b Carnal man
ignorauut of Gods spirit. 407. a Carnal weakness comforted. 454. a Cardinal
Wolsey most false. 375. a. his practice. 368. b. had two faces. 371. b. his
hat. 375. a Cardinal Wolsey and his Chaplems passed the xij. Apostles in pomp^.
370. b Care, of what sort forbidden. 236. a. of the Scripture. 305. b. of a
Christian man. 100. b. of the spirituality for the temporaltie. 192. b Care for
worldly wealth to be rejected. 234. b. to keep Gods couenau^^ the chief care.
235. b Care due to every man of what sort. 236. b Carefulnes of god for y^
weak. 189. a Carolus Magnus. 348. b Cause of false miracles. 301. a. of
Turkish and Jewish obstinacy. 301. b Cause of love searched of the spiritual.
247. b Caution in swearyng. 209. a Cautels in vows. 21. b Ceremonies. 9. a.
12. a. 237. b. preferred by Papists. 278. b. Scholemasters to the Jews. 12.
a. cause of ignorance. 278. a. bring not the holy ghost. 152. b. cannot
justify. 10. a. rejected without good doctrine. 248. a Ceremonies with their
true signififations tolerable. 278. b. confirm faith. 12. b. contain
profitable doctrine. 12. b Ceremonies had significations generally at the
beginning. 277. b. why given. 10. a Ceremonies of the communion how first they
came into the Church. 277. a Ceremonies of the new Testament. 226. a
Ceremonies, and Sacraments their uses. 12. a Certification of pardon for
sins. 213. a Charles the Great his life. 349. b. a whoremonger, and a saint.
350. a. b receives the Empire of the Pope 349. a. an Emperor for the popes
purpose. 350. a. compelled all to obey the Pope. 349. b Charles called of the
Pope most Christian king. 349. b 253. b. (...). Charity. 242. b. moderateth
the law. 209. a Charity ^eruent in the primitive Church. 346. a Charity has
diverse significations. 253. b Chastity. 242. b. feigned. 20. b. wilful. 16.
b. of the Clergy. 315. a Chastity of Priests, original thereof. 347. b Chaste
unchastity of Papists. 311. a Chastising of the body is for our profit. 328.
b Cheek to be strike^ on the other side, what it means. 210. a Chief cause
of the institution of the Sacrament. 440. b Children of faith, Abraham's
children. 63. a. they work of love. 163. a Children of God obedient to the
law. 325. a. why tempted with adversity. 236. a Children all of wrath by Adam.
337. b how to be brought up. 120. b. not to be rigourously dealt withal of
pare^tes. 120. b. how destroyed. 120. b to be taught Gods word. 101. b Choice
put to us in ij. things. 99. b Christ. 226. a. he only is holy. 407. a a
store house of mercy. 64. b. our only Savior. 394. b. our example. 195. b.
our faith and rock. 173. a. our life. 390. b. father of all righteousness. 72.
a. our advocate. 395. a. our anchor hold. 6. a. our hope. 91. a. our only
Physician. 75. b. our righteousness. 82. b Christ purchases all goodness for us
70. b. his burden is easy. 286. a. asure foundation. 92. a. A perfect
co^forter of Christians. 292. a Christ did good works, and why? 383. a. his
works rewarded in us. 92. b. his love. 164. b. the fulness of all goodness. 424.
a. the way to salvation. ibid: the comforter in all afflictions. 440. b. no
sinner. 160. b. justifies the greatest sinner. 120. a. loves all Christians
alike. 162. b. he brought salvation, as Ada^ brought sin. 46. a. his general
rule. 63. b. an example of all goodness. 383. a. In him we are all in all. 75.
a. his saying to hypocrites. 409. a Christ ignorant of worldly matters 163. b.
his Church. 187. b. he is very God. 390. a. possessed by faith. brings all
goodness. 89. a. to who^ given. 185. a. neither shaue^, shorn, nor anointed
with oil. 132. b. how he was entreated. 97. b. his doctrine and the Popes
contrary. 409. b. his exchau^ge with us. 402. a. why he delivered us. 22. a.
given to sinners. 161. a. his commandment to preach makes Pristes. 145. b.
what authority he gave his Apostles. 150. b. only without sin. 336. b
Christ did all things for our salvation. 382. b. only mediator between God
and man. 431. b. dwells in us by faith. 464. a. In no cause to be denied.
101. a. his seat is his preaching. 175. a. will not falsefie the Scriptures.
461. a. is very man. 390. a. his Vicare who. 411. b. his flock a little flock.
105. b. his Disciples are acquaynted with his phrases. 460. b. his three
witnesses 421. b. sent his Apostles with like authority. 126. a. why he came
from heaven to earth. 458. a. Reigning in us all is good. 163. b. Gods mercy
stool. 379. a. his Church ever persecuted. 289. b. a king. 401. a. king over
death. hell, and sin. 394. b. preached in the old Testament. 23. a Christ's
Gospel must be fed with the blood of faith. 453. b. his passion to salvation
not understood of whom. 187. b. most contrary to the Pope. 145. a. and. 362. b.
his steps how to be followed. 108. b. and. 73. a told his Disciples of his
Ascentio^ 470. b. plainly declares his bodyly departure. ibid. Christ causes
God to love us. 164. b opens him self to the Jews. 457. b. plainly
declares his bodyly departure. 470. b. condemns Phariseis, and why? 17. a.
sought of many for a worldly purpose. 105 b. compared with Jonas. 27. b.
persecuted and slain with Christians 139. a. his words offend yt Jews and
his Disciples. 464. a. he is all to a Christian. 163. a. and. 54. b. all in all
things. 102. a. his mercyfulnes. 394. b. merciful to the penitent. 29. a.
preached repentance. 28. b Christ why slain. 138. b. once sacrificed is a
sacrifice for ever. 447. a. only an acceptable sacrifice. 18. a. why he gave
him self. 394. a. his blood puts away all sin. 72. b. an everlasting
satisfaction. 14. a. apprehended by faith. 457. b. expounds the paschall
lamb. 439. b. his glorified body in heaven. 471. a. his memorial Mass. 323.
a. his blood only purchases remission of sins 55. b. his flesh ye food of
our souls 459. b. a full satisfaction for our sins. 50. b. his body not
naturally in the Sacrament. 469. b. how he is in many places and how not at one
instant. 461. b. his blood blesses us from curse of the law. 77. a. he
consecrated no bread. 465. b. satisfied for our sins after and before
Baptism. 32. a. sacrificed once for all. 310. b. he boroweth figures of the
old Testament, and why? 14. b. his prayer is heard praying for us. 401. b. his
treasures who understand not. 69. b Christ why not embraced. 162. a.
dishonored. 18. a. under the temporal sword. 115. b. a vain name in respect
of the Popes name. 127. a. his prophecy must be fulfilled how terrible soever
it be. 132. b. he prophesied why Antichrist should come. 151. b. not tied to
Antichrists ear 149. a. not disguised. 408. a. accused of insurrection. 105.
a. his prophecy fulfilled in the papists. 132. a. commands Scriptures to
be searched. 102. a. allows allegories aptly applied. 467. a. only
fulfilleth the law. 40. a Chrysostom calls the Sacrament a sign of Christ's
body. 474. b. his saying of our Lady. 336. b Christian man only suffers. 119.
b. receives ibid. has Christ's spirit 83. b. how far bosid to suffer 327
a. whereunto called. 98. b. what requisite for him. 34. a. seeks Christ's
honor. 292. a. seeks his salvation only of Christ. 292. a. seeks to
Christ. 329. b Christian love of who^ rejected. 116. b Christian patience. 260.
a Christian doctrine sufficiently contained in Paul to the Romans. 49. b
Christian king, who. 349. b Christenyng of Belles. 152. a Church 200. a. what
it is. 257. a. (...) word of diverse significatio^s. 249. a. without sin.
294. a. contains good and evil. 291. a. a place of prayer. 282. b. why first
ordained. 87. b. cannot err. 360. a Church of God how taken in Scripture. 250.
a. repugnaunt to Gods law erreth. 201. b. has a double signification. 291. a.
why translated into this word congregation. 250. b Church must yield a reason
of their doctrine. 288. a. Papal persecuteth, never suffers. 289. b. erreth
if the Pope be head thereof. 375. a Church carnal sins. 294. b Churlishnes.
290. b Churchwarde^s their office in times past. 373. b Cyprian. 332. b
Circumcision. 273. a. a figure of baptism. 467. b. the seal of Gods covenant
with us. 437. a. not used in xl. years. 248. a. without faith avails not.
441. a Circumspect Prelates. 369. b Citations. 134. b Civil orders for
fasting. 136. a Clergy. 339. a Clergy of the Pope. 293. a. are liars 341. b.
rob God of all honor. 165 b. secret conspiratours. 363. a. murderers. 341.
a. persecutours. 262. a Clergy discharged. 374. b Climyng up of the Pope. 347.
b Cloister love, is belly love. 164. b Comparion between Jonas and Christ 27. b.
contrariety between Christ and the Pope. 353. b. between the old passover and
Christ's last Supper. 467. b Comparison between Thomas Becket and Thomas
Wolsey. 361. b Competent living sufficient. 20. a. it comes by following
Christ. 235. b Compassion for Christ's sake must be showed. 84. b Commodities
following couetouse rich men. 231. a Common wealth. 23. a Common goods. 346. a
Compulsion that Priests should put away their wives. 314. a Comminalty what to
be required of by the Prince. 179. b Common saying of Papists. 360. b Comfort
against desperation. 4. a Commandments of whom kept. 76. b Comfort against
carnal weakness. 454. a Condemnation not under three witnesses. 23. a
Condemnation of the law. 57. a Confirmation of children. 276. b. how it came
first into the Church. 276. a Congregation how understood. 205. b it must order
us. 441. a. what pertains to them. 358. b Confession. 115. a. 290. b. 173. a
Confession, the nurse of treason. 155. b. what an intolerable burden. 140 a.
robs the Sacraments. 157. b. stablisheth the Popes kingdom 180. b
Confession due to them who^ we have offended. 148. b Confession with
repentance. 392. b. knowledgeth her sins hartly to God. 147. a Confession of
thy faith in Christ with out carnal fear assures thee of salvation. 147. a
Conquest of the world, what? 405. a Conquestes of faith. 421. b Conscience how
pacified. ibid. b Conscience accuses not the worker. 413. b Consciences must
be examined before the communion be received. 472. b Consideration of two
things in Sacraments. 468. a Constancy. 454. a Constantines gift feigned. 356.
a Correction of God, a token of love. 25. a Corpors ecloth. 277. b Contemners
of the law, who? 380. a Contempt of the world. 7. b Contempt or love showed to
Christ as to our brethren. 163. a Contents of the old Testament, and new. 377.
b Controversies concerning salvation to be stood unto. 1454. a. between James
and Paul. 130. b Continuance to the end in the Gospel makes us blessed. 52.
b Conversation of Christ and his Apostles to be considered in expou^dyng
Scriptures. 172. b Covenant of God. 186. b. to be kept with him. 23. a. a sure
absolution. 224. a Covenant of Gods promise. 432. a. of his bindyng him self
to us. 224* b. of the Jews. 436. a Covent. 192. b Covetousness. 189. b. 267. b.
290. b. 205. b Covetousness a plague. 230. a. blyndeth our eyes. 406. a.
blinds Religion. 19. b. blyndeth the spirituality. 107. b. root of all
evil. 215. b Covetousness bewrays a false Prophet. 189. b. makes a false
prophet. 231. b. the end of false doctrine. 173. a. of Prelates decayed
Christendom. 346. a. of shauelynges must not be restrained. 406. a Councels.
295. a. general. 314. b. how they should conclude. 288. a. put down all Images
in Greece. 323. b Council of Papists damnable. 108. a Craft of the Pope. 369.
b. of his Legates. 366. b. of Prelates. 135. a. of hypocrites. 134. a Cross.
186. b. 219. a. 326. a Cross borne in procession. 135. a Cross of Christ
purges all vices. 165. a. follows a true Christian. 209. a Cruelty of
Papists. 309. b. 363. b Curse. 110. a Curse of God upon law breakers. 23. b
Curse of the Pope a fearful bugge 150. a Cursed who. 195. b Cursyng the
meaning thereof. 174. b Curiosity reproves. 23. b. to be avoided. 409. b
Curiosity in searching Gods secrets 329. a Custom of walshe people. 152. b
Cut of from Christ who. 165. a Cup of Christ's blood what. 443. b Cup of Christ
and the devil how they differ. 472. a. and b.
D.
DAmnation of Princes. 112. a Damnation not due to them that are in Christ. 42.
a Darkness. 232. b. of the Popes doctrine. 232. b Darkness caused through
covetousness. 232. a David. 260. a. would not aduenge him self. 110. b. slew
not Saul, and why? 111. a Dauncyng in Paris. 375. b Daily bread expounded.
222. b Daily use of the Sacraments commanded by God. 442. a Deacon. 345. b.
what it signifies his office. 133. b Deacons how admitted of the Apostles.
146. a. their office in the primitive Church. 345. b Deacons were the first
corruption of the Church. 346. b Deacons of Christ, and of the Pope differ.
310. b Dead men. 408. a. not helped by man 13. b. rewarded of the Pope. 362. a
Dead Saints, their miracles in the Popish Church. 302. a Death of Christ why
so necessary. 462. a. way to salvation. 257. b Death and resurrection of
Christ showed by Jonas. 27. b. figured by the paschall lamb. 439. b Death of
Christ purchased grace for our souls. 279. a Death of Christ blasphemed by
Papists. 16. b Deceauyng of our selves. 392. b Declaration of Adames heirs.
381. b. of Christ in the old Testament. 23. a Decrees deuilish. 262. a Decrees
of Bishops above Gods word. 124. b Deeds not allowed without faith. 85. b. how
farreforth acceptable to God. 154. b Deeds of ours why evil. 328. b.
procedyng and not procedyng of our selves. 47. b Deeds of Christ, and ours,
their effects. 35. b Deeds not justified by faith are sin. 155. a
Definition of the Church. 250. a. of faith in general. 42. b. of ^rue faith 64
b Definition of Popish penance. 398. a Defender of the faith. 374. b Defiance
sent from the French king to king Henry the viij. 371. b Degrees of nature
altered by marriage. 108. b Deliverance by Christ, and why. 22. a Deliuerau^ce
out of purgatory. 366. a Deliberation of Princes in making war. 193. b
Delight of the faithful. 379. b Denia^l of help to our neighbor dishonoreth
him. 270. a Derogation from the dignity of Christ's blood. 70. a Derogation
from Christ's faith is against his Church. 187. b Description of swyne. 238. a
Description of Baptism. 14. b. of our justification. 330. b Desert and free
gift are contraryes. 19. b Desperation how it comes. 219* a. assayleth faith.
259. a Despere of man's help brings Gods help. 454. a Desiderius. 359. a
Deuilish doctrine. 415. a. practices. 368. b. pride. 353. a. expoundyng the
Scriptures by Papists. 175. a Devil is darkness. 392. a. blyndeth us from Gods
will. 329. a. to be resisted with the shield of faith. 62. b. euerthrowen by
Christ. 278. b Devil driven away by faith. 131. b. aduauncer of Popes. 301. b
Devils and stifnecked sinners destitute of the faith that Paul speaks of.
130. b Devils confessed Christ to be the son of God. 95. b Devils wages.
100. a Devises of the Cardinal. 372. b Deuteronomium a book of Moses
commended. 21. b Differences of faith. 197. a. between the old and new
Testament. 444. a. between the Jews and the (...) ^ls. 44. a. betwne true
faith and feigned. 66. b. between false faith and right. 66. a Differences
between Gods children and the devils. 99. b. between Gods sinners and the
devil. 199. b. between the fall of Peter and Judas. 337. a. between true
Sacraments and false. 156. between Sacraments and sacrifices. 13. b. between
Christ's natural body and a painted Image. 281. b. between teaching the people
and a preacher 252. b Difference none of days to do good. 237. a Diggyng of
Abraha^s wells. 184. a Dignities of shauelynges. 353. a Diligence (although
in vain) toward our neighbor to be excused. 203. b Direction of our life to
what end. 387. b Disciples of Antichrist. 134. a Disciples of Christ were
worldly minded. 106. a. had a wicked opinion of him. 25. b. doubtful in faith
261. a Disciples of Christ understood Christ spiritually. 465. a. refuse not
death for his sake. 199. a Discipline used in ye primitive church 496. b
Dishonor of God and neighbor. 269. b Dispensations purchased of the pope.
329. b Dispensations for concubines. 134. a Disobedience. 290. b. counted a
spiritual thing. 109. a Disputations backward. 67. a. for superiority. 347. a
Disputations of predestination not rashly to be enterprised. 48. b
Dissimulation of the Pope. 352. a. of Papists. 19. a Dissimulation not
culpable in some causes. 209 a Dissembled truce. 366. a Distemperaunce in
eating and drinkyng. 227. b Distrust ought not to be in Gods prolongation of
help. 240. a Diversities of faith. 331. b Division in the Church. 347. b
Doctrine of the Pope. 412. a. and. 415. b. abominable. 316. b. wicked. 29. b.
Papisticall. 360. b. of Phariseis blind. 30. a. of shauelynges vain and
obstinate. 137. b. of More superstitions. 317. a. of Papists concerning
Purgatory. 306 b Doctrine false causes evil works 199. b Doctrine of
hypocrites. 87. a. of Papists needs miracles. 301. b. with out Scripture not
to be believed. 304. b Doctrine universally must be examined by Gods word. 414.
b Doctrine of Christ peaceable. 106. b Doctrine Apostolical. 408. b. of the
true Church. 304. a. of the Scripture. 388. b. and. 304. b. of Sacraments.
320. a Doctrine of the Apostles confirmed with miracles. 298. b Doctrine
sincere causes good works. 199. b Doctrine of Christ must be defended of
every man in his own person. 198. b Doctors doubt at Christ's plain words.
205. b. differ in the opinion of the Sacrament. 446. b Doctors generally call
the Sacrament a sacrifice. 447. b Doctor Colct. 318. b Doctor Ferman a
virtuous man, and godly. 330. a Documentes of Scripture necessary. 389. b
Dogs. 187. a. who they be. 238. a Down falling sinner has a false faith.
432. a Double signification of this word Church. 250. a Dregs of Papists.
406. b Duns. 302. a. his doctrine advanced. 278. a Dunsticall dreams, and
terms. 104. a Duke H^^frey. 363. b. his death. 364. a Duty of kings. 137. a.
of Priests. 133. b. of Ministers at the communion. 476. b Duty must be done
with love. 212. a
E.
Ear confession. 339. a. a wicked devise. 367. a. destroys Christ's
benefits. 320. a Ear confession and pardons never confirmed by miracle. 319.
b Earth given to man of God. 121. b Eating Christ's flesh is beleuyng in
Christ. 467. a Eating Christ's body and blood truly what it means. 463. a
Eating ye whores flesh what. 455. b Ecclesia. 250. b Effect of Christ blood.
380. b. of Gods word. 247. a. of his laws. 22. b. of our good deeds. 158. b
Effects of faith spiritual. 43. b Elders have erred. 303. b Elders and
Priests why so named. 38. a Eldest son of the holy seat. 349. b Elect must
be patient and tried. 260. a. b. have Gods will written in your hearts. 255. b
Elect ever meditate upon Christ's kyndnes. 382. b Election of the Pope
confirmed by the Emperor. 346. a Elias and More contrary. 284. a Emanuell.
408. a Emperors election to whom belo^gyng. 352. a Emperors have deposed
Popes, and Popes Emperors. 364. b. their oath to the Pope. 352. a. must not be
very strong by the Popes will. 365. b. abused by the Pope. 350. b. not esteemed
of the Pope. ibidem. doteth. 350. a Emperor sets on the French king by
night. 372. a. came through England. 371. a End of the law. 193. a. of all
laws. 240. b. of hypocrites. 306. a End must be cast before we begin. 99. a
Enemies to Gods word. 14. a Enemies of the truth to be hated. 216. a Enemies
must be overcome with well doing. 117. b Englishmen. 365. a English Bishops.
114. a Enormities of auricular confession. 180. b Enormities happened since
king Richard the second his death to this Realm. 207. a Intent of fasting.
229. b Intent of our ^eedes is all. 217. b Epiphanius cut down Images. 325. b
Erasmus. 304. a. favored of More. 251. a. partial in judgment. 2. a Error
may be saved. 258. b Error of covetousness. 230. b Estulphus king of Lombardy.
348. b Etymology of this word Euangelion. 378. a Euangelion called the new
Testament. 378. a Eucharistia. 467. b Everlasting life to who^ due. 390. b
Evil rulers not to be refused. 119. a. sign of Gods wrath. 118. b. whole some
medecines. 119. b Evil Priests their prayers prosits not. 300. a Evil
outward to be avoided. 22. a. must be recompensed with goodness. 413. a.
Examples for our learning. 5. a. of love. 332. a. of two poor men. 94. b
Examples very profitable. 30. b. and 259. a Example of false expoundyng
Scriptures. 173. a. how to understand ij. regimentes. 211. b Examples evil,
and their use. 4. a. of acceptable deeds before God. 243. b Examination of
consciences must go before the receipt of the Lords Supper. 472. b Exceptions
in bows. 21. b Exempt from Christ who. 403. b Exhortation general to all
people. 376. a Experience is in the aged. 345. b Exposition of the Pater
noster. 222. a. of this word (seven times). 17. b Ezechias. 299. b. face of ye
law. 383. b
F.
Faith. 42. a. 225. b. 16. a. 8. a. 226. b* truly defined. 42. b Faith
justifies expounded. 187. a 225. b. 64. b. justifies before all works. 45.
b. apprehends justification. 330. a. sufficient to justify us. 431. b. and
62. a Faith that works not justifies not 333. b. 331. b. and. 303. a. 432.
in Christ's blood only justifies. 336. a. only brings to Christ. 17. a.
under no law. 336. b. accounted to us for righteousness. 63. b. in Christ
fulfilleth the law. 91. b Faith how it justifies compendiously declared. 433.
b Faith eats and drinks Christ's body and blood spiritually. 464. a Faith
in Gods promise saved the Jews. 12. b Faith apprehends Christ. 457. b Faith
apprehends Christ's death. 418. a Faith in Christ brings to salvation. 80.
b Faith, love, and charity three sisters. 286. b. casts out devils, fasteth,
and prays. 77. a. prays in all places. 93. b. the life of the righteous.
463. b. expels Gods wrath. Not idi^. 430. b. chief part of penance. 398. a
Faith and charity joins with true prayer. 82. a Faith ye fou^datio^ of
Christ's church. 357. a. the holy candle wherewith to bless us at the hour of
death. 62. b* follows repentance. 18. b. styrred up in Gods people. 22. b.
confirmed by ceremonies. 12. b Faith required of the Jews. 457. b God
respects in prayer. 221. and 239. b. brings forth fruits of her self. 65.
b* makes us gods sons 89. b. accompanied with Gods spirit. 64. b. makes
deeds of the law glorious. 94. a. how it brings forth fruits. 63. b.
without fruits vain. 33. b Faith makes us Gods heirs. 67. b. 69. b. and
419. b. makes works acceptable. 335. b. known by her fruits* 66. a. of two
sorts. 266. b. 294. lost through allegories. 168. a Faith of works is
darkness. 232. b. contrary to the law in operations. 184. b. cannot appear
without works. 225. a Faith of the called, and not of the elect. 294. b.
comes not by freewill. 329. b. without fruit is a dream. 65. a Faith and
works come not of our selves. 66. a Faith false and fained. 42. b. without
Gods promise is Idolatry. 156. b Faith our victory. 190. b. Gods gift. 65. a.
only receaueth grace. 45. b. the surest shield. 4. b. the root of al goodness.
130. a. brings life. 62. a Gods gift. 329. b. possesses Gods spirit. 67. b.
idle without works. 55. a. her power. 225. a. unites us to Christ. 93. b
Faith feelyng. 266. b. true and lively. 42. b. in Christ's blood. 395. b. and
307. a. brings love. 32. a. 117. a. and 225. a. the mother of love. 419. a
Faith what it bredeth. 246. b Faithful have all things of God. 435. a. are in
good state. 448. b. though they slip yet fall not. 259 b Faythles man's prayer.
93. b Faithful and unfaithful sin diversely. 412. a Faithful fruits. 95. a
False Prophets who. 241. b. how known. 245. b. prove unwritten verityes by
similitudes. 170. b. teach us to trust in Saints. 158. b False worshipping.
271. a. of martirs 333. a. delusions. 285. a. miracles. 119. a False prayer is
paynfull. 221. a False doctrine never persecuted. 301. a False Popish books.
3. 4. a False preachers are murderers. 306. a Falsehode not all spyed in one
day. 326. b Fall of the Pope from God. 302. a Fall of Adam made us slaves to
the devil. 381. b Fanon. 277* b Fasting. 21. a. 228. a* and 242. b Fasting
truly, what. 275. a true use thereof. 81. a. 227. a. which required of God.
204. b Fasting not only in eating and drinkyng. 228. a Fasting papal, is
hipocriticall. 229. b Fast superstitious which. 81. a Father not known but by
the son 405. a Fear. 114. b. 418. b Fear of God not taught by y^
spiritualty, but fear of traditions 141. a F^astyng fastes. 229. b Fightyng,
slaying, and love may all be used at one instant to our enemies. 212* b Figures
by Christ borrowed of the old Testament. 14. b Figurative speeches used in
Scriptures. 469. b Filthynes of the heart. 193. a. of Popish doctrine. 411. b
Firye pillar. 283. a First fruits. 273 b Fisher. 182. b. his shameless iuggling
116 a Fish and flesh all one in heaven. 313. b Five Doctors apprehended at
Paris for the Gospel. 454. b Flappe. 277* b Flappes of the Albe. 277* b Flesh
described. 43. b. how to be understood in Scriptures. 43. a. sins all
generally. 258. a. enemy to man. 442. a Flesh and spirit what. 43. a. 186. b.
contrary. 48. a Flesh of Christ how signified by bread. 459. a Flesh and
blood of Christ of whom eaten and drunk. 458. a. b Fleshly Church. 291. b
Fleshly persecute the spiritual. 268. a Fleshly minded void of judgment. 297
a Fleshly reasons for woorshyppyng Saints. 160. a Fleshly man sauoureth not
spiritual things. 90. a Fond saying. 310. a Fond reasons of More. 337. a
Foolish Imaginations. 274. a Forbyddyng of Marriage. 312. a Forgiveness. 358. a
Force of good works. 15. a Fountain of true righteousness is Christ's blood.
74. a Free will. 113. b. 321. a. and 328. b. preuenteth not grace. 321. a.
overthrew our forefathers. 16. a Freedom. 113. a. from sin and the law. 46.
b Free from the law who? 46. b Free gift and desert are contrary. 19. b Free
Chapels. 136. a Frenchmen. 365. a French king. 182. b. made a Monk. 348. b.
helped forward the Pope. 348. a Friars. 151. a. 292. b Friar Forest. 366. a
Friar Bongey. 366. b Friars not bound to preach. 277. a Friars and Monks
should not preach. 164. b Fruits of faith and works. 45. b. of our love
toward God. 22. b. of ignorance. 277. a Fulness of all goodness Christ. 424. a
Fulfillyng the law, what. 240. b. obtained by faith. 44. b Foundations of man
feeble. 92. a Foundation of love. 416. a. of the old Testament. 9. b. of
Abbeyes, and Purgatory. 309. a Fury of the Popish Clergy. 93. a
G.
Gain joined with pain eases the same. 361. a Gainefull Gospel loved of
shave lynges. 406. b Geldyng of Priests. 317. b Generation of two sorts. 415.
b Generation of Serpents. 340. b George Joy writes to the king for license to
translate the Bible. 454. b Gildas. 28. a. a preacher and a Prophet. 101. a
Gift what it is. 42. a Gifts of grace our brothers as well as ours. 384. b
Giltles need no pardon. 318. b Glory. 200. b Glorious names of the Popes
Clergy, their estimation. 140. b Gloses. 200. a. Pharisaicall. 264. b God
described. 431. a. what he is. 104 a spirit. 294 b. invisible. 417. a. what he
requires. 26. a. only to be believed. 22. b. gives all things. 24. b. always
most gracious. 119. b. defends his doctrine him self. 97. a. teaches us if
man will not. 103. b. seeks us. 294. a. pardons us of his mercy. 74. b.
draws us to Christ. 458. a. hears prayer at all times. 20. b. receives the
humble. 85. b. works by grace in us before repentance come. 321. b. bids
us be bold with him. 297. b. rewards all obedience. 110. a. merciful to the
ignorant. 377. a. forgeueth our frailty. 293. b. reserueth a little flock.
298. a. what work he requires. 457. a. makes us blessed in Christ. 90. b God
is light. 392. a. the chief Physician. 297. a. can not lie. 170. b. in whom
dwelling. 417. b. how rightly served. 86. a. how truly worshypped. 180. a. who^
he receives. 101. a God who he will plague. 35. b. pours vengeance upon the
vnrepe^taunt. 28. a. aduengeth his doctrine. 106. b. aduengeth disobedience.
107 b. and 110. a. plagueth his enemies and helps his servants. 7. b. will
not be tempted. 171. a God forbyddeth Images. 8. b. like him self every where.
282. a God who he rejects. 25. a. takes away the wicked. 111. a. warns
before he strike. 105. a. destroys one wicked by an other. 110. b. punisher
of secret sins, the king of open. 122. b God works backward. 98. a. no
liar. 462. a God works upon all creatures as he will. 80. b. respects not
persons. 122. a. a just judge over king and all degrees. 142. a. only takes
vengeance on the king. 111. a. how he is at one with us. 72. b. burdened with
his promises. 4. b God sometimes weakeneth his elect and why? 101. a. scourges
whom he loves. 8. a and 186. a. tries his childrens faith. 98. a. is fatherly
to his elect. 293. b. keeps a little flock 268. a God first loved us. 88. b.
and 333. b. fights for us. 98. b. receives us for Christ's sake. 42. a.
works in us by faith. 415. b. loves us not for our works sake. 162. b. to us
as we should be to our neighbor. 73. b. stronger the^ all his enemies. 98. a.
defe^der of all estates. 341. b. pardo^neth all simple for Christ's sake. 346.
a God in the name of Jesus must be called upon in all adversities. 425. b.
rejoices in an acceptable receiver as much as in a liberal geuer. 244. b Gods
will is we should do good works. 75. a Gods children cannot sin. 423. b.
his love how to be understood in us. 89. a. his promise reaches to all
Abraham's posterity. 437. b. his promises are all comfort. 100. a. his favor at
what time from us. 34. b. his two Testamentes. 9. b Gods spirit. 392. a. where
it is. 41. a his word may not be altered. 23. a. his gentle correction. 287. b.
his children under chastising. 100. a. his forgiveness. 395. a. his goodness to
mankind. 234. a. his glory set forth by true miracles. 475. a. his kyndnes
moves us to love him. 67. b. his mercy styrreth up faith in us. 45. a. his
general covenant with us. 33. b. his word pith of all goodness. 290 ^a. not
the cause of evil. 105. b. ought to judge. 14. a. how to understand the same.
142. a. must season all things. 121. b. must be heard and done. 75. a Gods
spirit has spoken the Scriptures. 80. a. his truth works wonders. 97. b.
fights for us. 98. a Gods grace must be exercised in us. 68. a. his
Sacraments preach his promises. 162. a. his promise saves us. 52. a. his
mercy saves us. 45. a. his mercy toward the penitent. 22. a Gods promises
justify. 51. b. his promises in Christ belong only to the penitent. 31. a.
his will sought out only of a true Christian. 102. a Gods word sighteth
against hypocrites. 97. b. persecuted. 97. a. his Church called heretics.
291. a. his true church who are. 268. a. his true service. 217. a Gods works
supernatural. 21. b. his omnipotency not to curiously to be dealt withal. 462.
b. his presence in all places alike. 287. a. his wonderful care for his. 164.
a Goods. 212. b Good works where. 78. a. where true faith is. 45. b. and 55.
b Good works how far forth they please God. 54. a. significations of true
faith. 44. b. fruits of faith. 45. b Good men may err and not be damned. 300.
a Goodness must be showed to evil persons. 71. a Gospel. 36. b. 387. a. what it
signifies 127. a. comfort. 77. b. promised by the Prophets. 378. a. a true
touchstone. 3. a. the ministration of of righteousness. 62. a. why written of
the Apostles. 288. b Gospel and the Popes doctrine differ. 475. b. slaundered
by Papists. 320. b Goths. 351. b Government of Gods Ministers. 344. a Going
to law. 212. b Grace what. 157. b. how to be understood. 42. a Grace and truth
come through Christ. 199. b. received only by faith. 45. b. continues by
keepyng the law. 185. b Grammarians understand not Latin. 268. b Grecians. 303.
a. refuse the Popes tyranny. 347. b Gregory. 325. b Gregory the fifth. ibidem
Grievous sin not rebuked. 426. b Gross worshyppyng of God. 424. b
H.
HAm and the Pope like. 170. a Handy crafts commanded by God. 244. a Hatred.
204. a. and 404. a Heart must join with prayer. 239. a. worshyppeth God. 284. a
Heart of man Gods true temple. 87. b Heart contains the word of the law, and
Christ's promises. 31. b Headynes. ^90. b Heathen repent at Jonas preaching 30.
b. moved by miracles to know God. 27. a Hearing the word causes repentance
321. b Hearing Gods word provoked by true miracles. 284. a Heaven comes by
Christ. 112. b Heirs of God by says. 257. b Helizeus. 281. b Help comes al
from above. 433. a Help toward our neighbor must be in a readynes. 78. b
Hell follows evil works, as good works follow faith. 70. a Henry the second.
190. a Henry the fourth set up. 28. b Henry the fifth. 28. b. a great
conqueror. 366. a Henry the vi. 28. b. and 366. b Heresy whence. 38^. a
Heretics alleged by Rochester for his purpose. 129. b Heretics fallen out of
the mist. 295. a Heretics all termed that resist the Popes tyranny. 315. a
Hierome. 311. b. against Popish Bishops and Priests. 150. a Hildericus. 348. a
Historical faith much in^eriour to feelyng faith. 267. a Holy days. 181. b.
and 274. a. their ordinance. 248. a Holy days and offryng days how first
they came up. 133. b Holy Church has borne a swing. 289. b Holy ghost. 5. a.
shall rebuke y^ world. 247. a Holy strange gestures like Apishe play. 282. b
Holy water what it signifies. 276. a Honoryng God what. 269. b Honor Gods
name how we must. ^22. a Honor superfluous. 374. a Honor due to rulers. ^69.
b. to our neighbors. ibidem Honor of Christ abrogate with trust in Saints.
^^6. b Honor double due to virtuous Bishops. 53. b Hope her office. 188. b
Hope certain in Christ saves. 91. b Hope, love, and faith inseparable. 185. b
Horsley. 318. a House what it means. 406. (...) Household must be cared for.
84. a Humility, of the Apostles. 2. a. aduanuceth to heaven. 456. a Hunne a
Merchant. 318. a Hunnes a kind of people. 351. b Husbands how to rule their
wives. 54. b Husbands must rule their wives by Gods word. 121. a Husband in
Gods stead to his wife. 108. a Hypocritical prayers. 13. b. blind reasons.
274. a Hypocrisy of Papists. 181. a. must not be rebuked. 142. a. condemned
of Paul generally. 44. a Hipocrites their holiness. 245. a. blind 114 a. how
they read Gods law. 24. a. what deeds of mercy they taught. 138. b. why they
extol their works. 244. b. how they bynd and louse. 134. a. how they apply
Gods punishment. 105. a. need John Baptist. 264. a Hypocrites sit in Christ
seat. 263. a. love offrynges. 161. b. causers of all wickedness. 105. a. must
be salted. 196. a. live altogether by theft. 141. a
I.
James reproves false fruits. 333. b Idolatry. 239. b. 424. a. 425. b. and
443. a Idolatry of man's Imagination brings confusion. 161. a Idolatry to
worship Images. 273. a. set up the shauelynges. 398. b Idolatours all before we
came to Christ. 312. b Idolatrous persons, their worship. 299. b Idols abhorred
of God. 8. b Jerome a brother of Grenwich, his intent. 60. a Jerusalem the
first seat of the high Bishop 347. a. destroyed. 282. b Jesus. 408. a.
signifies a Savior 174. a. our advocate. 393. b. a true Messiah. 420. a.
calls to his father for us. 393. b. the way to his father. 431. a. procures
all things for us. 280. a. look more in this word (Christ.) Jews require
signs to confirm their belefe. 425. a. committed Idolatry. 298. a. their
obstinate blyndnes, 459. b. accused Christ falsely. 304. a. procured their own
vengeance. (...) how. 340. b. rebuked of incredulity. 458. a. rebuked of
Christ and why. 298. b. enforced by Scripture to acknowledge Christ. 275. b.
their hearts how hardened. 30. a. locked from the understanding of scripture. 33.
a. justified by faith. 273. a Jews and Gentiles how they differ. 44. a.
instructed of ceremonies. 12. a. delivered by Christ from error. ^^5. b.
converted to Christ. 275. a. saved by faith in Gods promise. 12. b. captures to
their works. 274. a Iewishe murmuryng reproved of Christ. 458. b. their
incredulity taxed. 438. a Jewish state in traditions more easy then the
Christians. 277. b Ignorance of Scripture whence. 278. a. excuses not. 245.
b. promoted Popery. 182. a. made us servants to ceremonies. 278. b. her
fruits. 277. a Ignorance of More. 406. a. of the Apostles. 26. a Ignorant
who. 404. b. Popish Priests. 278. a Incredulity chief of all sins. 43. b
Infidels mock our domme ceremonies which quench faith. 132. a Infirmity of
our nature. 13. a. how to be cured. 171. a Inseparable the love of God, and our
neighbor. 420. a Institution of the Sacrament. 440. a. of the Lords Supper.
444. b Institution of the paschall lamb. 439. a Instruction necessary for all
preachers. 43. b Interdiction. 135. a Introductions into the Scriptures. 390. a
Images how well used. 270. b. disalowed in the primitive Church. 325 a. not
tolerable in Churches. 325. b servants to man and not econtr^. 270. b.
forbidden of God. 8. b. must be abstaynod from. 22. a Imageseruice abhorred of
GOD. 401. b Imaginations Papal are Idolatry 280. a. carnal without Gods
spirit. 26. b Imaginations of man confirmed by Saints miracles. 30. a. alter
not God. 83. a Imperial power and the Popes virtue perished together. 351. a
Impure hearted who. 193. b John Tisen servant to the Bishop of London, a secret
Ambassador. 456. b John Baptist. 263. b. expounded the law truly. 264. b John
Baptist and our Lady were sinners. 336. a John the xij. Pope. 352. a Jonas his
sacrifice. 28. b. prays out of the Whales belly. 28. b. moved the Heathen to
repentance with preaching. 30. b Jonas afraid. 27. a. divided within him
self. 27. a. an unmeet message of him self. 26. b Jonas being carnal fled
from God. ibid. confesses his sins. 27. a Joseph an example of Gods
wonderful workyng. 98. a Israelites have a king given them. 118. a. mo in
number then the Jews 298. a. how comforted of Moses. 98. a Judas. 251. a.
310. a. perished. 337. a Judas a Priest, a Cardinal, and a Pope. 146. a
Judges. 122. b. are called Gods. 110. a. must be learned. 138. a Judgments
Papal. Concerning sin. 311. b. not indifferent. 341. a Judgments
hypocritical of Scriptures. 389. b Iudgyng of false miracles intolerable to
Papists. 364. a Iudgyng rebuked of some sort. 237. a Iugglers. 108. a Iugglyng
with words. 279. b. with textes. 357. b Iugglyng terms of Papists. 254. a.
of More. 330. b Just who. 335. a Justification. 17. a. 332. a. only comes by
faith. 10. a. 14. a Justification by faith loathsome to Papists. 18. a. not by
merits. 17. a. of our selves. 17. b Justification comes not by works though
they be never so glorious. 153. b Iusticiaries, bond children of the law. 167.
b Iustifiyng signifies Gods favor. 117. a
K.
KEy. 184. a. of the Scripture. 388. a Keys of knowledge. 357. a. what they be.
123. b. promised, paid. ibid. are the law of God. 138. b. counterfetted to be
avoided. 123. a Kepers of the commandment, in the state of grace. 402. b
Kernel of all fruits faith. 243. a Kindlyng first of Purgatory. 398. a King
Jews. 369. a King John. 249. b King Henry of Windsore. 298. a King Henry the
iiij. an usurper. 338. b King Henry the viij. with his army abused. 369. b.
called defender of the faith. 349. b King Herold. 362. a King of France made a
Monk. 348. b King is anointed. 393. b. Gods gift, though a tyrant. 178. b. a
great benefit, though never so evil. 112. b. in gods rowme in this world.
111. a has Gods authority. 213. b. may correct the spirituality. 214. b. Lord
of body and goods. 214. a. cannot privilege the spirituality to sin. 111.
b. is bound by office to aduenge and no man else. 136. b. only ought to punish
open sin. 137. a King given to the Israelites. 118. a Kings why chosen. 109.
b Kings and Emperors once elected the Pope, only. 352. b. thrown down by
Papists. 127. a. how instructed of Bishops. 98. b. captives through
flatterers. 137. a. become hangmen to Antichrist. 138. a in subjection to the
Clergy. 140. b. sin in geuyng, and Prelates in reuyng exemptio^s. 115. b.
wayt on the Popes pleasure. 114. b. defended the Popes false authority. 114.
b. sworn to Bishops and not Bishops to kings. 155. b Kings must make their
account to to God only. 111. b. must keep lawpromise with all men. 124. a.
must execute their office them selves, and commit the same to wicked Popish
Bishops. 138. a Kings law is Gods law. 137. b Kings must be learned. 198. a.
may not rule after their own Imagination. 179. a. must follow Gods word in all
their doings. 222. a Kings and subjects one before God 224. b Kingdom of
heaven what. 235. a. of Christ spiritual. 343. a. of heaven and of this world
not alyke. 160. a Kingdom of the pope of this world. 343. b Kingdom of
Lombardy divided. 349. a Knavery in shrift. 147. b Knowledge of God. 408. b. of
the true way. 298. b. of Scriptures pertayneth to all men. 138. a Knowledge of
Christ not taught us by Papists. 159. a Knowledge al dark save hearty
knowledge of Christ's bloudshedyng. 197. b Knowledge why used and not
confession. 254. a
L.
LAdders sold of Papists to clime to heaven. 123. b Lambs. 187. a Lands why
first given to spiritual officers. 134. a Lands temporal small in respect of
the spiritual lands. 135. b Landlordes should not raise rentes. 121. b.
should not suffer their tenauntes to be damaged. 122. a (Last farthyng)
expounded. 204. b Latin service. 151. b Latin tongue only used to all. 134. b
Latin text condemned of More. 251. b Latria. 299. a Laws of Papists several.
102. a Law spiritual of the Arches how it spoyleth. 136. b Law conde^neth. 77.
b. brings death. 62. a. how given. 117. b. what it requires. 47. a. a mark
to see how we are purged. 165. a. must be in ^ight and why. 379. a. requires
impossible things of us. 378. b. drives to desperation. 442. a Law her
office. 186. a. how fulfilled. 186. a. accuses the holiest of all. 120. a.
cannot justify. 64. a. leads to Christ. 184. a. cannot give life. 9. b.
fulfilled with love. 22. a. fulfilled with Christ's mercy. 31. b. given by
Moses. 184. b. and 378. how read of hypocrites. 24. a Law walkyng. 74. a.
requires all our hearts. 39. b. condemns, and why. 389. a. must be fulfilled
spiritually. 41. a. byndeth, the Gospel lowseth. 383. b. is spiritual. 26. a.
and 40. b. fulfilled by Christ only. 40. a. condemns, Christ gives pardon.
378. b. how satisfied. 40. a. wholly contained in the x. commandments. 33. b
Law her subjection, what. 46. b Law and sin words to be noted. 39. b Law
utters what sin is. 47. b. increases sin. 40. b Laws temporal. 10. b.
not executed, no law. 311. a Law of nature byndeth us to help our neighbor.
72. a Law keeping, and breakyng what follows. 206. b Law breakers cursed of
God. 23. b Layty why they rule not. 131. a. kept from half the Sacrament. 428.
a. must needs now have the Gospel. 148. a Leadyng in darkness. 310. a Learned
men have doubted of Paul his Epistle to the Hebrews, who is author thereof. 56.
a Leaven of many sorts. 225. a. of the Pope. 307. b Lechery. 267. a. 405. b
Lechery and covetousness no sins with Papists. 267. b Legend of Popish lies.
301. a Left hand. 141. a Leo the iij. Pope. 349. b Leper a good example. 15. a
Lesser ceasseth in presence of the greater. 358. b Lesson very fruitful. 31.
b. godly. 309. b. good for ministers. 477. a. tellyng us when we have Gods
spirit. 92. b Leude Cardinal and a false Pope. 371. b Jews the mild. 350. b
Liberty. 105. b. comes through patience. 119. a Liberties granted by
Papists to all manner mal^factours. 179. a Liberality to our brethren. 425. a
Light, continuance therein what. 404. a Little flock. 292. b. receives the
promises. 292. a. goes to wrack. 293. a Little master Parson, his practices.
362. b Life of Gods elect, Scripture. 389. b Life not given by the law. 9. b
Litterall sense is spiritual. 169. a. proves an allegory. 167. b Litterall
sense of More dashed. 466. a Loaf of bread signifies one body in Christ. 472.
a Loan forgeuen of the Clergy. 374. a and by the temporaltie. ibidem Losing
and bindyng. 357. a. the right manner thereof. 150. a. signification thereof.
174. b Loss for Christ's sake a C. times restored. 89. a Lottes castyng
lawful. 27. a Lone. 10. b. 205. a. 225. b. and 246. b. office thereof. 188. a.
diversely understood. 253. b. is righteousness. 225. a. prays. 201. b.
expels fear. 419. a. causes boldness. 418. b. makes us Gods sons. 417.
a. makes all things common. 40^. a. helps at need. 201. a. cares for our
brethren. 418. b Love of the world. 97. a. 405. a. of our neighbor. 211. a.
toward god and our neighbor how to be tried 22. b. must work in all
things. 281. a Love of God and the contrary what they be. 23. a Love to the
law is coupled with true faith. 187. a Love fulfilleth the law. 49. a. 22. a.
50 keeps the law. 203. a. fulfilleth Gods will. 419. a Love toward God,
fruits thereof. 22. b. seeks not her own. 84. a Love of our selves. ^90. b.
of our neighbor Gods commandment 419. b Love is not charity generally, and
econtra. 253. b Love understands the law. 36. b. breaks the law. 411. a
Love toward God what. 78. a. among Christians makes all things common. 83.
a. beautifieth all things. 248. b. not paynfull. 418. b. signified to us by
Gods correction. 25. a Love of God to us before ours to him. 416. b Love both
friend and foe. 216. b Lovers of God love their neighbor 332. b Lucretia the
Roman Lady. 113. b Lucifer 353. a. his brood justify the^ selves. 224. a
Lusts evil how purged. 186. b. diverse in one man. 113. a Luther his
submission to king Henry the viij. 375. a
M.
MAgistrates reuengers of temporal causes. 191. a Mahomet waxed great, and how
348. b. his doctrine, and continuance thereof. 301. a Mahomet and the pope
began at one time. 348. a Maid of Ipswich. 284. b Maid of Kent inspired. 285.
a. received small pleasure of our Lady. 285. a Master in Gods stead to his
servant. 109. a Malice of the Jews toward Christ 459. b Malicious blindness in
More. Mammon what it is. 71. b. 233. a. a God. ibidem. his servant who, and
how known. 233. b. disguiseth me^. 233. a. his servant no true preacher. 233.
b. may purchase friends for us. 71. (...) Man is first good. 412. a. first
evil ibidem, cannot help the dead. 13. b. Lord over all creatures. 248. a.
has three chief enemies. 442. a. universally sins. 392. b. not subject to
places. 283. b plucked from Adam* and graffed in Christ. 380. b Man's nature is
sinful. 393. a. his wisdom makes sects. 104. a. his life is Gods
commandment. 236. b Manner of Christ's, praying for us. 401. a Many fall and
why. 295. a Marchaundise of the Pope. 359. b. of Papists. 398. b Mart should
have been at Calice. 372. b Martyrs of the pope never preached Christ nor dyed
for his word. 295. b Mary an example of faith. 66. a Marriage. 107. b.
forbidden only by the Pope. 127. b. 261. b. of children unlawful without
consent of parents. 120. b Marriage of king Henry the eight. 366. b Marriage
alters degrees of nature. 108. b Mass described. 427. a. friendly to
Papists. 13. b. damnable. 425. b Mass at the first was a declaration of
Christ's passion. 426. a Matrimony figureth Christ's benefits toward us.
312. a Matrimony. 322. a. no Sacrament ibidem, not ordained to signify any
promise. 144. a Matrimony and eating of meat forbidden by the Pope. 220. a
Matters of faith are repugnaunt to reason. 462. b Material temples God
dwells not in. 272. b Ma^imi^ the Emperor was soldier to king Henry the
viij. 369. b Measure. 237. b Meditations of Gods mercy. 259. b. of ^s own
frailty necessary. 413. a Meekenes. 190. b. 201. a. the glory of youth. 456. a
Meekenes toward the higher power. 342. a Melancthon. 455. a Men of three
sorts. 112. b Mercy of God. 332. b. great. 30. b. toward ma^kyng. 444. a.
waits on the elect. 260. a. must be cleaued unto. 426. a. from whom locked.
57. a Mercy of Christ fulfilleth the law. 31. b Mercy in this life obtayneth
mercy in the life to come. 193. a. how many ways it may be showed. 192. a
Mercyfulnes taught. 335. a. toward our neighbor. 9. a. must be showed of one
to an other. 86. a Merits justify not. 17. a. Papisticall of no value. 165. b
Meritemongers obstinate. 17. b Mertion his heresy. 471. b Method of Paul's
doctrine. 43. b (...). 37. a Millane. 371. a Ministers named Elders with the
Jews. 253. a. why so named. 251. b. why reverenced. 344. b Ministers of the
Church their duty. 249. a. their office as chargeable before God as Peter's
was. 356. b. had no tithes at the beginning. 346. b Miracles why wrought of
Christ his miracles were subject to our senses. 475. a. and b Miracles of God
draw to Christ. 158. a. wrought by faithful prayer. 152. b. wrought by faith,
and not by ceremonies. 131. b. 183. a Miracles done by the Saints confirmed
their doctrine. 281. b. done for the people. 283. a Miracles move the heathen
to know God. 27. b Miracles feigned drive from Christ. 158. b. maintained by
Popish offrynges. 159. b Mystical and high questions to be avoided. 455. a
Miters. 134. b Modest manner of Paul's doctrine. 391. b Money purchases
preferment. 346. b. dispatcheth Purgatery. 307. b. makes marchaundise. 108. a.
byndeth not people to pray. 163. b Monks why cloystred. 196. b. made ministers
to the poor. 355. a. rob them. ibid. why they run into Religion. 191. b.
accursed. 192. a Monks and Friars not of God. 104. b Monks their love. 164. b
Monumentes of notable doings. 436. a Mortuaries. 136. a. 373. b. to two
Parishes. 136. a Mortification of our flesh the right work of faith. 48. b
More. 330. b. skillful. 251. a. subtle. 318. b. a iester. 309. a. a scoffer.
452. b. a mocker. 459. a. A dissembler. 251. a. a liar. 294. a. 375. a. 30. b.
a setter forth of unwritten verities. 461. b More would drive us from God. 297.
a. Bigamus. 317. b. maintayneth unwritten verities expounds the Scriptures
falsely. 460. a. against him self. 463. b More against the Popes profit. 297 b.
against him self. 305. b. his similitude of faces, weak. 463. a. blind in
scriptures. 460. a. blinded with covetousness. 231. a. driven from the
Scripture. 475. b More captious. 251. a. would excuse Hunnes murder. 318. b
More blasphemeth God. 328. b. proved an heretic. 316. a More preferred to the
Chauncellershyp by Wolsey. 373. a More if he had spoken with Christ would have
believed him. 462. a More, his second argument touching the last Supper
confuted. 461. a. his first reason touching the last Supper confuted. 460. b
Mores foolish gloss. 261. b. his wits captiuate. 338. a. his false doctrine.
283. a. his conclusion. 288. b. his naughty opinion. 307. a. his faith common.
311. a. his Purgatory as hoate as hell. 306. b Moses. 390. b. a mild mother.
122. b. his bo^es. 299. a. his face. 184. a. how looked in the face. 112. b.
mercylesse in executyng the law. 122. b. mindful of Gods benefits. 8. b
Mournyng, godly. 189. b Mourners for righteousness saved. 190. b Motions to
prayer. 220. b Multitude of man's witnesses verifieth not. 255. b Murder among
Friars. 255. b. of the Duke of Gloucester. 3^4. a Murderers are false
preachers. 306. a Murmuryng of the Jews at Christ's Divinity. 458. b Mutual
frendshyp and love. 434. b
N.
NAme of Jesus saves. 441. a Narrow gate found of few. 241. a Natural man.
114. a Nature of the Sacrament of our Lords Supper. 441. a Nature gives
authority to the aged 456. a Natural man understands not Scriptures. 80. a
Naturally we are the children of wrath. 391. a Nativity of the king cast by
the Cardinal. 368. a Necessity of almose, prayer, and fasting. 228. a
Necessity lawles. 252. a Necessity of holy days. 385. a Necromancy licensed
by the Pope. 367. a Neck verse. 112. a Neighbor how to be prayed for. 15. a.
82. b. must be beloved as our selves. 385. b New life. 293. b New Thomas
Becket. 369. a New practice of Papists. 364. a New Testament. 10. a. 36. b.
burned by Tunstall. 374. a Niniue the greatest City in the world. 29. a
Nicolas the first Pope. 351. a Nicolaus de Lyra. 303. a Noath. 303. a Noath
drunk. 169. b Note of the circumstau^ces of the last Supper. 470. a Note to
know hypocrites by. 350. a for temporal Magistrates. 228. b No flesh can
fulfill the law. 74. a Nurture of kings. 371. (...)
O.
OBedience wilful. 17. a Obedience, poverty etc. of the spirituality. 242. b
Obedience excluded through marks of Antichrist. 109. a Obedience for diverse
causes must be used. 116. a. toward Magistrates. 92. b. to God quenches
furious torments. 454. a. of Jonas toward God. 29. a Obedience to parents
is service to God. 107. a Objection against justification by faith. 432. b
O^on in the Apostles. 260. b Obst^acy of Papists. 310. a. of meri^no^gers. 17.
b Occasions light move great striffe. 5 a. move sin^e in us. 223. b Office ^f
faith. 188. a. of a Bishop. 52. a. of a Priest. 144. b. of a true preacher.
196. a. of a good shepherd. 51. a. of the law. 117. b Office of Magistrates
showed. 8. a Officers of Christ's kingdom must leave temporal dominion. 342.
b Officers first ordained in Christ's Church. 345. b Officer, not the private
person must aduenge. 191. a Offryng days, and priuey tithes. 136. a ffrings
what they meant. 204. a. of ripe fruits. 424. b. at first masses of Priests.
336. b. maintain Po- Opish miracles. 159. b ffenders open, openly to be
rebuked. 345. a Old translation. 318. b Old commandment, what. 403. b Old
ceremonies preachers to the people. 273. a Old Pharisaicall practice now
practiced by Papists. 340. a Old ^estament whereupon built. 9. b Old man must
be put of. 80. b Old Adam bynd^tl* our consciences. 47. a Opinions Popish and
waueryng how bred. 329. a. and 170. b Opinions iij. touching the Sacrament of
the last Supper. 445. a Oppres^ion of sure doctrine. 289. a Opportunity. 455.
a. and b Orders. 322. a. in teaching. 103. b. of iustifiyng. 330. b. of
Scholemen overthwart. 103. b. of S. Paul's doctrine. 43. b Orders how every man
may preach, and how not. 198. a. Papal compared with orders Apostolical. 354.
b compared with Christ's doctrine. 353. b Ordinaries hangmen to the faithful.
319. a Ordinance of rulers. 186. a Ornaments. 273. b Original of good works
whence. 10. b Oath of a witness may be taken. 309. b. unlawful may be broken.
137. a against charity to be broken. 315. b Otho king of Saxons. 252. a
Ouercommers of the world who. 421. a Overthrow of our forefathers was freewill.
16. a Oules and Papists alike in abhorryng light. 1. b Outward Popery is the
worship of the unfaithful. 422. b Outward signs required of Christ, by the
Jews. 457. b Outward deed fulfilleth not the law 117. a Outward oil not
auaylable. 409. a
P.
PAce an Ambassador. 372. a Pa^e taking how delightsome to God. 229. a
Paphnutius his opinion concerning marriage. 317. b Papisticall schole doctrine
corrupts youth. 103. b Papisticall Doctors repugnaunt. 102. b. their
arguments. 88. a. their gloses con^uted. 474. b. their works. 79. a Papists
ca^ do miracles. 300. b. teach with the mouth only. 267. b, still purge their
patientes. 166. a. of the carnal opinion of the Jews. 459. b. cannot abide
Scripture. 287. b. 319. a. wrest the Scriptures. 466. b. per^ert the Scripture.
ibid. suppressors of Scriptures. 1. b. walk in shadows. 125. a Papists great
iugglers. 201. a. persecutours. 448. b. furious against their adversaries. 447.
a. persecutyng tyrauntes. 319. b. blousheders 363. b. children of this world.
268. b throw down Kings and Emperors. ^27. a. hear not Christ's voice. 126.
b. fruits of their earthly Gods. 126. b. why they will not have Scriptures in
English. 128. a. preach works for their own profit. 334. b. trust in works
as they should in Christ. 246. a Papists and Phariseis make sin of no sin.
29. b Papists will louse nothing. 305. a. forecasters of perils. 370. a. make
no account of perjury. 376. a. abolish the true doctrine of Sacraments. 422.
a. enemies to all good learning. 278. a. know all other men's counsel. 102. a
Papists have a way of their own to heaven. 170. a. their malicious pratyng.
475. b. have robbe^ many realms of the Gospel and all goodness. 116. b.
Churchtheiues. 20. a. win what others loose. 165. b Papists abuse the
Sacraments. 13 b. against the Popes laws. 341. a. hate Scriptures as oules do
light. 1. b. their contrary preaching. 102. b lock up the Scripture that they
only may expound the same. 23. b. their ground for unwritten verities. 473.
b. cannot expound their ceremonies. 131. b. sworn to their wicked living.
305. a Papists and peripatetiques their doctrine. 88. b Parable how to
understand it. 78. b. of the Samaritane expounded. 285. b Parcialitie in
Erasmus. 2. a Parcialitie in a preacher for fear of persecution odious. 196.
b. in judges is wicked. 122. b Pardons. 173. a Pardons surer then the Popes
pardon. 223. a Parents to us in Gods stead. 107. a how they try their
childrens love. 12. a Parish Priest. 102. b Parliament. 314. b. at Bury. 363. b
Paschall lamb. 282. a. 273. b. figured the Lords Supper. 468. a. how
spiritually fulfilled in Gods kingdom. 440. a Paschall lamb and Christ's
death compared together. 440. a Patience in sufferyng. 454. a. brings
liberty. 119. a Paul. 103. a. a persecutour. 39. b. 275. a. a careful
preacher. 402. a. describes the Pope. 290. a. answers the Papists
concerning justification. 44. knew not Mass. 287. a. preached Christ, and not
him self. 391. b. how he rebukes hypocrites 44. a. condemns all hypocrisy.
ibid. no preacher of worldly wisdom. 170. b. gave faithful couns^ without
vexyng men's consciences. 129. a. teaches marriage of Priests 312. b. calls
the Sacrament bread after the consecration. 472. a. a fatherly instructor to
Timothy. 252. rebuked Peter to his face. 344. b. his Epistles are the Gospel.
127. a his traditions were the doctrine of the Gospel. 286. b. the order of
his doctrine. 43. b Paul and Peter equals. 359. a. above Peter in Apostleshyp.
126. a. his Apostleship how proved. 126. a Paul excommunicated, but Papists
burn. 339. b. lacked Ministers. 109. a. retained not Ones^us from his master.
109. a Pax. 276. a Peace making. 193. b Peace of conscience. 194. b Pelagius
his heresy. 407. b Penance. 426. b. profitable to Papists. 254. a. abused by
shauelyngs 397. b Penance put for repentance. 146. a People of two sorts
deceived. 379. b People why called to the temple. 282. a People believe in the
work without the promise. 153. a Persecution for the truth obtayneth life. 190
b Persecution of Papists. 195. a. at Rysell^s in Flaunders. At Saint Luke.
454. b Persecutors of the spiritual. 308. a. of the word threatened. 100. b
Perfect Christians in no danger. 48. a Perfect keeping of the law. 40. a
Perfection. 216. b. joined with repentance and strong faith. 386. b
Performance of man's pretense not of him self, but of God. 17. a. of an evil
oath double sin. 209. a Persuasions of Papists. 448. a. of hypocrites. 341. b
Partakers of Gods promise profess the law. 185. a Pestilence of Princes what.
123. a Peter his patrimony. 124. b. was never scholar in the Arches. 135. b
Peter rebuked openly of Paul. 344. b Peter and John, their puttyng on of
hands. 152. b Peter showed Gods power. 344. a. called chief of the Apostles
and why. 343. b. in what respect so called ibidem. preached, but so does not
the Pope. 357. a. practiced his keys. 123. b. sent to preach in Samaria. 344.
a. preached plain Scripture. 170. b. his seat and his keys are his doctrine.
359. a. his seat Christ's Gospel. ibid. his submission to his brethren. 344.
a. prophesies of the popes spirituality Epist. 2. cap. 2. 55. a. his faith
strong. 261. a. his possessions. 352. a Pety pillage. 136. a Phariseis applied
all to their deeds 205. condemned of Christ. 17. a Phariseis nearer the true
Church then Papists. 201 b Phariseis rebuked. 17. a. agree with Papists in
doctrine. 17. b. cleanse their souls with their own works. 30. a. their acts
all outward. 202. b. their freewill. 16. b Pharao confessed his sins. 95. b
Phocas an Emperor. 347. b. his privilege to the sea of Rome. ibid. Phrases of
speech expounded. 77. b Pilgrimages. 282. a. how lawful. 20 a. not needful
to a Christian for his salvation. 155 a Pilgrimages true, what they be. 272 a
Pity. 282. b Pipinus. 348. a Places of Scripture showing Christ's departure
hence as touching his natural body. 470. b Places having prerogative for
prayer. 283. a Plerophoria how known. 414. a Plurality of benefices. 373. b
Poetry Scripture to Popish schole men. 168. a Pollaxes borne before high
Legates what they signify. 142. b Pope with his Prelates set forth. 53. b. a
God on earth. 349. a. Antichrist. 262. a 289. a. 308. a. the deuilles vicare.
359. a. persecuteth Gods word. 25. b. 290. a. a deni^h blasphemer ibid. has no
Martyrs. 294. a. a peacebreaker. 365. b. a tyrau^t. 318. a. a breaker of bonds
of Matrimony. 350. a commands murder. 106. a. cause of great perjury. 115. a
Popes have been bloudsheders above this. 700. years. 351. a Pope a mercyles
tyrant. 362. b. curses his enemies. 395. b. wilnot be rebuked. 364. b. only
forbyddeth marriage. 127. b. half a God. 461. b aloft over all Bishops and
Kings 353. a. aduaunceth his in worldlynes. 353. b. has more kingdoms then
God. 135. b. a maker of laws. 356. a. sells Gods free gift. 151. a.
chalengeth authority over God and man. 159. a. commands God to curse. 151.
b. may do all at his pleasure. 364. b. wilnot obey Princes. 286. a. made a God
for his dispensations. 230. a. comes in Christ's name with miracles. 301. b.
says he cannot err. 264. a. distributeth his fathers kingdom. 354. a
thrusts down Christ. 292. a. lycenseth all things to be read saving the
truth. 21. a. forbids that God commands. 21. a Pope how he remitteth and
retayneth sins. 306. b. makes heretics of true preachers. 134. b sells
all things. 289. b. receives his possessions of the devil. 354. a. how he
reigns under Christ. 151. a. expounds Scripture contrary to Christ, and his
Apostles. 173. b. byndeth that Christ louseth. 102. a Pope not to be believed,
and why 304. b. lonseth all honesty. 123. a. more merciful for money, then God
for Christ's death. 151. a. deuideth poor people, and how. 354. b chosen
without consent of the Emperor. 360. b. purposed to be Emperor. 349. made two
Empyres of one. 349. b Pope and Pipine put down the right French king. 348. a
Pope and Cardinals their opinions concerning king Henry the eight. 288 b Pope
July. 369. a Pope his fast. 229. b. his traditions are wicked, and break Gods
commandments. 108. a. his authority improued. 12. 4. b. his clergy subtle.
1. a. his doctrine corrupt. 24. a. his doctrine does persecute. 97. a. his sect
not of Christ's church. 261 b. his doctrine bloody. 106. b. his saying of the
scripture. 306. b. his authority is only to preach Gods word. 123. b. his
false authority defended by kings. 114. b. his false works. 289. a. his
iugglyng 114. b. his widows. 354. b. his priests ibide^. his law. 355. a. his
faith. 410 b. his Church. 292. b. his practice with all Princes. 365. a. his
Deacons. 354. b. his Prelates taught of Caiphas. 122. b Popish tyranny. 475. b.
ceremonies more obstinate and mo in number then the Jews. 101. b. forgiveness.
395 a. Purgatory not feared of a true Christian. 434. b. Prelates would be
highest. 341. a. superstition. 425 b. doctrine. 447. a. has caused the truth
to be set forth more plainly. 476. a. works. 396. a. oil more feared then
Gods commandments. 131. a. confirmation 277. a Pope holy works a cloak for
the wicked. 27. a Possessed with deuines fled from Christ. 285. a Poor me^.
408. a. in spirit who. 189 a. must be cared for next our own household. 84. a.
called of Paul Gods Church. 473. b. poverty. 242. b Poverty wilful. 16. b.
her vow. 19. a Power good and evil whence. 321. b Poison of our birth
resists the spirit. 165. a A prayer. 228. a Prayer. 22. b. 242. b. 219. b.
defined. 81. b. of how many sorts. 220. a. a commandment. 238. b. heard in
all places of God. 282. b. the fruit of faith. 93. a. heard of God at all
times. 20. b. wins the victory. 238. b. of faith does miracles. 152. b vain
without heart and toungue. 221. a. of shauelynges breaks Gods commandment.
139. b. of Monks robs. 201. a. not sold in old time. 139. b. to Saints
superilitious. 296. a. without faith nothing. 274. b. to Saints not before
Christ's time. 296. a Practices. 371. a. of Parliamentes. 315. a. of Prelates.
363. a. of Popish Prelates in these days. 340. b. with poor Priests. 367. b.
of fleshly spiritualitie. 249. a Prayers and our deeds accepted according to
our faith. 154. b Prayers of all good women accepted as well as our Ladies. 326.
a. to Saints damnable. 433 b. all in Latin. 151. b. commanded to the
ignorant. 135. a Praise sought of hypocrites. 373. b Praise of Paul Epistle
to the Romans. 39. a Preacher his office. 206. a. may not preach unless he
be sent of God. 156. why accused of heresy and treason. 202. (...) Preachers
who are sent and who not, how to know. 156. a. of Gods word, their miracles.
302. a. need no miracles. 301. a. must preach repentance. 86. b. why not
believed when they preach truth. 101. b. must have a competent living allowed
them. 133. b. must not be violent. 214. b. who ought to be. 198. b Preaching is
byndyng and lousing. 359. a. of Christ. 391. the authority of Peter his
successor. 173. b. the chief authority that Christ gave his Apostles. 126. a.
extinct with ceremonies. 278. a Predestination. 306. a. in Gods hand. 48. b.
not rashly to be disputed upon. 48. b. how far to be proceeded in. ibidem
Presbyter. 144. b Priests. 310. b. must be virtuous. 314. b Priests how truly
anointed. 133. a ought not to be anointed with oil. 144. b. tell the
confessions of the rich to the Officials and Commissaries, and why. 136. b. may
have whores but no wives. 311. b. must have wives for two causes. 133. b
Priest disguiseth him self with Christ's passion. 132. a Priests understand
no Latin. 103. a Prelates why so wicked. 118. b. Courtiers. 347. a. understand
not Scriptures, and why. 287. b. why clothed in red. 142. b Pride. 405. b. of
the Pope. 363. a. of the Cardinals. 372. b Princes why ordained. 117. a. not to
be resisted though they be infidels. 111. a. whether they may be resisted or
no. 213. a Principles of Scriptures. 386. b Processions abused. 299. b
Profession of our Baptism. 388. b. first to be learned. 387. a Profession of
new life procures Christ's mercy. 219. b Promise how we may challenge. 218. b
Promise of God fulfilled for Christ's and not for Saints merits. 160. a. left
out in all things by the Pope. 154. a Promises of the Gospel comfortable to a
sinner. 378. a Promise comes of the promisers goodness. 196. a Promises of God
either wiped out or leuened by shauelyngs, and why. 151. b Promotio^s of the
spiritualty. 406. b Property of the Gospel. 194. a Properties of the Hebrew
toungue agrees with the English. 102. b Prophaners of Gods word. 104. b
Prosperity is a curse. 99. a A Prophet who. 76. a Prophets of whom slain.
138. b. and why. ibide^. bore their brethrens weakness. 25. b Prophecy of
Paul to Tim. iij. and iiij. chap. fulfilled in our days 53. b Protestation of
the author of this work. 157. b Protector of Purgatory, More. 364. a A
prouiso of the Papists. 361. b Pseudochristi. 132. a Publicans what they be.
216. a Purgatory. 256. a. 265. a. 324. a. and why so called. 139. a. the Popes
creature. 150. a. profitable to Papists. 307. b. not proved by Scripture. 456.
b. is terrible 396. b. stuffeth purses, and disheriteth right heirs. 139. a. a
iayle torme^ting. 307 b. is in earth as the pope says. 359 a. visible and
invisible. 297. b. none to the penitent. 307. a Punishment how it must be
executed. 211. b Pure faith abounds with good works. 52. b Pureness of the
heart. 143. a. of conscience. 142. a Puttyng on of hands without faith of no
force. 152. b Purses stuffed with Purgatory. 139. a
Q.
QValis pater, talis filius. 353. a Quick and dead burnt of Papists. 435. b
Questions of Scripture how to be judged. 137. a
R.
RAblementes of Popery. 136. b. of the Popes guard. 343. b. taken for the
Church. 249. b Racha. 203. a Raynebow a pledge of Gods promise. 436. b Ravenous
Wolves. 242. a Raylyng. 290. b Readynes to do good comes of God. 259. a
Realm decays by buildyng of Abbeis, cloisters etc. 279. b Reasons Papal
prouyng the Pope the Church. 262. b. against translatyng Scriptures. 1. a
Receipt of a child in Christ's name how to be understood. 343. a
Reconciliation. 387. a. to our brother. 44. b Reformation must be had by love.
344. b Regeneration causes the love of God. 382. a Regimentes, states, and
degrees of two sorts. 201. b Regiment spiritual and temporal poisoned by
Papists. 181. b Regiment temporal not used of Christ. 185. a Religion how to
be tried. 3. a. one holyer then an other. 104. a. blinded with covetousness. 19.
b Religious shauelynges behold the outward side only. 114. a Relics, and
Images enriched, poor neglected. 272. a Remission of sins. 369. b Remission
of sins to conquer England. 362. b Remedy against vayneglory. 217. b
Repentance. 18. b. 320. b. and 331. a. how acquired. 254. b. preached by
Christ. 28. b. by Sacraments. 13. a. preached to the Jews by the Apostles.
28. a Repentance the forerunner of faith. 18. b. has three parts. 37. b.
taught by Baptism. 14. b. signified by Baptism. 146. b Repentance prepares
the way to Christ. 145. b Repentance, and sure faith in Christ purge our
sins. 157. a Repentance interpreted for penance of Tyndall. 254. a
Repentance and forgiveness come by preaching. 123. b Repentaunt justified by
faith. 31. b. no sinner before God. 82. b. receives Gods promises in Christ.
31. a Request how to be made to God. 222. b Resistaunce must be made against
all false doctrine. 454. a Resistaunce against God dishonoreth him. 270. a
Resistau^ce of magistrates, resistau^ce of God. 213. a Resistaunce. 393. a
Restitution of the law. 202. b Resurrection of Christ. 261. a. destroyed by
More. 296. a. foolish to the heathen. 256. b Rest of conscience in Christ. 177.
b Reuengement must be referred to to God, and his officers. 215. b Reward how
it comes. 218. b. of patience in persecution for the Gospel. 52. a. of
obedience. 107. a. of disobedience. 107. a Righteous live by faith. 336. a
Righteousness of many sorts. 380. b. both outward and inward, what? 68. b.
comes freely from Christ. 71. a. how purchased. 44. a. where contained. 194.
a. how to be understood. 43. a. and 191. b Righteousness of the Phariseis. 200.
b. of the kingdom of heaven. 235. a. of man odious to Gods word. 52. a
Riches. 189. a Rich in spirit. 189. a Rich men thieves before God if they
help not the poor. 77. a. must pray for daily bread. 239. a Richard the
second slain. 28. b Right Antichrist who. 408. a Right penance. 387. b Right
Israelites, not all that came of Israel. 275. b Ripe fruits offered. 424. b
Rites and ceremonies Papal. 407. b Roan persecuteth. 454. b Robin good fellow
and the Pope a like. 174. b Robinhode of authority in the popes behalf. 129.
b Robart of Caunterbury. 362. a Romish Church abominable. 267. a Rome how it
came to be chief. 347. a. mother of all wickedness. ibidem Root of all goodness
faith. 404. a. of all commandments faith. 414. a Rochester an Orator. 129.
b. his Divinity. 124. b. improued. 129. a. faithles. 130. b. misco^strueth
Paul's text most shamefully. 130. a. falsely allegeth Paul for ceremonies. 128.
b his malicious blyndnes. 127. a. alleges heretics for his purpose. 129. b.
makes Aaron a figure of of the Pope. 127. b Ruben his story. 169. a Rustler.
372. b Rule to know if we love God. 403. a Rulers Gods gift. 118. a. for whom
ordained. 228. b. why evil. 118. a. not to be resisted. 385. b. their duty
toward runagates. 207. b Rulers repine to hear their faults. 214. b
S.
Sabbath day must serve us. 274. a. for ma^s use. 287. a. how it should be
occupied. 274. b Sacraments. 273. a. why ordained. 425. a. and. 442. a. not
without significations. 322. a. all have significations. 322. a. all have
significations. 256. b. without significations to be rejected. 455. a. are
sin to the unfaithful. 443. a. how profitable. 13. a. how they justify.
143. b. confirm weak consciences. 448. b. preach repentance unto us. 13. a.
are stories to keep the covenant in memory. 441. a. signs of Gods promise.
144. a. no Sacraments to the dead. 13. b Sacraments of whom superstitiously
ministered. 293. a. abused by Papists. 13. b. of Papists disagree. 253. a.
Robbed through confession. 157. b. ministered in an unknown tongue. 153. a
Sacraments of Papists are dumine. 152. a Sacrament. 320. b. what it means.
445. a. of Christ's body to whom profitable. 323. b. the effect thereof. 441.
b. how to be received. 470. a. a sure token of our salvation. 442. a. only
preaches justification. 143. the true meaning thereof. 464. b Sacrifice and
Sacrament differ. 13. b Sacrifice. 310. a. 322. b. 273. b. of blood. 424. b.
of the old law. 281. a Sacrifices and ceremonies when they ceased. 357. b
Sacrifices old why ordained. 29. a Sacrilegie in Papists. 20. a Sacerdos. 144.
b Salvation to believe in Christ. 70. a. not attained by pilgrimage. 155. a
Sanctus. 408. a Saints. 295. b. in heaven who. 298. a. cannot help us. 70. b.
not to be trusted in. 296. a. why not to be called on. 325. a. are examples.
159. a Saints truly worshypped. 280. a. examples of faith. 133. b. desire our
salvation. 280. a. joyful of our company. 401. a. abhor them that pray to
them. 433. b Saint Bartholomew. 285. a Sanctuaries. 112. a Salt. 196. b. 277.
b. meaning thereof. 197. a Salt of the word unsavory through covetousness. 231. b
Salt of Papists unsavory. 280. a Salutation. 370. b Salvation certified in
writing. 255. b. is within us. 155. a. by grace. 395 b. by faith. 34. a.
comes by the word. 18. b Salve Regina. 326. a Satan an enemy to man. 442. a
Satisfaction what and how we should make it. 37. b. only for our sins what.
257. b. Christ's blood. 394. a. true faith. 387. b Satisfaction may be made to
our neighbor. 133. a Scala coeli. 139. b Scriptures. 103. a. how they speak.
87. b. have seen God. 417. b. wisdom thereof. 99. a. contents and method
thereof. 169. a. how to be searched. 3. b. how locked up. 184. b. and 388. b.
how to be read. 30. b. how to be understood. 7. a. 33. a. of whom understood.
319. a. the right touchestone. 103. a. teach the truth. 388. b. must be kept
sincerely 22. a Scripture teaches the truth. 388. b. chief of the Apostles.
344. b. declares gods good will and needs no miracles. 301. a. authorized with
true miracles. ibidem. 304. a. testifies of the right Church. 293. b.
contains our salvation wholly. 256. a. causes belefe of Scripture. 304. a
Scripture has body and soul. 23. b. calls signs things signified. 469 b.
delivered first to the people in the vulgar tongue. 319. a. ought to be known
of all men. 142. a. ought to be in English. 101. a. should be in every
language. 377. a Scriptures caused of God, to avoid heresies. 303. a. must
try the Papists. 288. a. corrupted by the pope and why. 256. b. hid by the
pope, and Papists. 1. a. 304. and 394. b. wrested by Papists. 24. a. 446. a.
locked up by Papists, and why. 23. b. suppressed by Papists. 1. b Scripture
resists Popish doctrine. 304. b Scriptures speak diversely. 79. b. full of
hid mysteries. 440. a. opened with two keys. 31. a. contain three
principal things. 23. b. not grossly to be understood. 80. a. have but one
sense. 166. a Schools of Divinity. 104. a Schole doctrine of Papists corrupt
171. a Scholemasters take great wages, and teach not. 101. b Scribes,
Phariseis, and elders erred. 303. b Scribes and Phariseis what they were. 201.
b. were very Antichrists 60. b Scoffyng. 313. a Secrets. 371. a. of God known
to few. 12. b Sectaries Papish are scoulders and braulers. 2. b Sects through
man's wisdom, innumerable in Popery. 300. b. damnable amongst Papists and
heretics. 173. a S^^ge of Pauie. 371. b Service of God. 177. b. of Christ
passes service of Saints. 295. b Servants all in Christ. 121. a Servants
must be taught to know Christ. 121. b Servant of Mammon not Christ's Church.
233. b Shauelings win whosoever loose 141. b. put down Christ. 127. a. are
the world. 405. b. desire to be sanctified with an whore rather then a wife.
144. a. challenge only Gods spirit to them selves. 137. b Shauyng borrowed of
the heathen, oylyng of the Jews. 134. a Sheep clothyng. 241. b Sheryng what
it signifies. 135. b Shield of faith invincible. 4. b Ships saylyng by la^d
a. M. miles. 372. a Shrift a work of Satan. 147. b. put down among the
Grecians for knavery. 147. b Shrinyng of Saints. 351. b Shuttyng the chamber
door expounded. 220. b Sick comforted by Papists with a Latin Gospel. 135.
a Signs evident of the latter day. 53. a Sign of ye cross truly beholde^. 282.
b Signs are called commonly by the names of things signed. 447. a Sign of
Christ's body called by the name of Christ's body. 444. b Significations of
things must be sought. 248. a Significations of Sacraments taken away by the
Pope. 256. a Signification of our Baptism. 386. b Similitude. 332. a. 360. b.
380. a. of what force. 12. a. aptly applied. 18. b 109. b Similitude of
works. 69. b. of a mother. 421. a. of an earthly king. 432. b Similitudes
their use. 170. a. prove weakly. 171. a Similitudes and reasons of men's
wisdom. 170. b Similitudes of well and evil doing. 219. a Simon Magus his
faith. 95. b Sin. 41. b. 321. a. defined. 410. b. how far it extends.
113. b. under grace. 186. b. under the law. ibidem. increased by the law. 40.
b. all with out faith. 153. a. when it chiefly reigns in us. 40. a. pain
thereof. 307 b. must be wrestled withal. 397. a Sin called in Scriptures
unbelief 41. b. against the holy ghost. 254. b. cannot stand with faith. 258.
a. the best marchaundize. 151. a Sin all of our selves, goodness all of God.
384. b Sins accompsed no sin. ^5. a. are of our selves. 32. a. venial.
186. b. beadly. 187. a. all forgeuen for Jesus sake. 387. a. washed away. 13.
a. how known to be forgeuen. 47. b Sinners must be helped of us, or else we
must perish with them in their sin. 203. b Sinners all in general. 44. a
Sinners all forget not God. 260. b. must repent spedely. 334. b Sinners saved
all by Christ's power. 357. b Sincerity required in all. 104. a Sir. Thomas
Hitton. 294. a. murdered. 375. a S^eigh practices. 367. a S^^res of Papists.
316. a Solution of doubts. 240. a. of Popish reasons. 262. a Sophisters. 168.
a. say the litterall sense kills. 168. a Souls departed rest at Gods
pleasure. 324. b Soundnes in faith brings knowledge in Scriptures. 38^. a
Spirices. 414. b Spirit of God makes a man spiritual. 40. b Spirit of God
accompanies faith. 65. b contrary to the ^lesh 48. a Spirit resisted by our
by^ remainyng in us. 165. a Spirit unclean. 35. a Spirit of God ^o guide to
Popistes. 148. a Spirit (...) 188. b Spech bo^. 166. b Spiritual (...). 1^4.
a Spiritual ^ers why ^ned 1^ Spi^ 247 b Spiritual ^ce of God, what. 443. a
Spiritual ^ng only ^eth. 464* b Spiritual vnderstand^ng of Christ 460* b
Spiritual and temp^ral re^ (...). (...) (...) would not that s^. 3^8. a (...)
des^sed. (...). a (...) ^45.(...)with co^. ^07.(...)for Ch^ us. (...). (...).
(...) ^ure. (...). (...). (...) (...) and tempor^. 201. (...). (...) works
true ^ayth. 41. b (...). 402. b S^ the fourth ^ope. (...). b (...) the second
Pope. ^48. (...) (...). 277* b ^e. 24^. b ^ctrine. 29^. (...) (...) the ^ers.
143 a ^ed how (...) be applied to (...). 31. b Submission to Christ. ^^1. a
Suffraunce with Christ brings joy. 342. a Suffraganes why ordained. 152. a
Sum of Gods law. 410. b Supper of Christ how instituted. 470. a. a
memortall of his death. 441. b. why given us. 323. a Superstition odious. 401.
b. furthered by Papists. 279. a Superstitious observations. 248. b
Superstitious fast God abhors. 274. b Suttletie of the Pope to enlarge h^^
kingdom. 356. a. of Allegor^es. 1^. b. of the Popes Clergy. (...) Subtle
conueyaunces of Papists. 3^6. a Suit in law without offense. ^45. a Swarms of
Popish sects. 280. a. (...) Swearyng. 30^. b. by God.(...)how lawful. (...)
Sweet words baytes o^ (...)* b S^. a. have (...) S^^^de of P^pistes (...)
T.
T^ why so ^ull.(...) Te De^ the French king. 372. (...) Te^ 270. (...) Temple.
274. b Tem^ re^ment. 211 (...) Tem^ are not belong^ (...). 342. (...) T^ of
God. what. (...). a.(...)Apostles. (...) Temp^ Te^ of the Sacrament. 4^ a
Test^ie of God in true beleuers hearts (...). a Te^tes. (...). (...). of
obser^a^nt F^ T^. (...). a Thankesgeuyng* 477. b. ^o ^od. 478. (...) Thanks
must be given to the gra^ter of (...). 433. a These days why called evil. 71.
b Thom^s of C^er. 302. a. and ^61. b (...) ^40. b Thomas Aq^ a. and 361. b
Tho^es (...) ^nces. 45^. a Thomas ^ols^y ^d. 36^. a ^mas Ar^ 363* (...) ^r^es
hear no sigges. (...) ^hree (...) at once. 3^4. (...) (...) of man not to be
^d. 4^ (...) made B^sh^^ by(...)Paul. (...) Tindall why he uses the wo^
^taunce. 37. a. his submission to the learned. 3. (...). ^oyde of man. 376. b.
deceived. 2. b Tindall swea^^th. (...). b. moved to trans^ate the S^ prot^
(...) 1. a.(...)books and (...) Tindall (...) Tokens (...) To^. b. 207 b To^.
260. a T^. 3^^. a (...). b (...). Pr^es. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
by(...)By^. 340. b (...) ^73. a. to the(...)wrought through con^. 155. (...).
laid against the (...). 373. (...) (...) practices. 363. (...). o^ Pre^s. 370.
(...) ^ther of the (...) of (...) (...) by the (...) (...) b. of^ Gos^er. 3. a.
of (...) (...) (...). b. 9^. b (...) for the Gospel brings (...) (...) paid
o^ the Popes (...). (...) (...) Chri^end^ the popes(...)preaching of
Gods(...)why 10^. b (...) Christ. (...). b (...). (...). a (...). 271. b
^es.(...)^08. (...) (...). 415. a. (...). (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^nce.
254* a Tru^ prayer.(...)pleasant. 221. a Tru^ prea^ng binds and ^ouseth* 15^
^28. (...) (...) from Christ's blood. 74. a True watchyng. 81. b True
woorshyppyng of the Sacrament what. 324. a. Truth none in the Popish
spirituality. 376. b Trumpets blowyng. 217. b Turks. 267. b. must be
resisted. 338. b. have no faith and acknowledge one God. 94. b. more in number
then Papists. 276. a. must be lamented for their ignorance. 248. a Turks and
Jews think they can not dye. 268. a Turks their almose void of faith
abominable. 244. a Tullius chief of Orators. 128. a Tunstall Bishop of London
after Bishop of Durham. 2. a Turney. 371. a Tyrauntes why given us. 207. a.
cannot have all their will. 100. a. why God suffers them to prosper. 236. b
Tyranny of Papists. 277. a. to cause a man to accuse him self. 122. b
V.
VAgaboundes from faith. 358. b Vandales. 351. b Vain disputations. 323. a
Vain names. 123. a Vbiquetie cannot be proved. 455. b Vengeance is Gods. 110.
b. must be remitted to God. 93. a. will fall on tyraunts. 342. a. poured on the
unpenitent by God. 28. a. pertayneth to God only. 194. a Verb (est) taken for
(significat) 469. a Venetia^s. 364. b. neglected the pope. 365. a Verities
Papal unwritten are not to be credited. 389. a Virtue of Christ's blood. 381.
a Virtues inward known by the outward deeds. 117. b Virtues divine
inseparable. 188 a Vicare. 102. b Vicar of Troydon. 366. a Vigilance required
in Bishops. 53. b Violence. 211. a Victory of Christ. 396. b Virginity of our
Lady. 286. b Unbelief. 321. a Unbelief and sin how taken in scriptures. 41. b
Unfaithful Jews their sacrifi^^ despised. 274. b Unfaithful woorshyp of God
with outward Popery. 422. b Ungodliness. 290. b Unions. 267. a Union of
Doctors. 327. a. a good book. 338. b Unity must not be broken. 237. b
Unlawful othesmust be broken. 124. a Unmercifully are saythles. 334. a
Unrighteous steward who. 72. a Unspeakable mercy of God. 416. b Unthankfulness.
290. b Vntha^kefull receauers eat and drink their damnation. 473. a Untoward
reasonyng of More. 282. a Unworthy receauers of Christ's Supper, who? 443. a
Void of faith in Christ are wanderers. 423 a Volowyng. 152. a Voluptuous
persons. 380. a Votaries admonished. 21. a Vows. 18. a. 315. b. and 326. b. of
religion. 398. b. made in general for three caused. ibidem. how to be made,
and how applied. 21. a. unlawful not to be observed. 328. a. must be made
warely. 328. a. how they be good, and what is a good vow. 20. a Upright
officers in Gods sight. 270. a Vprightnes required in all men. 208. b Vprising
sinner, his chief joy. 384. a Use of the Mass abominable. 427. a. of signs
and ceremonies. 269. a. of Gods creatures. 328. a. of inferior creatures to
manward. 270. b Use of Popish universities. 361. a Use of Christ's Supper. 466.
a. and. 470. a
W.
WAlshmen. 299. b Walsh customs. 151. b Walking in light or darkness. 392. a
War between king Henry and the Earl of Warwick. 366. b Warrior. 212. a
Warnyng to repent. 376 a Watchyng superstitious. 81. b Water and wine mixed
together. 287. a Way to salvation Christ. 424. a Way how we may be made
righteous. 44. a Weak flesh has a strong spirit to God. 99. b Weak
brethren must be louyngly dealt withal. 49. b Weakness of the flesh. 393. b
Weakness and frayltie cause sin in us. 258. b Weakelynges to the world strong
to Christ. 99. b Weakelynges should be taught and not deceived. 159. a Weddyng
garment of faith must be put on at the Communion. 477. b Well of swearyng.
436. a Weying of souls. 317. a Whore of Babylon. 115. a. the Pope is she. 384.
a Whore carried about with the Emperor Charles the great. 350. a Whores not
wives embraced of the Popes brood. 134 a Whores please Papists. 362. b
Whoredom licensed by the Pope. 262. a Whoredom allowed, and maring^
forbidden. 267. a Wicked Princes. 341. b Wicked doings of the Pope. 320 a
Wickedness of false Prophets. 239. a of Phariseis. 202. a Wickedness removed by
preaching. 300. a Wickedness destroys wickedness. 105. b Wickedness where
committed. 48. a Wicles^e. 28. a Widows. 313. a. and 345. b Widows their
office in the primitive Church. 313. a Wife. 205. b Wilful sinners feel not
Gods wrath in his law. 44^. a Wilful chastity. 16. b. not to be vowed of
all. 20. b Wilful poverty. 16. b. how to be vowed. 18. a Wilful obedience.
17 a William King. 249. b William Roye a false Disciple. 59 b Wild Irish. 299.
b Will, in bondage. 113. a Wills and Testamentes altered at the Popes
pleasure. 359. b Wit and will. 306. b Wit leads the will. 338. a Wit,
reason, and judgment go before will. 329. a Witnesses many of Christ's
ascension into heaven. 471. b Witches. 300. b Witchcraft, sorcery. etc. 8. b
Wolsey the Cardinal in great estimation with the king. 368. a. his subtlety.
371. a. vayneglorious. 374. b. Legate a Latere. 405. b. a traitor. 373. a
Wolsey ruled all. 369. a Wolsey his last potion. 404. a Wolf in a lambs
skin, is the pope. 343. a Woman made whole by Christ, and not by his coat.
298. a Woman of Lemster was a great miracle. 176. a Women as well as men endewed
with wisdom. 252. a Women why they Baptize. 287. a Women discrete may
minister the sacraments. 322 b Women have power to bind, and how. 358. a
World shall know Christ. 410. a World knows not Christ. 409. a. blind in
godly matters. 423. b Wrold worse, and worse 55. b. a lover of wickedness. 7. b
World of whom ouercomen. 421. a World must be rebuked for lack of judgment.
248. b Worldlynes in the Popes doctrine. 416. a Worldly wisdom tendyng to
Gods glory is commendable. 455. b Worldly prefermentes are lettes to true
Christianity. 340. a Worldly wisemen understand not the Scriptures. 88. a
Worldly rulers, how far to be obeyed. 385. b Worldly wit. 113. a Word of
the law, and Christ's promises contained in the heart. 31 b Word of God. 34 a.
the force thereof. 178. a. ground of faith. 302. b. makes true faith. 170. b.
tries miracles. 300. b Word being the Gospel, before the Church. 255. a Word
saves. 18. b Word altered not Gods word. 201. a Words honoryng God expressly.
269 b Words of Christ are spiritual only. 460. a. are spirit and life. 465.
b Work made acceptable by faith. 243. b Works. 4. b. 16. a. 19. b. 219. a.
225. b. and. 331. b What they be, and to what end. 81. a. Gods workema^ship.
15. b. are Sacraments. 226. a. which be good. 84. b. whence they be. 331. b.
how to be done. 73. a. how accepted of God. 18. b. must be seasoned with Gods
word. 219. b Works their force. 15. a. 384. b Works of the law, and
fulfillyng the same two things. 40. b Works Papisticall. 396. a. taught with
cruelty. 29. b. blind. ibidem Works make hypocrites, the true in tent away.
228. b Works without faith. 16. a Works are made perfect with Christ's blood.
31. a. without Christ in Gods sight damnable. 70. a Works our witnesses before
God. 69. a. a show of faith. 55. a. cannot be separated from faith. 42. b.
declare faith. 402. a. declare Gods goodness. 67. b. expressed by faith. 413. b.
cannot be done without faith. 73. b. where true faith is. 411. b. follow true
faith. 68. a. spryng from true faith universally 41. b. follow justification.
45. a Works looked on. 162. b. not to be presumed upon. 11. a. cannot fulfill
the law. 249. b. deserve not the reward promised. 218. a Works of the law
justify not. 41. a. 195. b. 185. b. and 335. a. no satisfaction for sins to
Godward. 39. a. satisfactory in no wise. 398. a. deserve not the gifts of
grace. 386. b Works are under the law. 336. b Works without the promise save
not. 153. a Works of ours can deserve nothing 333. a. must be done without
hope of reward. 69. a. must be done and not trusted in. 85. a. must serve us,
and not we them. 273. b Works all evil where faith lacks. 46. a Works of
ours how far they extend. 37. a. fulfill the law before the world. 117. a.
must not be done for reward. 333. a. obtain not Gods favor. 89. b Works must
proceed of love. 335. b Works to our neighbor works to God. 421. a. the
fruits of light. 392. a. of love. 88. b. of faith. 73. b Works outward
declare where true faith is. 68. b Works which most meet to be done. 49. a.
why they must be done. 32. a Worker first of our work GOD. 329. b Work holy
sophisters confounded. 117. a Worship of Saints, and heathen Gods a like. 424.
a Worship of God truly. 396. a Worshypping of Saints. 398. b. and 224. b. of
the Cross. 270. b. of vnco^secrate hosts. 298. b. of Images 271. a
Worshypping of Images never established by miracles. 300. b Worshypping, and
honoryng are one. 26^. a Worshyppyng in spirit. 395. b Worthy receauyng of the
Sacraments increases faith. 446. b Wrath of God styrreth up destroyers of the
Church. 341. b Written Scriptures must confound unwritten verities. 255. b
Writing from the beginning. ibidem
Y.
Youngest best beloved of parents. 264. a Young widows forbidden ministration.
313. b Young Timothy made a Bishop. 252. b Yuye tree a similitude. 352. b
Z.
ZAcharias the first Pope. 348. a Zeal without knowledge naught. 87. a Zeal of
righteousness, what. 192. b Zeal of ceremonies may not break unity. 237. b
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius belyed of More. 473. b
The end of the Table of M. Tyndals works.
Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

An. 1572.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

I D



THE WORKS of the excellent Martyr of Christ, John Frith.
DIEV ET MON DRIOT

His life and Martyrdom.
1. His book of Purgatory. Fol. 1. 2. An answer to Rastals Dialogue. 7. 3.
An answer to Sir Thomas More. 32. 4. His answer unto Fisher Bishop of
Rochester. 51. 5. A Bulwark against Rastall. 60. 6. His judgment upon M.
Tracyes will and Testament. 77. 7. A letter written from the Tower to Christ's
congregation. 81. 8. A mirror or glass to know thy self. 83. 9. A treatise
upon the Sacrament of Baptism. 90. 10. An antithesis between Christ and the
Pope. 97. 11. A book of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. 107.
12. Articles for the which he dyed. 170.


A Table containing the principal matters of all his works.

ARISE, FOR IT IS DAY



The story, life, and Martyrdom of John Frith with the Godly and learned
works and writings of the said Author, here after ensueing.
THe said John Frith was borne in Kent and was the son of Richard Frith
Inholder in Senenock in the Countye of Kent. This young man so greatly profited
in lerning, that scarcely in his time there might be any found equal unto
him. And unto his great knowledge and learning, was adjoined such an honest
conversation and godlynes of life, that it was hard to judge, in whether of
them he was more commendable. Of the great godliness that was in him, this may
serve for experiment sufficient, that not withstanding his other manifold and
singular gifts and ornaments of the mind in him most pregnant, wherewith all
he might have opened an easy way unto honor, and dignity, yet he chose
rather wholye to consecrate him self unto the Church of Christ, excellently
showing forth and practicing in him self the Precept so highly commended of
the Philosophers touching the life of man, which life (they say) is given unto
us in such sort, that how much better the man is, so much the less he should
live unto him self, but unto other, serving for the common utility: And that
we should think a great part of our birth to be due unto our parents, A
greater part unto our country, And the greatest part of all, to be beestowed
upon the Church, if we will be counted good men.

First of all he began his study at Cambridge where he had to his tutor
Stephen Gardener, who afterward was Bishop of Winchester. And in the nature of
this young man being but a child, God had planted marvelous instinctions, and
love unto learning, where unto he was addict. He had also a wonderful
promptnes of wit, and a redye capacity to receive and understand any thing, in
so much that he seemed not to be sent unto learning, but also borne for the
same purpose. Neither was there any diligence wanting in him equal to that
towardnes or worthy of his disposition. Whereby it came to pass, that he was
not only a lover of learning, but also became an exquisite learned man.

And at that time it happened that Thomas Wolsey Cardinal of York prepared to
buyld a College in Oxforde, which had the name and title of Frideswyd, but now
named Christ's Church. And unto this College the said Cardinal gathered
together such men as were found to excel in any kind of Learning, and
knowledge. Among whom this John Frith, the Author of these notable works was
one, who then being a studient in Cambridge, and Bacheler of art was called
from thence, and placed in ye said College. And when he had diligently Labored
in most godly study certain years, not without great profit both of Latin
and Greek. Then being suspected to be a fauorer of Martyn Luthers doctrine. He
was aprehended and committed to prison, from whence afterward being delivered
he resorted to the City of London, and there came in acquayntaunce with
William Tyndall. And not long after the said William and John Frith had many
metinges and great conferences, and by the said William he first received into
his heart the seed of the Gospel and sencere godliness, and after with great
peril and Danger they both being inquired and sought for, fled. William
Tyndall first placed him self in Germany, and there did first translate the
Gospel of S. Mathewe into English, and after the whole new testament etc. And
not long after the departure of Tyndall, John Frith escaped and fled into
Flanders where he remained almost the space of iij. years, and there he made
his book against purgatory, and diverse other Godly and learned works, as in
the perface of the said book does appear. But at the last he being driven to
necessity and lack of money, was forced secretly to return over into this
Realm to be releued of his friends: namely of the Prior of Reading. And (as it
was thought he purposed to have had the Prior over with him. And he being at
Reading, it happened that he was there taken for a vagabond, and brought to
examination. Where the simple man loath to utter him self what he was, and
unacquainted with their manner of examinations, and they greatly offended with
him, committed him to ye stocks, where when he had sitten a long time, and was
almost pined with hunger, and would not for all that declare what he was: At
the last he desired that ye Schoolmaster of the town might be brought unto
him, which at that time was one Leonard Coxe, a man very well learned. As Soon
as he came unto him, Frith by and by in the Latin tongue began to bewail his
Captivity. The school master being overcome with his eloquence, did not only
take pity and compassion upon him, but also began to love and embrace such an
excellent wit, and disposition unlooked for, especially in such state of
mysery. Afterward they conferring more together upon many things as touching
the Universities, Schools, and tongues, fell from the Latin tongue, to the
Greek, wherein Frith did so inflame the love of the said school master
toward him, that he brought him into a merueilous admiration, especially when
as the schoolmaster hard him so promptly by heart rehearese Homers verses out
of his first book of Iliades. Where upon the schoolmaster, went with all
speed unto ye Magistrates, grievously co^playning of the injury which they did
show unto so excellent and innocent a young man. And so through the help of
the said schoolmaster, the said Frith was freely set at liberty. All be it,
his sauetie ca^tynued not long, through the great hatred and deadly persute of
Sir Thomas More who at that time being Chauncelor of England, persecuted him
both by land and Sea: besettyng all the ways, havens, and ports, yea and
promysing great rewards if any man could bring him any news or tydinges of
him. Thus Frith being on every part beset with troubles, not knowing which way
to turn him, sought for some place to hide him in. And so flyeng from one
place to another, and often changing both his garments and place, yet could
he be in safety in no place, no not long amongst his very friends, so that at
the last he coming to a Port town in Essex called Milton shore, and there
purposing to have taken shipping to have passed over into Flaunders, was
betrayed and brought bound back again, and laid in the Tower of London. And
diverse times after was called before Sir Thomas More, and also before the
Bishops with whom he had many conflictes. And he continuing long prisoner in
the Tower, at the last a false brother resorted unto him whose name was William
Holt a Taylour, who (feyning that he bare great friendship unto him) so
slattered him (and he himself being utterly void of all suspicious nature)
that he began to communicate unto him his very Secrets, and among other entered
into a long discourse of the sacrament, which Frith had penned in a book in
the time that he was Prisoner in the Tower. And when the said Holt had seen
the said book, he required him most instantly to lend him the same only to
read over, the which the said John Frith did unadvisedly grant, which after
was the occasion of his great trouble and finally of his death. So sone as
this false brother had the book, he departed, for now he had the pray that he
had long watched for, And forth with he carried the said book^ unto Sir Thomas
More, who rejoiced not a little at the having thereof, and forthwith whetted his
wits, and cauled his spirits together, meaning to refute his opinion by a
contrary book, but that was more then he could do. Yet he attempted to do
as much as he might, and at the last wrote a book against him, the Copy
whereof when it came to Frithes hands, although he were then prisoner in the
Tower and destitute both of books and conference, yet he answered it,
omitting nothing that any man could desire to the perfect and absolute
handeling of the matter. Beside all these co^mendations of the before said
Learned young man, there was also in him a friendly and prudent moderation in
uttering of the truth, joined with learned godliness, which virtue has always
so much prevailed in the Church of Christ, that without it all other good
gifts of knowledge be they never so great can not greatly profit, but
oftentimes do very much hurt. And in all matters, where necessity did not
move him to contend, he was ready to grant all things for quietness sake.

After he had sufficiently contended in his writings with More, Rochester, and
Rastall Mores son in law, whom he did so valiauntly fight withal and
confound, that he connerted Rastall to his part. Then he was ^^ryed to Lambith
before the Bishop of Caunterburie, and afterward to Croydon where was present
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester who had been his tutor in Cambridge as
aforesaid, and seemed to owe unto him great love and favor, but in the steed
thereof he found in the end his great malice and tyranny, and last of all he
was called before the Bishops in a Common assemblye at London, where he so
costantly defended him self that he had prevailed, if he might have been
heard, as indeed he was not. The order of his judgment with the manner of his
examination and Articles which were objected against him, are comprised and set
forth by himself in a letter written to his friends, which letter also is
imprinted and set forth in this book. After sentence given against him by the
Bishop of London, he was delivered to the Mayor and Shirifes of the said City
(Sir Stephen pecocke, a simple man being then Mayor) and forth with he was
committed to new gate, where he was put into ye Dungeon under the said Gate,
and laden with Boltes, and Irons as many as he could bear, and his neck with
a Coler of Iron made fast to a post, so that he could neither stand upright nor
stoop down, yet was he there continually occupied in writing of diverse
things, namely with a candell both day, and night, for there came none other
light into that place. And in this case he remained iij. or iiij. days, and
then was from thence carried into Smithfeelde ye iiij. day of July. 1533. where
with great patience, and constancy he suffered that most h^lly, and cruel
death of burning.

And when the fire was set on the faggottes he embraced the same in his Arms,
and and with all patience committed his spirit unto almighty God. But this one
thing is yet to be remembered, that he being bound to the stake with an other
good Martyr, which was a very simple young man named Andrew Hewet, there was
present one Doctor Cook that was person of the Church called Allhalowes in
honey lane situate in the mids of Chepesyde. And the said Cook made an open
exclamation and admonished the people that they should in no wise pray for them
no more then they would do for a dog. At which words Frith smyling, desired
the Lord to forgive him. But the ungodly and uncharitable words of the said
Doctor did not a little offend the people. And thus for the testimony of the
true doctrine of Christ, which the said Frith sealed with his blood the day,
and year before said, he dyed in the xxiiij. year of his age (as some say)
but his parents reported in the xxx. year of his age.

JOHN FRITH UNTO the Christen Reader.
GRace and peace be with thee Christian reader. I am sure there are many that
will much meruell and count it a great presumption that I being so young and of
so small learning dare attempt to dispute Not who speaks, but that which is
spoken is to be weyed most.
this matter against these three personages of the which number two, that is to
say, my Lord of Rochester and Sir Thomas More, are ancient men both of great
wit, and dignity. Notwithstanding I will desire the^ patiently, to hear
mine answer, not aduertisyng who speaks the words, but rather what is
said. And as concerning mine youth, let them remember what Paul monisheth. i.
Timot. iiij. willing that 1. Tim. 4.
Timotheus should instruct the co^gregration The holy ghost inspireth where,
when, and on whom he pleases.
and that no man should despise his youth: for as the spirit of God is bound
to no place, cue^ so is he not addict to any age or person, but inspireth when
he will and where he will, making the young to see visio^s and espy the
truth, and the elders to dream dreams, and to wander in fantasies Acts. 2.
Joel. 2. Acts. 2.


And as touching my learning I must needs acknowledge (as the truth is very
small, nevertheless that little 1. Cor. 12.
(as I am bound, have I determined, by Gods grace) to bestow to the edifying
The talent of our learning is to be employed to the edifiyng of Christ's
congregation.
of Christ's congregation which I pray god to increase in the knowledge of his
word.

I would not that any man should admit my words or learning, except they will
stand with the Scripture, and be approved thereby. Lay them to the touchstone,
and try them with Gods word. If they be found false and counterfaite, then
damn them, and I shall also revoke them with all mine heart. But if the
Scripture allow them, that you can not deny but it so is, then resist not ye
doctrine of God, but knowledge your ignorance and seduction, and return
gladly into the right way. Wilfully to resist Gods word, is sin against the
holy ghost.
For if you ca^ not improve it by Gods word, and yet, of an hate and malicious
mind that you bear to the truth labor to resist it and condemn it that it
should not spread: I ensure you your sin is irremissible and even against the
holy ghost, and the blood of them Ezech. 33.
that perish for fault of instruction shall be required on your hands. Objection.


Peradventure some of you will say, your fathers and old progenitors* with
many holy men and Doctors have so believed and that therefore you will abide by
the old. I answer: The ways and Answer.
judgments of God are marvelous, who knows whether God have suffered his
elect to err and be seduced for a season, to the intent that the unfaithful
which would not believe the truth, but had pleasure in iniquity might sto^ble at
their error into their utter confusion 1 Thessalonians.
and ruin? Although a man be never so faithful and holy, yet is there much
imperfection in him as long as he Our imperfection forgeuen thorough faith in
Christ's blood.
is included in this mortal body, how be it, it is not imputed unto him, but
through ye faith in Christ's blood who lie pacified and forgeuen. And therefore
it is not sure, that we follow their exteour works or other imaginatio^s, but
let us ever co^ferre them unto the pure word of God, and as the Scripture
testifies so let us receive them.

My Lord of Rochester does testify The Bishop of Rochesters own opinion
concerning the understanding of the scriptures in his time, and long a for^
that.
him self writing upon the xviij. Article, that there are many points both of
the Gospels and other Scriptures which are now discussed more diligently, and
more clearly understand, then they have been in times past. And adds
furthermore that there are diverse places in Scripture yet some deal dark,
which he doubts not, but that they shall be more open and light unto our
posterity, for why shall we despair of that (says he) since that the Scripture
is for that intent left with us, that it may be understand of us exactly, and
to the uttermost point? Of this may you evidently perceive that the old fathers
and holy Doctors have not seen all the truth. But somewhat is also left,
through the high provision of God, to be discussed of their successors. And
therefore is it not mete, that we straight ways cleave unto their words, with
out any further ensearchyng the scriptures, but we must examine all things by
the Scriptures although. S. Paul or Peter should preach it unto us, as we see
experience Acts. xvij. that when Acts. 17.
Paul preached, the audience daily searched the Scriptures, whether it were as
he said.

But you have been of long continuance The cause of our blindness, and gross
errors.
secluded from the scriptures, which is cause of such gross errors as ye are
now fallen in, so that ye could neither search them, nor yet once look on
them. Alas what blindness does occupy our eyes? Are ye so childish to believe
that the same word which has made the unfaithful and heretics, faithful
and Christen in times past, is now so far altered that it should cause the
faithful and Christen to become heretics? I pray God open your eyes.
Howbeit we may now well taste at our fingers ends that we have long been in
that miserable case that Paul prophesied upon us. ij. These. ij. 2 Thessalonians 2.
that God has sent us strong delusions because we would not receive ye
knowledge of the truth: what greater delusion can we have, then to think that
the very word of God, which was written for our comfort, which is the very
fode and sustenaunce of our souls, which is the sure metyarde and perfect
touchstone that judges and examineth all things: Romans 15.
to think (I say) that this wholesome word should be our poison and
condemnation?

And all be it our forefathers have lived without it and received all for truth
that our Prelates belyes have imagined: yet is not their fault and ours a like
(although I can not excuse their ignorance but that it is sin before the
face of God) for they had not the light of Gods word opened unto the^.
Voluntary ignorance, not to be excused.
Now since we have the light declared unto us, and yet will proceed in blind
ignorauncie and not confer and examine these iugglyng mistes with the light
of Gods word, our ignorance is wilful and without excuse.

Suffer therefore all things what soever they be, to be tried and examined by
the Scripture. If they be true then shall the Scripture do them no hurt, but
stablish and stre^gthen them, for the Scripture discloseth nothing but
falsehead, and condemns nothing but that is damnable.

The cause of John Frithes writing against Purgatory.
And now to descend unto our matter and disputation which is of Purgatory, I
shall show you what occasion I had to take it in hand. I wrote a letter unto a
certain friend in England, desiryng him instantly to send me certain books
which I though necessary for my use, and were not to be gotten in these
parties, as the Chronicles, Sir Thomas Mores book against the Supplication of
Beggars, and certain other. These books I received upon S. Thomas day before
Christmasse, the year of our Savior a. M. ccccc. and xxx. with a letter
written in this form: Sir I have sent you such books as you wrote for, and one
more of Rastels making, wherein he goes about to prove Purgatory, by natural
Philosophy: which thing (quoth he) I think be more easy to do, the^ to
prove it by any good Scripture. etc. This stuff received, I was meruelously
desirous and tickled to see what reasons he brought for his probations. And in
the beginning and Prologe of the book, he set seven reasons which he said that
fond fellows alleged for the^ to prove that there could be no Purgatory. And
in deed they are very fond that would deny Purgatory, if there were no better
Arguments to confute it then he assigns. But by Gods grace I will propounde
vij. times seven which shall have such pith, that their paineful purgatory shall
not be able to abide the worst of them, for these seven that Rastell assigns
are not worth one Bean.

When I had read and well pondered these reasons, I thought that he should
sharply have confuted the^, as he might full well have done, specially since
they were but of his own imagination. Neuerthesse when I came unto his
solutions I found not one but it had certain points repugnau^t unto the
Scripture (unto which our reason must ever be obedient) Man's reason must be
obedient to the Scriptures.
yea and also they were extremely injurious unto Christ and his precious blood.

Then left I him, and read: Sir Thomas Mores book, to see what Scripture might
be brought for that purpose, and after that made I dilligent enquire to come by
my Lord of Rochesters book which also writes on the same matter, and when I
had well examined their reasons and had seen the order and process of the
Scriptures which they alleged: Aulus Gelius.
I found that clearly verified which Aulus Gellius says, that it were a
great deal better for a man to be sharply rebuked yea and openly to have his
faults published of his enemy, then to be coldly and slenderly praised of his
friend. The rebuke of an open enemy better then the sclender praise of a friend.
For a man's enemy ensearcheth narrowly and gathers together all that he can
imagine, and so accuses a man more of a fumous heat then of any verity: and
therefore the audience (if they be wise) consider his words thereafter, and so
give very small credence or else none unto them. But if a man's friend before
audience do praise him slenderly and coldly, it is an argument that the person
is very faulty, for a friend beholds all qualities and circumstaunces, his
birth, bringyng up, and what feats he has done all his life long: yea and
applies many things unto his friends praise, which serve but sinally for it,
for he will lean nothing behynd that may be imagined to employ his friends
fame and honor. Now if in all these points he can not color out a glorious
apparent laud, but is compelled for lack of matter to praise his fre^d
slenderly, then (if the audience be wise) they may soon conjecture that he is
no praise worthy, and also may well doubt whether that small praise which he
gave him be true or not. Eue^ so, when I had read these books of Sir Thomas
More and my Lord of Rochester, and saw the small probations and slender reasons
that those two witty and learned men had brought to confirm Purgatory:
considering also that they are the chiefest friends, proctours and patrones
thereof, and that they had applied many reasons and Scriptures for their purpose
(for lack of matter) that rather made against them: yea and not that only,
but also that they dissented between them selves in their probations: for M.
More says that there is no water in Purgatory. And my Lord M. More and my Lord
of Rochester can not agree.
of Rochester says that there is water. Master More says that the ministers
of the punishment are devils. And my Lord of Rochester says that the ministers
of the punishment are angels. Master More says, that both the grace and
charity of them that lie in the pains of Purgatory, are increased. My Lord of
Rochester says, that the souls in Purgatory obtain there neither more faith
nor grace nor charity then they brought in with them. These things
considered, it made mine heart yerne and fully to consent, that this their
paynefull Purgatory was but a vain imagination, and that it has of long time
but deceived the people and milked them from their money.

Notwithstanding God has left us two Purgatories. One to purge the The
Purgatoryes, that God has ordained.
heart and cleanse it from the filth which we have partly received of Adam (for
we are by nature the children of wrath. Ephe. ij.) and partly added thereto by
consentyng unto our natural infirmity. This Purgatory is the word of God as
Christ says. John. xv. Now John. 15.
are ye clean for the word which I have spoken unto you. This purgation The
Purgatory of the heart.
obtayneth no man but thorough faith, for the unfaithful are not purged by the
word of God, as the Scribes and Phariseis were nothing the the better for
hearing his word but rather the worsse for it was a testimony against them unto
their condemnation. And because we receive this purgatio^ The Purgatory of the
heart, is faith.
only through beleuyng the word, therefore is the virtue of this purging
applied also unto faith, for Peter says. Act. xv. that the Gentiles hearts
were purged thorough faith, that is to say, through believing the word. And what
word is that? verily the preaching that Christ's death has fully satisfied for
our sins and pacified for ever the fathers wrath toward us. etc. This faith
purifieth the heart and gives us a will and gladness to do what soever our most
merciful father commands us.

Nevertheless because our infirmity The Purgatory of the members.
is so great, and our members so weak and frail that we ca^ not eschew sin,
as our heart would, and as our will desires: therefore has God left us an other
Purgatory which is Christ's cross. I mean not his material cross that he
him self dyed on, but a spiritual cross which is adversity, tribulation,
worldly depression. etc. And this Heb. 12.
is called the rod or scourge of God wherewith he scourges every son The
Purgatory of the members is the cross of Christ.
that he receaueth, that we may remember his law and mortify the old Adam and
fleshly lust which else would wax so rebellious that it would subdue us, reign
in us, and hold us thraull under sin. When soever we have committed a crime
the^ is God present with Psalm. 89.
this rod as he says Psalm. lxxxix. If they defile my ceremonies and not
observe my commandments, then with a rod shall I punish their sins and
with beatyngs shall I reward their iniquities, but yet my mercy shall I not
take from him neither will I deceive him of my promise.

This cross must we ^eceaue with a God nayleth us to the cross, to heal our
infirmities.
glad heart and thank our loving father for it, for it is but a medicine to
heal our infirmity and to subdue our rebellions members. But when our members
are fully mortified, that is, when death has subdued our corruptible body, and
our flesh committed to rest in the earth, then cease the Purgatories that God
has ordained, and then are we fully So evil was the life of the Papists that
they imagined a Purgatory for them selves.
purged in his sight.

If our Clergy could have found in their hearts to have taken these Purgatories
upon them, they had never neded to imagine any other, but since their life
began to wax so dissolute, specially since they should be the salt of the earth
and lanternes of light: It was necessary for them to imagine Purgatory after
this life, for else they might be sure that the most part of them were never
like to come in heaven.

Judge Christen reader which have the spirit to discern and know the
voice of Christ what reasons Rastell has brought and how he has soluted
them: for in my mind both his reasons and solutions are so childish and
unsavory, so unlearned and baren, so full of faults and fantasies, that I
rather pity the man's deep ignorance and blindness (which has so deceived
him self through Philosophy and natural reason) the^ I fear that he by his
vain probations should allure any man to consent unto him.

Judge and confer the Scriptures which Sir Thomas More and my Lord of
Rochester allege for their opinion, and I doubt not but that God shall open
thine eyes to espy that thing which has blinded them.

Judge and compare the Scriptures together which I have brought to confirm my
purpose, ponder their reasons and my solutio^s unto them, and I am sure thou
shall perceive that my small learning has condemned their high eloquence,
that my folly has brought to naught their wisdom, and that my youth has
disclosed their old and festred ignorance.

And this is even the old practice of The wisdom of the world foolishnes
before God.
God: to chose the folish things of the world: to confound the wise: to chose
the weak to confound the mighty: And to chose the vile things which are of
no reputation: to confound them of high degree: that no flesh might bost it
self in his sight to whom only be praise and thanks for ever.

Amen.
A Prologe whereby a man may the better perceive the occasion and whole cause
of this Book.
THere was a brother Simon Fish the maker of the book of the Supplication of
Beggars.
of ours named Simon Fish (which now I trust rests in Gods hands) whose
eyes God had opened, not only to espy the wily walkyng of hipocrites and ruin
of the realm which through their means was nigh at hand: but also to mark
and ponder the peril of men's souls, and how that the ignorant people by their
seduction was fallen into that frantic imagination that they more feared the
Pope and his Decrees which are but vanity, then God him self and his law
which are most righteous and eternal. This man therefore of a fervent and
burning zeal that he bare to the wealth of the comminaltie brake out and
touched these hypocrites in a little treatise which he called The Supplication
of Beggars, willing Our riches is to be bestowed on the poor.
that we should give the abundance of our richesse unto the poor to whom
it is due by the law of God: and that we should no longer suffer our selves to
be dispoyled and robbed of a sight of sturdy lubbars which under a false
cloak of virtue and prayer deceive the poor of their living and both the poor
and the rich of their souls health, if credence be given unto them.

And where these wilye Foxes Either there is no Purgatory, else the Pope is
mercylesse.
would have pretended the cloak of Purgatory affirmyng that it were due unto
them because they pray for their friends souls that they might come to rest,
he answered unto that point preuentyng their objection, and proved that either
there could be no such Purgatory, or else that the Pope were a mercylesse
tyrant which (as he says him self may deliver them from thence and will not
except he have money. At this point began M. More Whereat M. More first began
to fume against such as deny Purgatory
to fume and took upon him self to be Proctour for Purgatory (I will not say
that he was hired there to of our spirituality although many men dare swear it
(and to confirm his purpose he wrested sore the Scriptures, and triumphs
also that the very miscreantes and Idolaters believe that there is a Purgatory.
He adds thereto (to stablish his matter with all) that there is no man which
believes that there is a God, and that the soul of man is immortal, but he
must needs grant that there is a Purgatory. There took Rastell his hold,
Rastell follows M. More.
which is a Printer dwelling at Paul's gate in London and of Master Mores
alliance, which also coueteth to counterfayte his kinsma^, although the beams
of his brains be nothing so radiaunt nor his co^ueyaunce so commendable in the
eyes of the wise. Notwithstanding this Rastell has enterprised to dilate this
matter, and has divided it into three Dialoges, imaginyng that two men dispute
this matter by natural reason and Philosophy, secludyng Christ and all
Scripture. The one of them (that should dispute The names of the disputers in
the matter of Purgatory
this matter) he calls Gingemen, and fayneth him to be a Turk and of
Mahometes law. The second he names Comingo an Almany and of Christ's faith.
And he makes the Turk to teach the Christen man what he should believe.

The first Dialoge goes about The so^me and contents of Rastels iij. Dialogues
to prove by reason that there is a God, which is merciful and righteous. The
second entendeth to prove, that the soul of a man is immortal. Against these
two Dialogues I will not dispute, partly because this treatise should not be
over long and tedious, and partly because that those two points which he
there labors to prove are such as no Christen man will deny (although many
of his probations are so slender, that they may well be improued) but as
concerning his third Dialogue wherein he would prove Purgatory, it is wholly
injurious unto the blood of Christ and the destruction of all Christen faith,
if men were so mad as to believe his vain persuasions. And therefore I thought
expedient to compare this third Dialoge with all the deceitful reasons unto
the true light and pure word of God that at the least Rastell him self might
perceive his own blind ignorance and return again into the right way. And
if any man have been deceived through his book (as I trust there are but few
except they be very ignorant) that they may repent with him and glorify GOD
for his inestimable mercy which has sent his light into this world to disclose
and expel their dark and blind ignorauncy, that they may see his ways and
walk in them praising the Lord eternally.

Amen.
The first Book which is an answer unto Rastelles Dialogue.
THere is no man as I An answer to Rastels Dialogue.
think that has a natural wit, but he will grant me that this book of
Rastels making is either true, or false, If it be false the^ how so ever it
seem to agree with natural reason Rastels book is either true or false.
it is not to be allowed: if it be true, then must we approve it. Natural
reason must be ruled by Scripture. If natural reason conclude against the
Scripture, so is it false, but if it be agreeyng to Scripture then is it to be
heard.

Of this may I conclude that if Rastels If natural reason conclude against the
Scripture then is natural reason false.
book be agreeyng to Scripture, then is it true and to be allowed, if it
determine contrary to the Scripture, then is it false and to be abhorred, how
soever it seem to agree with natural reason.

Now is there no Christen man but he believes surely that if Christ had not
dyed for our sins we should all have been damned perpetually and never have
entered into the joys of heaven, which thing is easy to be proved, for Paul
says Romans 5. As thorough one ma^s sin, that is Ada^, ensued Roma. 5.
death in all me^ unto conde^natio^: Even so thorough one man's righteousness
which is Christ, came righteousness, in all men unto ye justification of life.
Also. John. xi. It is necessary John. 11.
that one man dye for the people, that all the people perish not: so that we
had been condemned and had perished perpetually if Christ had not dyed for us.
But Rastel with his Turk Gingemin excludes Christ and knows not of his
death, wherefore al yt reasons that they can make unto domesday ca^ never prove
Purgatory (except they imagine y^ we must first go to Purgatory 2. Rastels book
clearly and quickly confounded.
and then after to hell:) for this is a plain co^clusio^ that without Christ
(whom they exclude) we can never come to heaven: what fondnes were it then to
invent a Purgatory. Now may you see that Rastels book is fully answered, and
lies already in the dyrte, and that his third Dialogue is all false and
injurious unto the blood of Christ. As for the first and second Dialogue,
although there be some errors both against Divinity and all good Philosophy,
yet will I pass them over, for they are not so blasphemous against God and his
Christ as the third is.

Notwithstanding I will not thus leave his book, although I might full well,
but I will declare unto you what solutions he makes to these seven weak
reasons which he has propounded him self) for he auoydeth them so slenderly,
that if a man had any doubt of Purgatory before, it would make him swear on a
book that there were none at all. Besides that it has not one solutio^ but
there Rastel beaten to the wall.
are in it certain points repugnau^t unto Scripture, so that it is great
shame that any Christen man should Printe it, and much more shame that it
should be Printed with the kings privilege.

The first and chiefest reason that The first and chief reason made for
Purgatory
moves this man (yea and all other) to affirm Purgatory is this, which he
puts both in the first Chapter of his third Dialogue, and also in y^ last.
Man (says he) is made to serve and Rastell.
honor God, now if man be negligent about the commandments of God and
commit some venial sin, for which he ought to be punished by the justice
of God, and dye suddenly without repentance, and have not made sufficient
satisfaction unto God here in the world, his soul ought neither immediately to
come into the glorious place of heaven, because it is somewhat defouled with
sin, neither ought it to go to hell unto eternal da^natio^: but by all good
order of justice that soul must be purged in an other place, to make
satisfaction for those offenses, that it may afterward ^ee received into the
glorious place of heaven. And so by the justice of God there must needs be a
Purgatory.

Forsooth this reason has some apperaunce Answer to the first argument.
of truth and the similitude of wisdom, howbeit in deed it is nothing but
man's imagination and fantasy. For if we compare it unto Gods word, then
vanishes it away. But we regard not the word of the Lord, and therefore
chances eue^ the same thing unto us, that happened before unto the children
of Israel. Psalm. 81. My people regarded not my Psalm. 81.
voice and Israel gave no bid unto me: therefore let I them go after the
appetites of their own hearts. They shall wander in their own imaginations.
Now what go they about in this their invention and imagination of Purgatory,
but to ponder the justice of God in the balance of ma^s justice, saying. It is
no reason that we should enter into heaven which have not here satisfied unto
God for our iniquity except that we should be tormented and purified in an
other place. We were surely in evil taking if God were of man's co^plection
which remitteth the fault and reserueth the pain. Nay, nay, Christ is not
gredy to be avenged. He thirsts not after our blood, but suffered all
torments in his own body to deliver us from the pains that we had deserved.
But seeing they think their reason so strong and invincible, I will confute it
with one question that they shall not know whyther to turn them. But first I
will ground me upon this Scripture. S. Paul writes. 1 Thessalonians. 4. on this 1 Thessalonians. 4.
manner: we that live and are remaining in the coming of the Lord (unto
judgment) shall not come year they that sleep, for the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shoute and the voice of the Archaungell and tro^pe
of God. And the dead in Christ shall arise first, then shall we which live and
remain be caught up with them also in the clouds to mete the Lord in the
air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Now harken Question.
to my question. Those men that shall be found alive at the last day (for as it
was in the time of Noe, eue^ so shall the last day come upon us unawares and as
a thief in the night. Math. 24. Math. 24.
those men I speak of, shall any of the^ be saved or not? There is no man that
The confutatio^ of Rastels first and chief argument.
lives but he may well say his Pater nostor, of the which one part is:
Forgive us Lord our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us,
therefore is no man pure and with out all sin. And this confirms S. John,
saying: If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not
in us. 1. John. 1. what remedy 1. John. 1.
now? shall they all be damned? There is no doubt but some of them shall not be
very evil, although they have not made sufficient satisfaction unto God in
this world, and they ought not to go unto hell to everlasting da^natio^ (as
your own reason proves) and then shall there be no Purgatory to purge and
punish them. Besides that if there were a Purgatory at y^ time yet could they
not be cast into it, for all shall be done in the twinklyng of an eye. 1. Cor.
xv. and they shall be 1. Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
caught up to mete the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 4. Is God not as just then as he was
before? will he not have punished as well then as before. Now see you no
evasion for all your subtle imaginations, for they are not pure and without
spotte (as you say) except they make satisfaction them selves unto God. But
they must be without spot or wrincle that shall enter into heaven, as Rastell
him self does prove in the ix. Chapter of his third Dialogue. Howbeit? I
regard not his testimony, but the Scripture affirms that to be true, as Paul
says. Ephesians. Ephesians. 1. and. 5.
1. and. 5. Now since they must be pure eue^ without spot or wrincle that shall
enter into heaven, and these persons are yet spotted with sin, and have
neither place nor space to purge them in: you must needs conclude whether you
will or not that they must all be damned and yet you think that unreasonable
to.

See whyther your Arguments of natural reason bring you. But what says the
Scripture? verily Paul. 1 Thessalonians. 4. espied an other way: for he says: and so
shall we ever be with the Lord: and not damned. Of this may we evidently
conclude, that some shall be saved although they be sinners and never come in
Purgatory (there takes Rastell a fall and all his faultours) Rastell
overthrown in his own turn.
and since God is as just and merciful now as he shall be then: why shall we go
more in Purgatory the^ they? But mark I pray you how properly that
substauntiall reason wherewith they go about to stablishe Purgatory concludes:
which condemns into hell so many thousands, yea and even them whom Paul
affirms to be saved. And yet at the beginning it seemed very reasonable.

Now have I proved you sufficiently that this their reason can prove no
Purgatory, for as I said there shall sinners enter into heaven and never come
in Purgatory. Here peradventure you be desirous to know how Gods justice is
pacified. For all sin by the justice of God must needs be punished. Now can
the world espy no punishment here, and therefore they thought it necessary to
imagine a purgatory to purge and punish sin. Here answer I with S. Paul.

Christ the son of God being the 3. Hebr. 1.
brightness of his glory and very image of his substance bearing up all things
with the word of his power, has in his own person purged our sins and is
set on the right hand of God. Christ is the only Purgatory and purger of our
sins.
Behold the true Purgatory and consumyng fire, which has fully burnt up and
consumed our sins, and has for ever pacified the fathers wrath toward us.
Mark how he says, that Christ in his own person has purged our sins. If
thou yet seek an other purgation, then are you injurious unto the blood of
Christ. For if thou thought his blood sufficient, then would thou seek no
other Purgatory, but give him all the thanks and all the praise, of thy whole
health and salvation, and rejoice whole in the Lord.

Paul writes* Ephesians. 5. on this manner, 4. Ephe. 5.
Christ loved the congregation. And what did he for it, sent he it into
Purgatory there to be cleansed. Nay verily, but gave him self for it that he
might sa^ctifie it and cleanse it in the fountain of water, thorough the word
to make it unto him self a glorious congregation, without spot or wrincle or
any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame. Now if Christ by
these means have A, fruitful and excellent argument.
sanctified it and made it without spot, wrincle and blame, then were it
against all right to cast it into Purgatory, wherefore I must needs conclude
that either Paul says not true which affirms that Christ has so purged his
congregation, or else that Christ is unrighteous if he cast them into Purgatory
which are without spot wrincle and blame, in his sight.

Christ those us in him before the 5.
beginning of the world, that we might be holy and without spotte in his
sight. Ephesians. 1. If through his chosyng Ephe. 1.
and election we be without spot in his sight, Alas what blind vntha^ke Christ
by his election does purge and cleanse us.
fulness is that to suppose that he will yet have us tormented in Purgatory.

Peradventure every man perceaueth not what this means, that 6.
we are righteous in his sight seeing that every man is a sinner. 1. John. 1
Therefore I will briefly declare the 1. John. 1.
meaning of the Apostle. This is first a clear case, that there lives no man
upon the earth without sin. Notwithstanding all they that were chosen in
Christ before the foundation of the world were laid, are without spot of sin
in the sight of God. Ephesians. 1. Ephe. 1.
So that they are both sinners and righteous. If we consider the imperfection
of our faith and charity, If we consider the conflict of the flesh and the
spirit. Gala. 5. If we consider our rebellious Gallat. 5.
members, which are sold under sin. Roma. 7. then are we grievous Roma. 7.
sinners. And co^trarywise, if we believe that of mercyable favor God gave his
most dear son to redeem us from our sin: If we believe that he imputes not
our sins unto us, but y^ his wrath is pacified in Christ and his blood, If we
believe that he bath* freely given us his Christ and with him all things so
that we be destitute in no gift. Roma. viij. then are Roma. 8.
we righteous in his sight, and our conscience at peace with God, not thorough
our selves, but thorough our Lord Jesus Christ. Roma. v. So may Roma. 5.
thou perceive that thou art a sinner in thy self, and yet art thou righteous
in Christ, for through him is not thy sin imputed nor rekened unto thee. And
so are they to whom God imputes not their sins, blessed, righteous, without
spot, wrincle or blame. Roma. 4. Psalm. 31. And therefore will Roma. 4. Psalm. 31.
he never thrust the^ into Purgatory.

Paul says there is no difference, Justification freely, does exclude
Purgatory.
for all have sinned and lack y^ glory which before God is allowed, but they
are justified freely by his grace, through y^ redemption y^ is in Christ Jesus.
Roma. iij. what say you now, Roma. 3.
shall they yet go into Purgatory? Call ye that justification freely by his
grace, to lie in the pains of Purgatory. Surely that were a new kind of
speech, which I think Paul never understood.

Peradventure some man will Objection.
think mine Arguments to be of small pyth, and to dissolve them by a
distinction, saying: It is truth yt God has so purged and cleansed us from all
our iniquities, nevertheless his mercy, purging and forgiveness, have only
purified us from the fault and crime, but not from the pain which is due to
the crime.

To this objection I answer that In answer to the first objection.
if God of his mercy and thorough the blood of his son Jesus have not
remitted yt pain due unto that crime, then shall we all be damned: for the
pain due unto every disobedience that is against God, is eternal damnation.
And therefore if this pain were not forgeuen us, then are we still under
condemnation, and so were Christ's blood shed in vain, and could save no man.

If they will say that this everlasting Objection.
pain is not wholly forgeuen us, but that it is altered into the temporal
pain of Purgatory, out of which the Pope may deliver them by his pardon, for
else have they no euas^on at all, then may we soon confute them and that by
diverse reasons.

First, yt their words are nothing 1. In answer to the second objection.
but even their own imagination, for they cannot confirm their sayings by the
Scripture, neither ought we to accept any thing as an article of our faith
which is not approved by Gods word: for we may neither decline unto the right
hand nor unto the left: but only do that the Lord commands us. Deuteronomy. 4. 5.
12. 13.

And again if a man should ask 2.
them by what authority the pope gives such pardon. They answer, that it is
out of yt merits of Christ's passion. And so at the last they are compelled
The Pope ^elleth Christ's merits for money.
to grant even against them selves, that Christ has not only deserved for us
the forgeuenes of yt crime but also of the pain. If Christ have deserved all
for us, who gives the Pope authority to reserve a part of his deservings
from me, and to sell me Christ's merits for money.

Besides that, every Christen man 3.
ought to apply unto God all things which should employ his honor as far
forth as the Scripture will suffer. Now seeing it is more unto the honor of God
that he should deliver us in his blood both from the crime and from the pain,
and also not repugnau^t unto the Scripture but that he has relesed us from the
pain as We may not rob God of his honor.
well as from the sin: for what intent should we be so unkind as to
despoyle him of this great honor, and without any authority of Scripture
imagine that he has not delivered us from the pain as well as from the sin.

Moreover if he should reserve the 4. Blasphemy to say Christ's blood is not
full remission for our sins.
pain, then were it no full remission and forgiveness, but what blasphemy is
that to think y^ Christ's blood was not sufficient to give full remission unto
his faithful?

Furthermore, for what intent should the pain be reserved? to satisfy 5.
toward God for their offenses? Nay verily, for all me^ living are not There
is no satisfaction for sin, but Christ's death.
able to satisfy toward God for one sin. Neither are all the pains of
hell able to purge one sin or satisfy for it: for then at the length the
damned souls should be delivered out of hell.

Finally, I think that there was 6.
never any temporal punishment institute of God to be any satisfaction for
sin, but the use of all temporal pains and chiefest cause why they were
ordained is this.

Temporal pains are profitable 1. Why temporal pains are ordained.
for the common wealth, that they may be examples to learn the unfaithful
(which else fear not God) that they may at the lest for fear of punishment
abstain from committyng like offenses, for if their sin were unpunished then
should all vice reign to the utter subuersio^ of the common wealth.

They are also profitable for the 2.
faithful, for they try and purify the faith of Gods elect, and subdue and
mortify their carnal members, that they may be the more able to serve their
brethren and to withstand the vehement assaults of temptation which are ever
at hand: and lest they should wax proud and boast them selves for those
gifts which they have received of God.

Furthermore they set out and advance the glory of God. For after that we be
put in remembrance and made to feel our frail nature that so continually
displeases God our father: then have we occasion to ponder and compare this
tra^sitory pain which we here suffer with those enor mous trespasses that we
have committed Worldly pains can not sufficiently punish sin.
and so to espy the infinite mercy and favor of God, and even in our
adversities to be compelled to praise God our merciful and tender father
which scourges us so favorably for those grievous offenses that have deserved
a thousand times more punishment.

Howbeit (to say truth) there is no man that can take any such profit of them
that men feign to be punished in Purgatory. For we neither see it nor hear it,
neither have we any mention made of it in Scripture, that we may be sure that
it so is. Now since we Scripture makes no mention of Purgatory
have no infallible evidence, but only fantastical imaginatio^s, it is
plain enough that there was no such thing ordemed neither to advance Gods
honor nor yet to the profit of the cominaltie or else of Gods elect, for then I
am sure that Christ and al his Apostles would not have forgotten to have
remembered us of it.

NOw let us see some of Rastels reasons which he says that fond fellows lay
for them selves to prove that there should be no Purgatory.

They say (says Rastell) that contrition Rastels first argument.
which some call repentance is that which is the very payment and
satisfaction for sin, and they say that when a man commits a sin and
after is repentaunt therefore, that God of his goodness does forgive him, and
that that repentance is the only satisfaction that God would have made and
done for that sin. And then since a man by such repentance has made such
payment and satisfaction for his sin as God would have to be made therefore,
if then that man should go to Purgatory and have a new punishment after his
death, that repentance that he had before should be but void.

Forsooth I think that neither Rastell Frith.
ever heard any such reason, neither yet that any man ever would be A fond
argument.
so fond as to say yt this argument confuted Purgatory, except it were one y^
were clean purged of his wit before. But whose reason so ever it be, whether
Rastels, or any other man's, let us lay it unto y^ touchstone, that is the
Scripture, to prove whether it be gold or copper, upright or counterfaite,
truth or untruth. And to be short, the first proposition and Mayor of his
reason is this, that co^trition or repentance is the very payment and
satisfaction for sin. That is a stark The Mayor of Rastels argument is a lie.
lie to begin withal. For if we by all our contrition, repentance, sacrifices
and works (I add more to help him) can fully pay and satisfy for our
sins, then is Christ dead in vain, and might full well have spared his
blood. This can no man deny, but he that will set at naught both Christ and all
the Scripture. Now mark how he proceeds. And they say (says Rastell)
Rastell.
that when a man commits a sin and after is repe^taunt therefore, that God
of his goodness does forgive him, and that that repentance is the only
satisfaction that God would have to be made and done for that sin.

That is the next part of his argument Frith.
and contains two lies at once theined together, for where he says that when
a man commits a sin and after is repentaunt therefore that God of his
goodness does for give him: you must first consider that neither he nor his
Turk Gingemin know any thing of Christ. Now if it Christ's death only is the
cause of the forg^^enes of our sins.
were not for Christ's sake, all the repentance that man can imagine could not
mo^e the goodness of God to forgive one sin. But by his justice (where
Christ's death has no effect) he must needs condemn. The second lie is this,
that that repentance is the only satisfaction that God would have made and
done for that sin: for if this be true, the^ is our faith false. For our
faith holds that i^ Christ had not dyed for us, we had all perished. Then
proceeds Rastell.
he as though all that he had said before were true, on this manner. And Rastels
fond argument beaten to the ground.
then (says he) since a man by such repentance has made such payment and
satisfaction for his sin as God would have to be made therefore, If then that
man should go to Purgatory and have a new punishment after his death, that
repentance that he had before should be but void. Even just, if heaven fell
we should catch larkes.

Now let us see how properly ^ee Frith.
answers unto his own question. And you shall find more blasphemies against
Christ in his answer then preceded in y^ argument. Think you this man has
not taken great pains.

To prepare him self unto his matter Three lies at once.
he brings in three lies in the first chapter. The first is he says that
only the soul suffers and not the body, and makes Comingo, who^ he fayneth
to be a Christen man, to What folly is in natural reason, to reason against
the Scripture.
grant it well and wisely. Forsooth this is new learning in deed. For if this
be true, then Christ's body suffered no harm, neither when he was scourged,
neither when he was crowned with thorn neither when he was nailed on the
cross. But I report me unto your own selves if ye cut but your finger,
feel ye no pain? and yet I think ye will not say that ye cut your soul.
From hence forward if you see a poor man shiueryng for cold in the street,
you may bid him walk a knave and bear him in hand that he feels no harm,
for as this man says his body feels no harm, and I promise you of honesty
that his soul A good conclusion.
catches no cold. But what need I to make mo words of this matter since you
may make experience your selves. The second lie is this. That man was created
of God, to do him honor and ser^ice. For if a man may say the Gods honor
consi^teth not in our service.
truth man was not made for the intent to be a s^ruau^t and do service. For God
has no need of our service, but was in as full honor and as well ser^ed
before the world began as he now is. So that his honor, joy and service is
whole in him self, and is by us neither employed nor diminished.

But the cause why he made man Why man was made.
was this that man should have y^ fruition of his joy and honor. Such was his
goodness, he made us not that he should have any pleasure by us, but that we
should have pleasure by him. The third lie is this, that no other God made us
not for his pleasure but that we should receive pleasure by him
creature here in earth does service and honor to God but only man. This is
also a stark lie for all creatures honor God through their creation and
being, for the whole glory of their creation redowneth into the honor of God
and what service ca^ they do better the^ so to glorisie God? Neither yet
lets he them be idle but woorketh thorough them marvelous things and all
to his glory. Fire at his commandment came down from heaven and burnt Sodom
and Gomorra. Genesis xix. was that no honor Gene. 19. Exodus 14. Math. 8.
and service: he made a strong and burning wind to dry up and divide the red
Sea. Exodus xiiij. At his voice the wind and sea were obedient and wared calm.
Math. vi^j. was this no honor and service? But a man may see that his wit
was so purged in Purgatory, that he has not one drop left to espy any
truth at all.

But yet let us see how he answers the argument, and severally examine every
part. The first part was: Rastell.
that contrition or repentance is the very payment and satisfaction for sin.
To this he answers, that when An other of Rastels foolish arguments.
thou take repentance and as kest mercy of God for thine offense: No man
ought to be so foolish to think that God should be restrained or compelled,
but that it is at his liberty whether he will forgive or no.

I would be loath to move the man Frith.
and ask him what repentance is? for surely as far as I can gather by his
words he wotteth nothing what it means. But I pray you see how substantially
he answers the argument. It argues that contrition or repentance is the
very payment and satisfaction for sin. And to that au^swereth he neither yea
nor nay, for fear of trappyng (all beit the words are clean against
Scripture.) But he answers that when thou take repentance and ask
mercy of God for thy sin: no man ought to be so foolish to think that God
should be constrained or compelled to forgive thee. But for all y^ this is
sure enough that if repentance be the very payment and satisfaction for sin
(as the Repentance is no satisfaction for our sin, but Christ's death only
argument falsely supposes) that God of his justice must needs forgive me when
I repent. For the^ have I wholly paid him his and may require my right even by
his justice. If thou object that God were then restrained and compelled, I
answer nay. But it were rather a great pleasure unto him to forgive all me^
if so they could make satisfaction unto his justice by repentance, for he
reioyseth not in punishyng us. Then adds Rastell Rastell.
that it is at his liberty always to execute justice or mercy at his pleasure.
To that I answer, that he has no pleasure to do against his Scripture, Frith.
but therein has he fully opened his pleasure. His pleasure is to forgive God
forgeueth for Christ's ^ake and not otherwise.
freely all them that believe in his son Christ Jesus, and to condemn the^
that believe not. If Rastell mean on this fashion then grant we him. But if he
understand that God takes his pleasure and liberty in ministryng his mercy
and justice, so that he may condemn him which has given the very payment and
full satisfaction of sin (as it seems ^e should mean seeing he denies not
the first part of the argument) and again save him that believed not, then will
I say that Rastell runs ryotte and takes his Rastell groundeth him upon
lies and imaginations.
own pleasure. For God has no power against him self and his Scripture, but
look what he has promised and that he will perform. And therefore in this can
Rastell prove no purgatory for all that he groundeth him on so many lies.

But yet is it necessary that we declare unto you what is the very satisfaction
for sin and then shall we see whether Purgatory may stand with it or not.

Paul says Hebr. x. that Christ 8. Heb. 10.
with one oblation has satisfied for our sins, for we are hallowed (says
he) by the offering of the body of Christ Jesus which was once done (upon the
cross) and with that one oblation has he made them which are hallowed
perfect for ever. Now if this be true that we are made perfect by the oblation
of his own body upon the cross, then is Purgatory in Christ's merits
utterly sets aside Purgatory.
vain. For if he have so purged us, what need we an other purgation? If we be
made perfect thorough him what need we after this life to be purged? I^ he
have satisfied for us, why seek we an other satisfaction? why leave we the
fountain of living water and seek our refreshing out of polluted pooles and
specially since the headspryng is so ready at hand?

If we must make satisfaction unto God for our sins, then would I 9.
know why Christ died? think ye that There is no mean to purge us but only
the death of Christ.
his blood was shed in vain? This is no doubt, if there were any other way
unto the father the^ through Christ's blood, whether Purgatory or sacrifices or
what thou can imagine, the^ was his death not necessary. But alas what
unkindness is y^ so to deiect the precious blood of Christ and to set his
gracious favor at naught? If there be any means by the which I may satisfy
for my sins, I need no redemer nor yet any ^auour. But may call for my right
and duty. And so were there no need of Christ's blood mercy and favor. But
what may be more blasphemous unto Christ's blood and his free redemption?

Christ is able fully and for ever to 10.
save the^ that come unto God by him seeing he ever lives to make intercession
Christ is hable fully to save all that comes to God by him.
for us. Hebr. v^j. If he be able fully and for ever to save us, why run we
from him and seek an other Purgatory? If he make intercession for us, then is
it like that he is no cruel stepfather toward us, but rather y^ by all
means he seeks our health, why fly we from him that offers him self so
louyngly to us? why dar^ we not put our trust in him, which when we were his
enemies vouchsafed to dye for us, and to reconcile us unto his father. Romans 5.

Now makes he Comyngo his Almany, Roma. 5.
to bring in an example, and in confutyng that he thinks to win the field.
But we will show you that his similitude is nothing like in deed. But if he
will imagine that it be like, then does he not confute it but makes it
stronger. The example is this: If I owe thee. an. C. li. of true debt, and
humbly desire thee to forgive, discharge Rastell.
and pardon me and thou make me a clear release thereof then am I not bound to
make thee any other payment or satisfaction. To prove that the similitude is
naught, Frith.
and nothing like to the purpose, is very eas^e. For the purpose and first part
of the argument was this: that contrition or repentance is the very payment
and satisfaction for sin. Therefore if he will have it like, then Rastels
similitude is not good.
must he suppose that this humble request of forgiveness, discharge and pardon
is the very payment and satisfaction for that. C. li. and therefore upon that
should they first have agreed or else ca^ the example serve for nothing. Now if
he make them like and imagine that this humble desire or forgeuenes is the very
payment and satisfaction for that. C. li. then has he made a rod for his own
arse, for he shall never be able to avoid it. But let us see his answer.

In the case that you have put Rastell.
(says Rastell) if you desire me forgiveness of that. C. li. yet is it at my
liberty and gentleness whether I will forgive thee the whole. C. li. or else
part thereof, well hitte Master John. If I should pay you that. C. li. Frith.
in good curraunt money were it yet in your liberty and gentleness whether
you would forgive me a part or the whole thereof? Truly I would be loath to be
one of your debtours, if you ^e so hard to your creditours. Be like Mayor.
you have studied some cautell in the law. For I never heard but that if I owed
you an. C. li. and gave you the very payment and satisfaction thereof, then
should I be clean discharged whether ye would yea or nay, and neither need
to thank your liberality nor gentleness. But in your case the request Minor.
and desire of forgeuenes is and must be the very payment and satisfaction of
y^. C. li. or else it is nothing like the argument, so that you may put your
similitude in your purse til an other place and time where it shall better
agree, wherefore I must needs conclude, that if I desire forgeuenes (this
Co^clusio.
standing that the said desire of forgeuenes Rastels similitude clearly
confounded.
is the very payment and satisfaction of that. C. li. (for else as I said it is
nothing like) I am clean discharged and need neither to thank your
liberality nor gentleness.

Now where you object the recompense for the loss of time and damages, hurt
and hinderaunce that you have had for the none payment of that. C. li. and so
forth, that can not be applied unto God and the remission of our sins. For
there is no such loss Our doings can man God neither better nor worse.
of time, damage, hurt or hinderau^ce toward God. For we neither hurt nor
hinder him although we never ask forgiveness but be damned perpetually. So
that it is our profit to ask it, and our hurt and hinderau^ce i^ we ask it
not. If I owe a man. xx. li. the l^^ger I keep it the more is my profi^e and
the more his loss: but God receaueth v^ young, he receaueth us at ma^s state,
he receaueth us old, and thinks it no loss or hurt then to receive us, for
he says by his Prophet.

The wickedness of the wicked shall 11.
not hurt him in what day soever he turn from his ungodliness ^zech Ezech.
33.
xxxi^j. But it should surely hurt him if he should broyle in Purgatory for
it. Wherefore either there is no such paynefull Purgatory, or else can not I see
how the Prophet, which speaks these words in the person of God, should be
true.

I shall pour upon you clean water 12. Ezech. 36. If Christ have purged us
clean, w^deth an other Purgatory. 13.
(says God the father) and you shall be cleansed from all your iniquities.
Ezech. xxxvi. If we be purged from all, what need an other Purgatory? need
we more purging when all are cleansed?

I will surely convert Judah and turn Israel unto me, and I will purify them
from all their iniquities wherewith they hau^ offended me. Hieremie. xxxi^j. If
he purify them ^erem. 33.
from all, what should they do in Purgatory.

I will be merciful unto their wickedness, 14.
and their sins will I no more remember. Hieremy. xxxj. Hebr. vi^j. Ierem. 32.
If he will not remember our sins any more, then may we be sure that he will
not frye us in the fire of Purgatory for our sins.

NOw let us see his second argument The second argument.
which is in the. iiij. chap. and is surely fond, how beit his solution is yet
more foolish. The sum of his argument is this.

Man was made and ordained to Rastell.
have an infinite being, therefore after this mortality and death he must have
infinite joy or infinite pain.

I will put you a like argument. A Frith.
man is ordained in this world to be a king or a subject therefore after he is
borne he is ever a king or else ever a subject. Now may this be false, for
Rastels second argument confuted.
peradventure he may be borne a subject and after made king or else he may be
borne a king and after deposed and made a subject. Therefore this argument
holds not formally. But it holds on this manner, as I should say to an Ape
thou must needs be an ape or an ass, which now is true. But if I should say
the very same words to M. John Rastell, I think he would Anyppyng conclusion.
be angry and say that it were false. And I suppose our scholemen will say that
he lies, and put him an example of the infantes that dye without Christendom,
which (as the scholemen say) shall never have joy nor pain. But I will grant
him his argument to see how properly he will confute it.

Now mark his answer which stands in the v. chapter.

There are degrees in sins, some Rastell.
sins are great and some greater, and therefore must there be degrees in
punishment, some punishment is great and some greater. Well for your pleasure I
am content to grant Frith.
you this to. But else were it a matter worthy disputation what now?

When that a man (says Rastell) here in earth has committed a Rastell.
great sin and offense and taken repentance whereby the sin is forgiven
(mark that he being ignorant of Christ, says through repentance the sin
is forgiven,) and yet Rastelles fond argument to prove a Purgatory
has not taken such sufficient repentance therefore, nor had any sufficient
punishment which should make a full payment and satisfaction for that sin,
and dies before any condign or full satisfaction made, God must then of his
righteousness ordeine a place of Purgatory, where his soul shall have a further
punishment to make a condign and full satisfaction for that sin, and so to
be purged and purified before it shall be able and worthy to be admitted to
receive the eternal joy in heaven.

First brethren you must grant, Frith.
that we have a Christ or no Christ: a redemer or no redemer: a iustifier or no
iustifier. If there be none such (as Rastels second argument clearly confuted.
Rastell with his Turk Gingemini suppose) then all the repentance in the
world could not satisfy for one sin, but who soever committed a sin
should be damned therefore. So that Rastell speaks and seyeth all in
diminutiues, for where he should of truth spy hell, there espyeth he but
Purgatory. And where he should say that all sinners (if they stick not to
Christ's blood) shall be damned eternally, there says he that they shall be
punished in Purgatory. And to be short, if Rastell say truth the^ is Christ
dead in vain: If he say not truth why stick you to his reason? But
peradventure An answer to an objection.
thou that know Christ wilt say (as many do) that Christ's death and
redemption serves thee but for original sin, or at most for those sins
that thou committedest before Baptism: To that I answer with S. John.

Children, this do I write unto you 15.
that ye sin not. And if any man sin, yet we have an advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ, which is righteous. And he it is that obtains grace
for our sins, not for our sins only, but also for the sins of all the
world. To who^ wrote. S. John. this 1. John. 2.
Epistle? Think you that he wrote not unto the Christen and them that were all
ready Baptized? And yet he said: if any man sin, we have an advocate with ye
father, Jesus Christ which is righteous: and he it is that obtains grace for
our sins. Lo he adnumbreth him self also: for he says we have an advocate:
and says again, for our sins. Ye may see that he means not only original
sin, neither yet the sins done before baptism: for I doubt not but he was
Baptized when he wrote this Epistle, and yet said he: if we sin (meaning If
we fall into sin, We have no remedy but Christ our advocate.
after Baptism or when soever it be) we have an advocate with the father Jesus
Christ, this is S. John's learning: he knew no other remedy if we fell into
sin, but only Christ. Notwithstanding our Prelates have practiced further,
for they say: if any man sin he shall lie in the pains of purgatory, until
he be delivered thence by Mass pence, the Popes pardon or certain other
Suffragies, but not without money you may be sure.

Christ says (no man comes unto 16.
the father but thorough me. John. John. 13.
xiij. for says he) I am the way, yes Lord, our Prelates have espied an other
way, which although it be more paynfull unto the poor, yet is it more
profitable for Prelates.

Come unto me all ye that labor 17.
and are laden and I will ease you says our Savior Christ Jesus. Math. xj.
Math. 11.
will thou send us Lord into Purgatory? forsooth there is little ease, if the
Purgatory ^icke purse
fire be so hot as our Prelates have feigned it.

It is even I that put out thine iniquities 18. Esaias. 43.
for mine own sake says God the father, and thy sins will I no more
remember. Esaias. xliij. Ergo, then Broylyng in Purgatory puts not away sin.
he puts them not away for broylyng in Purgatory. He adds also that he
will no more remember our sins: call ye that no remembrance to cast us into
Purgatory for them.

Whom God predestined, them 19.
he called, and whom he called, them he justified: and what did he with the^
Those whom God calls he justifies (...) glorifieth.
then? Did he cast them in Purgatory there to be cle^sed? forsooth the Apostle
makes no mention thereof but adds immediately, whom he justified them he
glorified. Roma. viij. Wherefore let Roma. 8.
not us put such obstacles and be unkind unto the gracious favor of God.

Besides that Paul forbidedth us 20.
to be careful for them that sleep (that is to say for yt dead) as they that
have no hope. But surely if he had known 1 Thessalonians 4*
of any Purgatory, he would have been careful for them, since they feign them
in such miserable torments. Now seeing he had occasion to make mention of the
dead, and spoke not one word of Purgatory, it is plain enough that he knew
nothing of it or else was he very negligent to ouerhyppe it. But yet had I
lever say that Purgatory is but a fancy of man's imagination.
Purgatory were but a fantasy of man's imagination, then to ascribe such
forgetfulness or negligence unto that Apostle.

THe third reason that Rastell allegeth The third argument.
is in the vj. chapter, the su^me is this. There are degrees of joy in heaven,
and degrees of pain in hell. And therefore may God pass every man and give
him according to his deserte, either more or less and never need Purgatory.
Well let us grant these degrees for Rastels pleasure although the question be
s^ disputable that I am sure be can not defend it. What follows on this? for
sooth he brings in proper examples if they could serve for ye purpose. But
let us pass over to his solutio^ which is in the end of the vij. chapter.

When a man (says Rastell) is infected Rastell. The solution of Rastels third
argument.
with a great mortal sin and so depart, then his soul ought not to do
service in heaven unto God because it is putrified with that foul sin. But
if that man had taken the medicine of full repentance in his life, that
medicine would have restored him again to his soul health and virtue. (But
Frith.
here you must remember that Christ is dead in vain, for if repentance be the
medicine that restores again the health and virtue of the soul, what needs
Christ.) Now forth. But if he Rastell.
have taken (says Rastell) some repentance for that sin and not sufficient,
and had not sufficient time to make sufficient satisfaction therefore, yet by
the taking of that medicine of repentance, that sin is expelled and gone,
and the soul of that sickness and sin is clearly whole, but yet the
spots and tokens of the sin which is a deformity to the soul do still
remain till the soul have a time to be purged from those tokens and spots
to make it pure and clean of that deformity.

This man is ever in one supposition Frith.
which is both false and injurious unto the precious blood of Christ. I wonder
who taught him that conclusion, and why he grants so soon unto it, for he
would not have granted that there were a God, neither that y^ soul was
immortal (although they were both true) until he had proved it (as he thought
him self) by good natural reason. But as for this that Rastels natural reason
does foully deceive both him and his Turk Ginge^in.
is stark false (that is to say) that repentance while he excludes Christ,
does satisfy for our sin, he never puts in question, but grants it by
and by, belike the Turks have such an opinion. But let him go with his Turk
and let us Christen men grant nothing contrary to the scripture, but ever
captiuate our reason unto that, for it is the infallible reason and wisdom of
God, and passes our reason far.

THe fourth reason is propounded The iiij. argument.
in the viij. chapter which is this: that the soul unpurged may do some
mean and low service to God Ephesians. 5.
in heaven, though it be not the highest and best, which thing is false and
against Scripture. Ephesians. v. Ca^t. iiij. But let us see what answer he makes
Cant. 4.
unto it. His answer begins Rastell.
in the ix. chap. and the sum is this.

Heaven is so pure and clean of Rastelles answer to his iiij. argument.
nature, that it must expel all manner of impuritie and uncleanness, neither can
it suffer any thing therein, that is of any manner uncleanness or evil, or other
thing unpleasant. So now it follows that when a man has committed a mortal
sin and after takes repentance by the which he is healed of the foul
infirmity. (See how he harpeth all of one string which is also so far out
of tune that I wonder how any man ca^ abide him. For if I can heal mine
Rastell.
infirmity through repentance wherefore dyed Christ? But yet (says he) Frith.
the spots and tokens remain for lack of full satisfaction. I answer that it
remains every whitte, sin, spots, tokens, and all together except Christ
have taken it from of us, through his death and bitter passion. Therefore says
Rastel) God of his justice may Rastell.
not condemn his soul to eternal pain in hell for that offense which is
purged and put away. Wherewith is it purged and put away?

There is no remission of sin 21. Frith. Hebr. 9.
without blood. Hebr. ix. If there be no remission without blood, what shall
repentance do, where the blood of Sin can not be taken away but by yt blood
of Jesus Christ.
Christ is excluded? yea or what shall thy Purgatory do, for there is no
bloodshed. So is there nothing that takes away sin: but only the blood of
Christ Jesus, shed for our redemption.

And yet (says Rastell) God by his Rastell.
justice and by his discrete wisdom and goodness ought not immediately to
receive that soul into that clean and most pure place in heaven to accompany
the pure angels. etc. No mary I waraunt Frith. A merry conclusion of John Frith.
thee, be not afraid of that, for neither Gyngemin thy companyon nor thou
neither shall enter in there, either immediately or mediatlye, if ye exclude
Christ as ye have done hitherto, no not if ye had taken all the repentance in
the world, and would thereto imagine as many Purgatoryes as will pesen into a
Monks coule.

But it is Christ the lamb of God 22.
that takes away the sin of the world. John. i. It is he that has purged
John. 1.
our sin and now sits on the right hand of the father. Hebr. i. It is Heb.
1.
he that has purged our sin and has made us in his own sight and in yt
sight of his father, without spot or wrincle Ephesians. i. All beit in our own
sight we Ephe. 1.
find our selves sinners. i. John. i. 1. John. 1.
But he makes us blessed and righteous and imputes not our sins unto Romans
4. No need of Purgatory
us. Roma. iiij. Then what needs Purgatory?

THe fifth Argument that he brings The v. argument. Rastell.
against Purgatory is touched in his x. chapter, the sum is this. It should
seem convenient that this Purgatory (if there were one) should be in earth:
partly because the body which offends with the soul might be purged with the
soul: and partly to be a good example to all men living to put them in fear
to do any like offense, and so should cause many to abstain from committyng
any such like offense and sin, or else where should Purgatory be?

This reason has no great pyth. Frith.
Notwithstanding if it were well prosecuted, it would be to hard for Rastell to
avoid it. For this is no formal How Rastel proves that Purgatory is upon the
earth.
argument, it is meet yt the body which offends with the soul should be
purged with the soul, Ergo, Purgatory must be upon the earth. For God may
join the body and soul together again after they be departed and so punish
them together although purgatory were not in earth, even where soever it be.
And therefore thus me thinks it should well follow.

The body was fellow and partener 23.
with the soul in committyng the crime and sin, and shall also be partaker
of the glory, which is prepared for them that love God. Wherefore it is reason
if the soul should be purged and punished in Purgatory: that the body should
also suffer with him in Purgatory: feign the place of Purgatory where you will,
in heaven, in earth or in hell. But wot ye what Rastelles fond conclusion of
his v. argument.
Rastell would here say unto me? forsooth even as he did in the first chapter
of the third Dialogue, that is to say: he would stoutely affirm that the body
suffers neither well nor woe, joy nor pain, good nor evil, and therefore it
needs not go to Purgatory. And by that reason it is folly that the body
should go either to heaven or hell, for it neither feels pleasure nor pain,
this is new learning in deed. But I think there is no Christen man so
foolish as to believe him.

And as for the second point that it should be a good example to put men in
fear for committyng such trespasses, it were soon answered. For We may not
abstain from sin for fear, but for love
we ought not to abstain from eui^l because of yt punishment that follows the
crime but only for the love that we have to God without any respect either of
salvation or of damnation. If thou abstain for fear, so art thou under the
law and under damnation: The law of God and the law of man are far unlike:
for the law of man is fulfilled by the exterior act although the heart be far
from it. As if I owe The law of God, and the law of man does greatly vary.
a man. xx. pound and be compelled by the law to pay him at a certain day: if
I then pay albeit mine heart be never so grudging and evil willing, yet have I
fulfilled the law so that there shall no process or sentence pass against me.
But Gods law requires a thing to be done with a well willing heart, and eue^
for pure love. For if thou do it for fear or unwillingly yt shall be imputed
unto thee for sin. If thou do it for fear, then workest thou not of love,
but rather hate both the thing that thou do, and also the law that
constrains the unto it. And if thou do it unwillingly then The law of God
requires the heart and mind.
willest thou to do the contrary, and so would thou that there were no such
law neither yet any God that should judge thee in so doing. And since God
judges thee after thine heart The law of man requires the body and outward
deeds.
and will, then must he needs condemn thee, for thou willest contrary unto
his law and will: yea and willest in thine heart contrary to that thou do in
thine outward deed.

Now let us see his solution which is in the xi. chapter and so foolish, that
if it were not for the great length of the chapter, for loss of time and for
the more cost in Printyng, I would surely have answered unto it at length,
even that he should have been ashamed of him self. But to be short Rastels
foolish solutio^ of his fifth argument.
we will touch some of his words. The first part of the argument which he
entendeth to answer to, is this: that it should seem convenient that
Purgatory should be here on earth, because the body which offends with the
soul should be purged with the soul. This reason is of no value as I have
showed you before. But what says Rastell?

That reason (says Rastell) Rastelles solution.
proves not only that there is no Purgatory, but also that there should be
neither heaven nor hell. For if a man have lived so vertuouslye in earth, that
he ought to be saved and go to the joys of heaven, (let us pardon him this
lie, for the Prophet says that no man shall be justified in ye sight of God,
if he enter into judgment with us Psalm. C. xliij. Psalm. 143.
And yet did never meritorious act but only when the soul was joined with
the body, then should he never be rewarded, but here in earth while his soul
is joined with the body. Rastels reason fails him.
Here may ye perceive what Frith.
Rastell thinks of heaven and hell, even thus that the body shall never come
in heaven nor hell, which point I will touch more largely a none. First
where Comingo in his argument says, that it should seem convenient for
Purgatory to be upon earth, there says Rastell yt he would take away the
liberty, prerogative, and authority of God. As by example, if I would say, It
should seem convenient that the Bishop of Londons palace should be in London,
partly because it is ye chiefest City of his Diocese, Rastell does to much
abuse him self.
and partly because it is nigh the Court whereto he may the better resort to
get further promotion, there would Rastell say by and by that I took the
Bishops liberty, prerogative, and authority that he might not set it where he
would: belike this man has drunk of a merry cup. He affirms also that this
argument takes Rastell. Frith.
away both heaven and hell: why so? Because he supposes it convenient that
Purgatory should be here upon earth? Albeit he say it is convenient, yet says
he not that it must needs be. Nay, but there is an other thing that Rastels
sore yes can not abide. What is that? verelye for he added that it were most
convenient that the body which is partaker in committyng the crime, should
also be purged and punished with the soul. And that as ye know plucketh
Rastell by the beard, for he went about to prove the Rastell is contrary to him
self.
contrary in the first chapter, that ye body has neither pain nor pleasure.
etc. But how should this take away heaven and hell? for sooth on this manner.
Rastell thinks not that God ca^ and will join the body again with the soul
after this transitory life that they may together receive joy or pain for yt
passes his natural Philosophy. But thus he imagines, when the body and soul
are once departed, the^ say they adieu for ever and a day. Therefore (thinks
he) if God will punish them in hell together, or save them together in heaven,
the^ he must take them whiles they are here living in earth. And so this
Rastell has here a foul overthrow.
supposition that the body must suffer with ye soul (after Rastels learning)
must prove that heaven and hell be here in earth or else there ca^ be none. See
this learned man yt would prove Purgatory by good Philosophy.

The second cause, that Purgatory should be a good example to the living to put
them in fear to do any like offense, is not soluted of Rastell, but I have
soluted it before and will yet satisfy you again because Rastell leaves it
out. Rastels solution confuted.
We have here in ye world Moses and the Prophets that is ye old Testament, yea
and also Christ and his Apostles, which we call the new Testament, now if we
believe not these the^ shall we not surely believe although we had Purgatory and
hell to among us. And this may well be gathered of Christ's own words. Luke.
xvj. Luke. 16.
Where he brought in ye parable of ye rich man and Lazarus, for ye rich man
being in pains desired Abraham to send Lazarus unto his v. brethren to warn
them that they might not come into that fire. Abraham answered again, yt they
had Moses and the Prophets. And added, let them hear them. The^ said the rich
man: Nay father Abraham, but if any of them that are departed appear unto
them, then will they believe it. And Abraham concludes on this manner. If they
believe not Moses and the Prophets, no more will they believe if any of the dead
should rise again. And therefore may I likewise conclude, that if they believe
not, A true and good conclusion.
neither yet fear the pains which Moses and the Prophets, yea and Christ and
his Apostles have prophesied to fall on the unfaithful, then will they not
believe for fear of the pains of Purgatory.

Rastell.
Now to the last point where Purgatory should be, he answers as you shall
hear. Frith.
First yt it is a foolish question (for he can not answer unto it by his
Philosophy.) Rastell can not tell where purgatory is, whether on the earth or
else where.
And then he says that no man can tell, neither the place neither yet the manner
of the pain. Here makes he. S. Thomas yea and all our Scholemen fools by
craft: partly because they take upon them to answer unto this question which
he calls foolish, and partly because they fully determine that the place of
Purgatory is the third place in hell, and all to assign fire to be the manner
of yt pain. Rastell proves all the scholemen to be double fools.
And again in this last part he proves the^ double fools. Once because they
stoutly affirm that thing which no man can tell (as Rastel says) And again
because they restrain God of his liberty that assign any place and make him
oflesse authority then an inferior judge: which has no place assigned him,
but may do execution and punish the guilty in what place he will. I wonder
that our Scholemen may abide this fellow.

Rastell.
And then he says that Purgatory is in a place limitatiue. And where soever God
does limitte the soul to be purged there is the limitatiue place of that
soul and there is the Purgatory of that soul. Purgatory is not in one place
only but in many and diverse plates.
So yt a man may gather by Rastell that the souls be not limited to one place
to be purged and punished. And thereto agrees also his similitude of the judge
which assigns one to be punished in one place, and an other in an other
place, even at his pleasure. If such gear had come from beyond the Sea it
should soon have been condemned although it had not been half so grievous
against our Scholemen. But let this pass as it is well worthy, and let us see
and examine more of this newfangled Philosophy.

NOw are we come unto the sixte Rastels vi. argument.
argument which begins in the. xij. chapter the effect is this.

Repentance is the full payment and satisfaction of sin and brings
remission, therefore as soon as repentance is taken, God of his justice must
give remission, and so there ought to be no Purgatory.

This argument is nothing worth, Frith.
for the first part as we have often proved is false. For if repentance were
the full payment and very satisfaction for sin, then dyed Christ in vain.
Notwithstanding if he grant this first part to be true, neither he nor all
his fellows shall be able to solute this argument while they live. But because
we will be short, let us pass over to his answer which is in the. xiij.
chapter.

In solutyng this argument he Rastell.
groundeth him on two lies at once, the first is that God never gives
remission except he see in us a convenient cause counterpaysyng his justice.

Frith.
What cause found he in the man that was brought unto him sick of the palsy,
to whom he said: There can be no cause in us that may deserve the forgeuenes
of sin. Luke. 23.
be of good comfort (son) thy sins are forgiven thee? Math. ix. Mark. ij.
Luke. v. what cause found he in the thief that was crucified with him, but
that he had been an vnthryft all his life long? And yet even the same day that
he suffered with Christ was he partaker of joy with him in Paradise. Luke.
xxiij. Where was Purgatory then where was the punishment that he should have
suffered for his enormities? If any man should suffer in Purgatory, it is like
that this thief should have done it. There is no Purgatory,
But he went from death to life, and never came in Purgatory, wherefore I may
conclude that no man shall come there, if there were any. What cause I pray you
does Paul assign as touching our rede^ptio^ and remission of our sin?
forsooth no other but yt we were wretched sinners and the very enemies of God.
Roma. v. Roma. 5. God of his mere mercy
For says Paul, if when we were his enemies, we were reconciled unto God
through the death of his son, much more now we are reconciled, reconciled us
when we were his enemies.
shall we besaued by his life. So that in us is no manner cause of remission but
only misery and sin.

But the whole cause of the remission of our sins and of our salvation, 25.
is the blood of Christ which has fully counterpaysed the justice of God The
shedyng of Christ's blood is our salvation.
the father, and has pacified his wrath toward us that believe. He is the
very Purgatory for all faithful which has already purged our sins and
sits on the right hand of the father. Hebr. i. The second lie is this, he
says Heb. 1. Rastell.
that God of his justice must give to every thing his own, which own is the
thing that it deserves to have. If this were true then should Frith.
not one of us enter the inheritance of heaven, for we have every one of us
deserved death and damnation. For as Paul says Roma. iij. we have Roma. 3.
all sinned and want the glory which before God is allowed. But we are freely
justified through his grace by yt faith that is in Christ Jesus. If it be freely
through his grace, then is it not by our own deseruyng, for the^ grace were no
grace. And contrariwise if it be by our own deserving, the^ is it not of grace,
for then deseruyng were no deseruyng. Roma. xj. But the truth is Romans 11.
this: that God of his mercy had promised unto our forefathers his dear son
Christ that he should deliver them from all their iniquities and that all the
nations of the world should be blessed in him Gene. xij. This seed he Gene. 12.
promised of his mercy and favor, who^ also he sent in the time that he had
ordained Gala. iiij. not for our own deservings, Gallat. 4.
but for his truths sake and to fulfill that he had promised. This God for his
truths sake is merciful unto us. 1. Cor. 1.
Christ is become our righteousness. i. Cor. i. so yt the justice of God is not
to give us y^ we our selves have deserved (as Rastell lies) but to cloth us
with an other man's justice (that is Christ's) and to give us y^ which Christ
has deserved for us. And this justice of God through the faith of Jesus comes
unto all and upon all them that believe. Roma. iij. Now mark a mystery. Roma.
3. and 26.


Christ humbled him self and was made obedient unto the death: even to the
death of yt cross. Phil. ij. This Phil. 2.
obedience and death was not for himself but for us, for he alone suffered and
dyed for us all. Cor. v. Now since 2. Cor. 5.
he was obedient unto the death for us, that is even as good as though we our
selves had been obedient every man for him self unto the death. And Christ
only submitted himself to death for our sins.
since he dyed for us, that is eue^ as good as though we had dyed our selves for
our own sins. What will thou have more of a man then that he be obedient
unto God the father even unto death, yea and dye for his sins, will thou yet
thrust him into Purgatory.

On these two lies brings he in an answer which is so confused, intricate
and long that it were not only foolishnes to solute it, but also much lost
labor and cost to rehearse it, wherefore I let it pass, for every child shall
Rastels ignorauncy.
easily solute it since his foundation and first stone is taken from him. But
yet one thing is necessary to be touched. He goes about to prove his purpose
with an ensample on this manner.

If I do beat thy servant or apprentisse Rastell.
and do mayme him, where by thou do loose his service: and A foolish example
set forth by Rastell.
also that this servant during his life is not able to get his living. If so
be that thou do forgive me the offense done unto thee in that thou have lost
his service: yet am I bound to make an other satisfaction unto thy servant for
the hurt I have done him, which is the cause of the hynderaunce of his living.
And in like manner if I have offended God and my neighbor, Albeit God for give
me his deal, yet can he not of justice forgive me my neighbors deal to, but
yet must I make satisfaction unto my neighbor. Now in case I would and be not
able to fatisfie my neighbor, and There is no way to pacify the wrath of God
against our sins, but faith in Christ.
yet he forgive me not, then must I suffer in the pains of Purgatory for it:
and those pains shall stand my neighbor in profit for part of his Purgatory
if he come there or else to the increase of his joy if he go to heaven: this is
yt su^me but he speaks it in many mo words. Now because he has touched the
matter of satisfaction I will show you my mind therein.

There are two manner of satisfactions. Frith.
The one is to God: the other to my neighbor. To God can not all the world
make satisfaction for one crime. In so much that if every grass of the ground
were a man, even as holy as ever was Paul or Peter and should pray unto God all
their lives long for one crime, yet could they not make satisfaction for it.
But it is only the blood of Christ that has made full satisfaction unto God
for all such crimes. Heb. vij. or else were there no Hebr. 7.
remedy but we should all perish: as I have proved before. And he that seeks
any other satisfaction toward God then Christ our Savior, he does wrong
unto his precious blood.

There is an other satisfaction which is unto my neighbor whom I have
offended. As if I have taken any ma^s good from him. For then am I bound to
pacify him either by restoring it again or else by other means as we two can
agree. If I have diffamed him, then am I bound to pacify him, and to restore
him unto his good fame again, and so forth. But if I be not able to satisfy
him, the^ must I knowledge my self guilty and desire him to forgive me and
then is he bound to forgive me, or else shall he never enter into heaven. For
God has taught us to pray. Math. vj. that he should forgive Math. 6.
us, as we forgive them that trespass against us, so if that we forgive not
one an other then will not God forgive us. To this well agrees the parable.
Math. xviij. The kingdom Math. 18.
of heaven is likened unto a certain king which would take accomptes of his
servants. And when he had begone There are two manner of satisfactions one to
God and the other to our neighbor.
to reckon, one was brought to him, which ought him ten thousand talentes: but
when he had naught to pay, the Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and
his children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The servant fell
down and besought him saying: Sir give me respite, and I will pay it every
whit. Then had the Lord pity on the servant and losed him and forgave him yt
debt. The same servant went out and found one of his fellows, which ought him
an. C. pence. And laid hands on him and took him by the throat, saying: pay
that thou owe. And his fellow fell down and besought him saying: have
patience with me and I will pay thee all: and he would not, but went and cast
him into prison till he should pay the debt. When his other fellows saw what
was done they were very sorry and came and told unto their Lord all that
happened. Then the Lord called him and said unto him. Devil servant I forgave
thee all the debt, because y^ praydest me: was it not meet also yt thou
should have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? And
his Lord was wroth and delivered him to the gaylers, till he should pay all
that was due to him. So likewise shall your heavenly father do unto you if you
will not forgive with your hearts, each one to his brother their trespasses. Here
may thou see that if you forgive hartly the small debt or offense y^ thy
neighbor Except we be ready to forgive the^ that offend us God will not
forgive us.
has done against thee, then will thy heavenly father forgive thee, yt whole
and great debt that thou owe him, for the which thou art well worthy to be
damned. And so is it more profitable for thee to forgive it then that thy
neighbor should broyle in Purgatory for it, as Rastell fayneth. And
contrariwise if thou forgive him not, the^ shall not God forgive thee thy great
debt, but thou shall surely be damned, and so shall not thy neighbors
Purgatory profit thee (be it in case there were one and that he should go
thither) but it is rather the cause of thy damnation: but this can not Rastell
see.

NOw be we come unto the seventh reason which is in the. xiiij. chap. The
argument is this. God is the very owner of all, and thy neighbor Rastelles
seven argument.
has no property, but as a servant to God, as but to make account to God.
Therefore when thou do an offense to God and to thy neighbor, when God
forgeueth it thou nedest no other satisfaction unto thy neighbor. And to
stablish his reason he brings in a stmilitude, which is nothing to ye
purpose. The similitude is this. I put case thou have a servant whom thou
put in trust to occupy for thee, to make bargaynes change and sell to thy
use, to take bonds and again to make acquitaunces and releases in his own
name. If this servant sell part This similitude is not proper between God and
man, as it is between man and man.
of thy ware and take an obligation for the payment of xx. pound, if thou
afterward knowing of this, either for love or some other cause wilt make unto
the said debtour a clear release: I suppose no man will deny but that this
debtour is fully discharged of this. xx. pound, and is not bound by any
justice to make any satisfaction either unto thy servant or to any other man.
For thou art the very owner thereof, and thy servant had but the occupation as
to give the accoumptes thereof.

This similitude can not well be applied Frith.
unto God and man. For albeit it is true that all our substance pertains
unto God as it is written. Agge. ij. Gold is mine and silver is mine: Agge. 2.
yet has not God given it us to occupy it for his profit and use (as the
servant does for his master) but only that we should use his gifts for ye
profit of our neighbor and to ye use of the congregation. i. Cor. xij. And
where (...). Cor. 12.
as he induces that when God forgeueth us which is the principal part, yt
thou need no other satisfaction to ^hy neighbor. I answer that God God
forgeueth no man that offends his neighbor, except he first reconcile him
self to his neighbor.
forgeueth no man which had offended his neighbor, unless that he make
satisfaction unto his neighbor, if he be able but if he be not able, yet is he
bound to knowledge his fault unto his neighbor and then is his neighbor
bound under the pain of damnation to forgive him, so that God never forgeueth
until thy neighbor be pacified in case the crime extend unto thy neighbor.
This soluteth ^oth the reason and also improueth the similitude. Now let us
declare his solution.

God of him self has two powers: Rastell.
One is an absolute power, and Rastel^ solution to his seven argument.
an other is an ordinary power. The absolute power is the authority that God
has over all thing in the world, by that he may give to every creature what
pleases him, and also forgive every offense done by any creature at his
pleasure without any cause. And by this may he forgive both the crime done
toward him self, and also toward my neighbor. But by his ordinary power
he does every thing by order of justice and equity. And by this can he not
forgive the offense done to him and my neighbor without satisfaction. Frith.


Now would I feign wete, whether Rastel imagine ye God by his absolute power
may save ye unfaithful and da^ne the faithful. If he say nay, then may I
conclude ye Rastels diffinition is false where he says: that god by his
absolute power may give to every creature what pleases him, and also forgive
every offense done by any creature at his pleasure without A perfect definition
of Gods absolute power.
any cause. If he say yea, the^ must I conclude that God has power to do
contrary to his Scripture, for the Scripture says: that he that believes and
is Baptized shall be saved, but ^e that believes not shall be condemned. Mark. ^6.
Mark. xvi. Now if he grant me that he has power to do against his scripture,
(^^th his Scripture is the truth and his own word,) then must it needs follow
ye he has power to do against his truth: and consequently he has power God
ca^ not be against him self.
to be false, and so to sin. And since ^^th he has power against his own
word, and that word is his son, the^ must we grant him power against his
son, even to make him a liar where he says in the foresaid text Mark. xvi.
And since his son is God, then has God power to do against God and so can
not his kingdom endure. Math. 1^.
Math. xij.

Furthermore, if I might be bold with Rastel, I would ask him this question,
whether God have not an absolute justice as well as an absolute power? Whether
God have an absolute justice?
If God have also an absolute iustiee? then can not his absolute power prevail
until his absolute justice be fully counterpesed. And so is it false that
Rastell begins withal, that God by his absolute power may forgive every
offense at his pleasure without any cause. For (as I said) his absolute justice
must needs be satisfied and fully counterpesed. If Rastell dare say that God
has an absolute power and no absolute justice, then takes he his pleasure in
deed. For if he make one Nocionall in God greater then an other (by this word
Nocionall which ye Scholemen use, I would you should There is no one power in
God greater then an other.
understand the goodness, wisdom, power, justice and mercy of God etc.) then
shall he make a dissentio^ in God and imagine that one Nocionall subdueth an
other: yea and besides that, since each one of these Nocionals is very God (for
the power of God is nothing but God him self, and the justice of God is
nothing but God him self, and so forth of all the other) then if his power
were greater then his justice, it should follow ye God were greater the^ God, and
consequently we should have a great God and a little God and more Gods then one,
such revel makes Rastel with his Turk. But the Christen believe that one
power of God is no greater then an other and that his power is not above his
justice, neither his justice above his mercy etc. And so may you see that
Rastels Rastels imagination of Gods absolute power is childish.
imagination of Gods absolute power is but very childish and unsavory. For he
has no power against his Scripture and him self. Thus finish his seven
reasons with their solutions.

But yet that his work should long endure all tempests and storms, he adds
a batelment and weather stone to avoid and shote of the rain, for fear it
should soke in and make his buildyng decay. And there with concludes his book.

To believe (says he) that there The conclusion of Rastels book.
were no Purgatory to purge and punish our sins after we be departed, should
put away that dread of God from the most part of the people and give them
boldness to commit offenses and sins. And again, if the people should believe
that they never need to make any satisfaction nor restitution to their
neighbors for the wrongs done unto them, they should never force nor care
what injuries, extortions, theftes, robberies and murders they did. Finally if
they believed that such a light repentance should be sufficient without any
other satisfaction to be made, it should be an occasion to destroy all virtue
and increase vice and sin to the utter destruction of the common wealth and
quiet living of the people. And thus much he makes an end.

As to the first where he says that Frith.
it would put away the dread of God and give boldness to sin, if we thought
there were no Purgatory, we see and may evidently perceive the contrary all day
both in young and old of them that believe there is a Purgatory. The young say I
will The fear of Purgatory cannot keep us from sin but rather y^ fear^ of
hell and everlasting damnation.
take my pleasure while I may, and if I may have but one hours respite to cry
God mercy, I care not, for then shall I go but to Purgatory and so shall I be
sure to be saved. The old say: I will keep my goods as long as I may for I
wot not what need I shall have. But when I dye I will cry God mercy, and then
shall I go but to Purgatory, and mine executours that have my goods shall
redeem me thence well enough. And so to believe Purgatory, is rather an occasion
of rechlesse, boldness, then of the fear of God. Besides that if they knew y^
there were no Purgatory, then should many the more fear God and do well them
selves and not trust to their executours for fear of damnation, howbeit as I
have said before they that fear not God but for pain whether it be of hell or
Purgatory are yet under condemnation and not in Gods favor. Such as fear not
God but for Purgatory and helles sake shall never come in heaven.
And this dare I boldly affirm, that they which fear not God but for
Purgatoryes sake shall never come in it no nor yet in heaven. And therefore it
is but folly to imagine Purgatory for that intent.

As concerning the second point. If the people believe that they neded not to
make satisfaction to their neighbors for their trespasses etc. I have
sufficiently au^swered before, that we must make satisfaction unto our
neighbors, if we be able or else will God never forgive us. And if we be not
able, yet must we knowledge our offense and then is our neighbor bound to
forgive us under the pain of damnation. And so can this prove no Purgatory.

Now as touching the third, that if they believed that such a light repentance
were sufficient without any other satisfaction, it should be an occasion of
vice and subversion of the common wealth: I answer, All the penance and
repentance in ye world without faith in Christ's blood can not save us.
as I have done before almost in every argument: since thou art ignorant of
Christ's death and his satisfaction unto the father for us, that all the
repentance which we can take is not sufficient to counterpese one crime, but
that if Christ were not we should all be damned. Here will I leave Rastell and
his Turk Gingemin with all their natural Philosophy (which is now proved
foolishnes) for hitherto has he proved no Purgatory, neither has he one good
reason nor yet to that baren reasons one good solution, as we have sufficiently
declared. But let us hear somewhat more of Gods word: and see how Purgatory
stands with that.

Paul says, we must all be brought 27.
before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive according to
the works of his body, whether it be good or bad. 2. Cor. 5. If this 2. Cor. 5.
be true, then can there be no Purgatory which shall profit him after he is
dissolved from his body, for then should he not receive according to ye works
of his body. But rather according to the pains that he suffered in Purgatory.
Now if this text be true then must it follow that all thine executours dealyng,
and offering of Mass pence. etc. help thee not a myte. And by this text it is
not possible that there should be a Purgatory.

Upon this text would I feign dispute a point of Sophistry, which I would
gladly have dissolved of them that think the^ selves learned in Philosophy. My
Sophisme is, ye ij. contradictories Contradictories.
may stand together and be both true. Which I am sure no Sophister dare
grant, for it has in times past ben condemned in Oxford for an heresy. The
co^tradictories are these. Every man shall receive according to the works of
his body. And some man shall not receive according to the works of his body,
that these two co^tradictories be both true I will prove. The first proposition
is Paul's. 2. How two contradictories may be both true.
Cor. 5. which no man will deny to be true. And the second may easily be proved
true, which is, that some man shall not receive according to the works of his
body. For be it in case y^ there depart a man out of this world, which is not
clean purged by faith and the word of God, neither are his rebellious members
subdued through death (as they imagine) but that the spots and remnauntes of
sin remain in him, for the which he is worthy to lie in the pains of
Purgatory for the space of six year. This granted, which I am sure they
will not deny, then also put I the case that this man lyeng in Purgatory by the
space of a month, have a friend which offers for him a penny unto S. Dominikes
box (which has such power that as soon as the tinging is hard in ye box, so
soon the soul is free in heaven) or that a friend of his bye a Pardon for him
which may absolve him a poena and a culpa for all comes to one effect. This
man delivered on that manner does not receive according to the works of his
body for by the works of his body he should yet lie in Purgatory more the^
five years? And that does he not, but is by and by delivered from Purgatory.
Ergo, I may conclude that some man receaueth not according to the works of his
body, and so are two contradictories true or else there can be no such
deliverance out of Purgatory, which destroys all Pardons, Massepence and
Suffragies for the dead. This would I have soluted. How beit I will not
adnumber it for an argument because the unlearned people (to whom I write this
book) can not well perceive it. But this Sophisme have I written to stop the
chatteryng mouths of the Sophisters and to cast them a bone to gnaw upon.

Paul says, you which were in 28.
times past strangers and enemies because your minds were set in evil works
has he now reconciled in the body of his flesh thorough death to make you
holy and such as no man can complain on, and without ^aulte in his own sight
if ye continue grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moved away from
the hope of the Gospel. Collos. i. Here Paul affirms We are reconciled to
god by ye death of Christ, and therefore need not to book for any other
Purgatory
that you are reconciled through his death, so that ye are made holy and
without fault in his sight (I have expounded what it is to be without fault
in his ^ixt argument) look ye yet for an other Purgatory? are ye so childish
and insensible no imagine that ye must yet go through Purgatory, ^ith ye are
already without fault in his ^ight? This a plain ^ase, God of his The
^th(...)(...) Purgatory although there were one.
righteousness will not punish a man for nothing: but all that are grounded and
stablished in the faith are in his ^ight without fault (for their sins are
not imputed unto them but forgeuen through Christ's blood (wherefore of
necessity I must conclude that no faithful shall ever come there.

Every man that departs this 29.
world is either faithful or unfaithful if he be faithful then comes he not
there, as ye foresaid argument proves. And if he be unfaithful the^ comes
he never in Purgatory, but is all ready damned. John. iij. Mark the last.
John. 3.
Now if neither ^aythfull nor unfaithful ^e ^o^ to say there is a Purgatory.
enter into it, then should it be in vain: but there is nothing made in vain
wherefore I must conclude that there is no such Purgatory.

Paul says he that spared not his 30.
own son but delivered him for us all, how shall he not with him give us all
things also? who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Roma. viij.
Forsooth Lord God our Roma. 8.
prelates lay so sore unto their charge, that they would have them broyle in
Purgatory. But Lord be our protector for it is thou that iustifiest us, and W^
d^ that God (...). (...).
have freely given us all thing with him. Roma. viij.

Paul says the law of the spirit, wherein is life through Christ Jesus has
delivered me from the law of sin and death. Roma. viij. Seeing R^
we be so delivered what n^de us seek an other deliverance specially ^ith they
make it so paynefull? S^yng, we are on ye manner delivered, how ^hau^ceth it
that we are taken prisoners again under sin, that we must be purged a fresh
by the fire of Purgatory? I pray God give us grace that Christ has purged ou^
sins.
we may be purged from this our blind ignorance thorough his spirit of
knowledge, that we may perceive how it is Jesus Christ that purges our sins,
and has delivered us thorough his bloudshedyng. So should we give him the
praise which has deserved it. And not be so unkind unto him as we now be.

Paul says ye there is no conde^natio^ to them which are in Christ Jesus.
Roma. 8. But if we continue firm and Roma. 8.
stable in Christ unto the end the^ shall we be saved. Math. 24. what needs
Math. 24.
the^ purgatory yea and what should purgatory There is no Purgatory.
do? Is not Christ sufficient? the^ is our faith in vain. And if he be
sufficient, the^ is Purgatory in vain.

Paul says if you be justified by 33.
the law then is Christ dead in vain. Now if the law being good just and
holy. Roma. vij. And even of Gods Roma. (...)
own making ca^ not justify us, think thou to be justified by fryenge in
Purgatory?

They that are the chief patrones 34.
and proctours of Purgatory, do feign it for no other intent, but to purgeeuill
works, and to be as a penance to supply the good works which we lacked
being in this world. But all this can not bring us into heaven. For then were
Christ dead in vain. And of this have we evident examples. Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, David and all Purgatory is a vain imagination.
holy Prophets were excluded from heaven until Christ had suffered death,
this all men testify. But if good works or penance could have brought them
to heaven they should not have tarried out of it so long. Therefore I may
conclude that it is but vanity to imagine a Purgatory for to purge evil
works and supply good. For as I have showed, that help not the Patriarchs.

Peradventure thou will say unto Objections
me, shall I then do no good works? I answer yes. Thou will ask me Good
works.
wherefore? I answer, thou must do them because God has commanded them. Thou will say, for what intent has he commanded them? I answer, because thou art
living in this we must do good works because God has so commanded us.
world, and must needs have conversation with men, therefore has God appointed
^hee what thou shall do to the profit of thy neighbor and tamyng of thy
flesh. As Paul testifies. Ephesians. 2. we are his work made in Ephe. 2.
Christ Jesus to good works, which works God has prepared that we should
walk in them. These works God would have us do that the unfaithful might
see the godly and virtuous conversation of his faithful and thereby be
compelled to glorify our father which is in heaven. Math. v. Math. 5.
And so are they both profitable for thy neighbor and also a testimony unto
thee by the which me^ may know that thou art the right son of thy heavenly
father and a very Christ unto thy neighbor: and even as our heavenly father
gave his Christ unto us not for any profit that he should have there by, but
only for our profit, likewise y^ should do all thy good works not having
respect what commodities thou shall have of it, but ever attendyng through
charity, the wealth and profit of thy neighbor. Thou will yet object, then
see I no great profit that I shall have by them: I answer, An answer to an
other objection.
what would y^ have? First Christ is given thee freely and with him have
thou all things. He is thy wisdom, righteousness, halowyng and redemption. i.
Cor. i. by him art thou made 1. Cor. 1.
inheritour of God, and felowheyre with Christ. Roma. viij. This is freely
Roma. 8.
given thee with Christ before thou wast borne thorough the favor and election
of God which election was done before the foundations of the world were cast.
Ephesians. i. Now were Ephe. (...).
thou very fond and unkind if thou thoughtest to purchase by thy works the
thing which is already given thee. Therefore must thou do thy works We must
work with a single eye.
with a single eye, having neither respect unto the joys of heaven, neither
yet to the pains of hell, but only do them for the profit of thy neighbor
as God commands thee, and let him a lone with the residue.

To this well agrees Paul. Ephe. 35. Ephe. 2.
2. saying: by grace are ye made safe through faith and that comes not of
your selves, but it is yt gift of God and comes not of works lest any man
should boast him self. Lo here says Our salvation is yt gift of God, and
comes not by works.
Paul plainly that our salvation is the gift of God and comes not of works,
if it come not of works then are we worse then mad to feign a Purgatory. For
the chiefest operation of that should be but to supply the works which we
have not accomplished being in this body.

Paul says Roma. xi. The remnaunt 36. Roma. 11.
which are left at this time, are through the election of grace. If it be
through grace the^ is it not by works, for then grace were no grace. Or if it
be for the works sake so is it not of favor and grace, according to that
which he wrote before. Roma. iiij. If Romans 4.
Abraham (says Paul) were justified by his works, then may he rejoice but not
before God. But what says the Faith in Christ is our righteousness.
Scripture? Abraham believed God and that was imputed unto him for righteousness,
for he that works receaueth his reward not of favor but of duty. Now if it
be duty, then needs he not to thank God, but rather him self for the^ God
gives him nothing but that which is his own of duty. Where is then the
praise and glory that we owe to God? Therefore it follows Faith is imputed for
righteousness.
in the same text: unto him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the wicked, is his faith imputed for righteousness. Now if our
salvation come of faith and not through our works and deserts, then is
Purgatory shut out of door and quite vanishes away.

Christ says. So has God loved 37.
the world that he would give his only son that all which believe in him
should not perish: but that they should have everlasting life. John. iij.
John. 3.
The^ what needs Purgatory? Thou will peradventure say, it is true they
Purgatory is nedelesse.
shall have everlasting life but they must first go through Purgatory. I
answer nay verily. But Christ affirms and that with an oath, that he which
hears his word and believes his father which sent him, has everlasting life.
Yea and that he is gone already from death unto life. John. v. John. 5.
will thou now say that he shall into Purgatory? forsooth if that were true,
and the fire also so hot as our Prelates affirm, then went he not from I
forged and famed Purgatory.
death unto life, but rather from a small death unto a greater death.

The Prophet says: precious is in 38.
the sight of the Lord the death of his Saints. Psalm. C. xvi. And S. John.
Psalm. 116.
says, blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord. Apocal. 14. but surely if
Apoca. 14.
they should go into the paynefull Purgatory, there to be tormented of
fendes, the^ were they not blessed, but rather wretched.

God says by Moses Exodus 33. I 39. Exodus 33.
will show mercy to whom I show mercy and will have compassion on whom I have
compassion. Now if our salvation be of mercy and compassion, then ca^ there be
no such Purgatory. For yt nature of mercy is to forgive, Mercy and Purgatory
cannot agree.
but Purgatory will have all paid and satisfied so that they twain be
desperate and can in no wise agree. And look how many textes in Scripture
commend Gods mercy, even so many deny this paynefull Purgatory.

The Prophet says, he has not 40.
dealt with us after our sins neither has rewarded us according to our
iniquities, but look how high heavens are above the earth, eue^ so high God is
merciful and forgeueth us our sins.
has he made his mercy to prevail over them that worship him. And look how
far the East is from the Weast, even so far has he set our sins from us.
Psalm. Citj. And before Psalm. 103.
in the same Psalm ye Prophet exhorts his soul to praise the Lord, saying.
Praise the Lord (O my soul) which forgeueth thee all thine iniquities and
heals all thy diseases. Now if this be true that he orders us not according
to our sins, but powers his mercy so plenteously upon us, if also he
forgive us all our iniquities, why should there be any such Purgatory to purge
and torment the sely souls, and specially since all was for given them before?

Will thou not call him a shrewed 41.
creditour which after he has freely forgiven his debtour, will yet cast him
in prison for the same debt? I think every man would say on this manner* God
has forgiven us our sins and therefore will not punish us in Purgatory.
It was in his own pleasure whether he would forgive it or not and then of
favor and compassion he forgave it. But now he has forgeuen it he does
unrighteously to punish his debtour for it. And albeit man repent his
forgeuyng and afterward sue for his debt, yet God can never repent him self of
his mercyable gifts. Roma. xi. Romans 11.
And therefore will he never torment us for our trespasses no nor yet once
remember them Ezech. xviij. Heb. x. Ezech. 18.


Since God forgeueth the greater offenses why shall he not also forgive 42.
yt less? He forgave freely much greater offenses unto the Publicane which
knowleged him self to be a sinner. Luke. xviij. then those be for which
Luke. 18.
men feign that we must be tormented in Purgatory. For there is no soul (as
they grant them selves) that suffers in purgatory for great crimes and mortal
sins. But only for little pretty pecca dulia^s (if a man may be bold to use
M. Mores word) and for venial sins. Dis. xxv. Cap. qualis. He forgave much
greater enormities unto the thief, to whom he said this day shall thou be
with me, not in Purgatory, but in Paradise. Luke. 23. He Luke. 23.
forgave much greater to Marie Magdalene. Luke. vij. Is his hand now Luke. 7.
shortened? Is not his power as great as it was? Is he not as merciful as ever
he was? why leave we yt cisterne The thief went not to Purgatory but to
Paradise.
of living water, and dig us pittes of our own which can hold no pure water?
Iere. ^j. why forsake we Christ which has wholly purged us and seek an other
Purgatory of our own imagination? If thou believe that Christ's blood is
sufficient to purge thy sin, why sekest thou an other purgatory?

S. Paul says: I desire to be losed 43.
from this body and to be with Christ Phil. i. Phil. 1.
Verily if he had thought to have gone thorough Purgatory he would not have
been so hasty. For there should he have had an hot broth and an hartlesse,
and so might he rather have desired long to have lived. S. Paul knew of no
Purgatory.
And therefore I suppose that he knew nothing of Purgatory but that he rather
thought (as ye truth is) that death should finish all his evils and so rows
and give him rest in losing him from his rebbellious members which were sold
and captive under sin.

How a Christen man should desire death
All Christian me^ should desire death as Paul does. Phil. 1. not because of
their cross and trouble which they suffer in this present world for then
they sought the^ selves and their own profit and not the glory of God. But if
we will well desire death, we must first consider how sore sin displeases
God our father, and then our own nature and frailty and our members so bound
under sin that we ca^ not do nor yet think a good thought of our selves. 2.
Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 3.
Then shall we find occasion to lament our life, not for the troubles that we
suffer in it, Because daily we offend God, therefore we should pray to be
dissolved as Paul did.
but because we be so prone unto sin and so continually displease God our
father. What desires he that would long live, but daily to heap sin upon
sin? And therefore should we have a will to dye because yt in death our sin
is finished, and the^ shall we no more displease God our father. Now if we
should feign a Purgatory, it were not possible to imagine a greater obstacle to
make us fear and fly from death. For since every man must knowledge him self a
sinner. 1. John. 1. 1. John. 1.
And not believe that Christ's death were sufficient, but that he must also go
to Purgatory: who should depart this world with a quiet mind?

45.
The wiseman says: The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God. They
seemed to dye in the eyes of the foolish and their end was thought to be pain
and affliction, but they are in peace. Sapi. 3. Sapien. 3.
There is no man but he must needs grant me that every faithful is righteous
in the sight of God as it is written Abac. ij. Abacuc. 2.
the righteous man lives by his faith. And Roma. v. Roma. 5.
because we are justified by faith we are at peace with God thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ etc. It is mere foolishnes to think there is a Purgatory
When these faithful or righteous depart, the^ says this text that they are
fools which think them to be in pain or affliction: for it affirms that
they are in peace. Now since their Purgatory which they imagine is pain and
affliction, and yet feign that the righteous only shall enter into it after
their death, then are they fools that suppose there is a Purgatory, or else
this text can not be true.

46.
For what intent will God have us tormented in Purgatory, to make satisfaction
for our sins? verily the^ is Christ dead in vain as we have often proved
before. But think you not rather that our purgation should be to increase our
faith, or grace, or charity (for these three cover the multitude of sins) no
verily we can not feign a purgatory for any such cause. For faith springs by
hearing of the word. Roma. x. Romans 10.
But the Pope sends the^ no preachers thither, The Pope sends no preachers
into Purgatory.
Ergo, their faith can not there be increased. And again, pain ingendreth and
kyndleth hate against God and not love or charity. M. More and my Lord of
Rochester can not agree.
Furthermore My Lord of Rochester is compelled to grant that the souls in
Purgatory obtain there neither more faith nor grace nor charity then they
brought in with them, and so can I see no reasonable cause why there should be
a purgatory. Nevertheless M. More says that both their grace and charity is
increased. And so may you perceive that lies can never agree how wyttie so ever
they be that feign and cloak them. For in some points they shall be found
contrary so that at the length they may be disclosed.

47.
when thou have no power to accomplish the outward fact. For the wiseman says
Prou. xxiij. son give me Prou. 23.
God is fully pacified with thy will thy heart. Now if thy will be upright and so
that thou have a desire to fulfill the law, then does God reken that will unto
thee for the full fact. If then through the frayltie of thy members thou fall
into sin, thou may well say with the Apostle Roma. v^j. The Roma. 7.
good that I would do, that do I not: that is, I have a will and desire to
fulfill the law of God, and not to displease my heavenly father, yet that I do
not. But the evil which I hate, that do I, that is I do commit sin which
in deed I hate. Now if I hate the sin which I do, then love I the law of
God which forbids sin, and do consent unto this law that it is good
righteous and holy. And so the sin which I hate and yet commit it thorough
the frayltie of my members, is not imputed or rekened unto me for sin.
Neither will S. Paul grant that it is I which do that sin: but he said: I
have a will to do good: but I can not perform that will. For I do not that
good which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I. Now if I do
that thing which I would not do, then is it not I that do it but the sin
that dwells with in me. I delight in the law of God with mine inward man
(that is with my will and mind which is renewed with the spirit of God) but I
see an other law in my members which rebelleth against the law of my mind and
makes me bond unto the law of sin which is in my members. So that I we have
a will and mind to obey the law of God, but our sinful flesh will not consent
thereunto.
my self in my will and mind do obey the law of God (hatyng sin as the law
commands me and not consentyng unto it in my mind and will) but in my flesh
and members I serve the law of sin, for the frayltie of my members compels
me to sin. Romans 7.

As by example if I see a poor man Example.
which is not of ability to do me any pleasure, and nevertheless does all his
diligence to seek my favor and would with heart and mind give me some
acceptable present if he were of power being also sorry that he can not
perform his will and mind toward me. Now if there be any point of humanity
or gentleness in me, I will count this man for my friend, and accept his good
will as well, as though he had in deed performed his will. For his ability
extends no further. If his power were better, better should I have. Even so
since we are not of God accepts our good will if we do that in us is to obey
his commandments.
power and ability to perform the law of God, and yet bear a good heart
toward God and his law, lamentyng our imbecillitie that we can do him no
further pleasure: then will God recount us not as his enemies, but as his dear
children and beloved friends. Neither will he afterward thrust us into
Purgatory, but as a tender father pardon us our trespasses, and accept our good
will for the full deed.

S. Paul exhorts us Gal. vj. that 48. Gallat. 6.
we work well while we have time, for what soever a man does sow that shall he
reepe, by this may we evidently perceive that he shall not receive according
to his doing or sufferyng in Purgatory is nedelesse.
an other world, and therefore ca^ there be no Purgatory.

The wiseman says Eccle. xiiij. 49. Eccle. 14.
work righteousness before thy death for after this life there is no meet,
that is to say succor to be found. There are some which will understand this
place and also the text in the xlviij. argument on this manner that there should
be no place of deseruyng, but yet there may well be a place of punishment. But
this solution besides Some imagine Purgatory to be a place of satisfaction.
that it is not grounded on Scripture, is very slender. For I pray you wherefore
should their invention of Purgatory serve but to be a place of purging,
punishment, and penance, by the which the soul should make satisfaction, that
it might so deserve to enter into the rest of heaven?

Blessed are the dead which dye in 50,
the Lord from hence forward, yea truly says the spirit, that they may rest
from their labors. But their works follow with them. This text they use Apoca.
14,
in their soul masses as though it made for Purgatory. But surely me thinks
that it makes much against them. For let us enquire of all the proctours and
fautours of Purgatory, whether y^ souls that must be prayed The dead that dye
in the Lord are blessed, and therefore are not in Purgatory.
for, are departed in the Lord or not? And they must needs answer that they
are departed in the Lord, for the unfaithful which dye not in the Lord must
not be prayed for. And therefore must they be upright Christen souls which are
tormented, for the other are all damned. Now says the text that all such dead
as dye in the Lord are blessed: but what blessedness were that to broyle in
Purgatory? And if they would here feign a gloss (as their manner is) when they
are in a strait ever to seek a startyng hole and say that they are blessed
because they are in a good hope, although they have not yet the rest, but must
suffer before in Purgatory: that evasion will not this text suffer, for the
text says that they rest and are in peace as Esayas also says in the. lvij.
that the righteous Esaias. 57.
(and every faithful man is righteous in the sight of God as we have often
proved before) when he departs rests in peace as in a bed. And Sapie^. iij.
it is said that the righteous Sapien. 3.
souls are in peace: and so is it not possible that there should be such a
paynefull Purgatory.

Thus have we confuted Rastell: both his arguments and also solutions, for all
that he writes is false and against Scripture. Furthermore, we have brought
in, to prove that there ca^ be no such Purgatory l. arguments all grounded on
Scripture. And if need were a man might make a thousand of which our Clergy
should not be able to avoid one?

Here I think some me^ will wonder The co^clusio^ of John Frith against
Rastels book.
that I have the Scripture so full on my side because that there are certain
me^, as my Lord of Rochester and Sir Thomas More, which by Scripture go about
to prove Purgatory: and this is sure that Scripture is not contrary unto it
self. Therefore it is necessary that we examine the textes which they bring in
for their purpose, in markyng the process both what goes before and what
comes after. And then shall we easily perceive the truth, and how these ij.
men have been piteously deceived. First I will answer unto M. More which has
in a manner nothing but that he took out of my Lord of Rochester, although he
handle it more suttelly. And what soever is not answered in this part, shall be
touched and fully convinced in the third, which shall be a several book
against my Lord of Rochester.

Thus ends the first Book.
The second book which is an aunwere unto Sir Thomas More.
Master More begins M. More begins pitifully.
with the sely souls of Purgatory and makes them to wayle and lament, that
they hear the world wax so faynte in the faith of Christ that any man should
need now to prove Purgatory to Christian me^, or that any man could be found
which would in so great a thing so fully and fastly believed for an undoubted
article this. xv. hundred year, begin now to staggar and stand in doubt. etc.

Verily me thinks it a foul fault Frith.
so sore to stomble even at the first. It were a great blot for him, if he
should be compelled by good authority to cut of. iiij. hundred of his foresaid
number. Now if we can not only prove that Purgatory in 400. year after Christ
was neither believed as an article of yt faith nor yet for an undoubted truth.
he must cut of that iiij. hundred year, but also bring witness that it was
neither at that time believed for an article of yt faith nor yet for an
undoubted truth: the^ I think ye would suppose this man somewhat out of the
way. And that will I prove by Gods grace. S. Austen was four hundred year
after Christ. And yet in his time was it not fully and fastly believed for an
article of the faith, no nor yet fully and fastly believed to be true. For he
him self writes in his Enchiridion on this manner speaking of Purgatory. After
he expounded the place of Paul. 1. Cor. 3. and had taken this 1. Cor. 3.
word fire not for Purgatory, but for temptation and tribulation, he added
these words in the. 69. chapter. It is not incredible that such a thing should
also chance after this life, and whether it be so or not it may be questioned
etc. Of these words may we well perceive S. Austen doubted of Purgatory
that he counted it not for an article of yt faith, neither yet for an
undoubted truth for if it had been an article of ye faith, or an undoubted
truth then would he not have said, Potest etia^ queri, that is to say: it may
be questioned, doubted or moved: for those holy fathers used not to make
questions and doubts in articles of the faith among the^ selves, neither yet
in such things as were undoubted true: they Roma. 4.
used not to dispute whether Christ dyed for our sins and rose again for
our justification, but only believed it.

Beside: that the occasion why he wrote the book entitled Enchiridion was
this. There was one Laure^tius a Christian man, which instantly required of S.
Austen that he would write him a form of his belefe which he might
continually bear in hand and whereunto he should stick. Upon this wrote him
S. Austen this little book, where in he commands him not fully and fastly to
believe (these are M. Mores words) that there was a Purgatory: but says that
it may be questioned, doubted or moved whether there be such a place or not. Of
this have we plain evidence that it was none article of yt faith in S. Austens
M. More much deceived in the accomptyng of his
time (which was four hundred year after Christ) neither yet undoubted truth.
And so may all men see that M. More is sore deceived and set on the sand even
at the first brunte and in the beginning of his viage.

His second reason that he has to M. More.
prove Purgatory is this. The very miscreauntes and Idolaters, Turks,
Saracenes and Paynimes have ever for the most part thought and believed M. Mores
second reason.
that after the bodies are deceased: the souls of such as were neither deadly
dampened wretches for ever, nor on the other side, so good but that their
offenses done in this world have deserved more punishment then they had
suffered and sustained there, were purged and punished by pain after the
death, ere ever they were admitted unto their wealth and rest. And so must
there needs be a Purgatory.

I answer, if it were lawful to require Frith.
wisdom in a man so wise as M. More is counted, here would I wish him a little
more wit, for I think M. More makes a false and fond argument.
there is no wiseman that will grant this to be a good argument, yt Turks,
Saracenes, Paynimes and Jews believe it to be true, Ergo, we must believe that
it is true: for I will show you a like argument. The Turks, Saracenes,
Paynimes and Jews believe that we have not yt right Christ, but that we are all
damned which believe in Christ. Is it therefore true? shall we turn our faith
because they believe that we be deceived? I think there is no man so foolish as
to grant him this. But if M. More will have his reason hold, he must argue on
this manner: The miscreauntes and infidels John Frith ame^deth M. Mores argument.
before named believe that there is a Purgatory and their belefe is true,
therefore we must believe that there is a Purgatory. Now follows this argument
somewhat more formally. Here might I put him to the proof of his Minor: which
is, that their belefe (in beleuyng Purgatory) is true: which thing he shall
never be able to prove. But I have such confidence of the truth on my side that
I will take upon me to prove the negative, Cut^ that their belefe is not true
as concerning Purgatory. For these miscreauntes John Frith proves the negative
to be true.
which believe Purgatory, believe that there is a Purgatory for us that be
Christen: for they believe that we are fallen from all truth and utterly damned.
But they think that there is a Purgatory for them selves wherein they shall be
purged and punished until they have made full satisfaction for their sins
committed: but that is false, for neither Turks, Saracenes Paynimes nor Jews
which believe not in Christ have or ever shall enter into any Purgatory, but
they are all damned wretches because they believe not in Jesus Christ. John. 3.
Now since John. 3.
they be deceived, for they have no Purgatory, but are all damned as many as
believe not. Alas what blindness is that to argue that we must follow them which
are both blind and out of the right way?

After this disputes he by natural Rastell had his arguments from M. More.
reason that there must be a Purgatory, his disputation continues a leaf and
an half, out of the which Rastell took all his book. And so are all his
apparent reasons disclosed before against Rastell. Then begins he with the
Scripture, on this manner.

IT seems very probable and likely M. More.
that the good king Ezechias Ezechias.
for no other cause wept at the warning of his death given him by the Prophet,
but only for the fear of Purgatory.

The story is written. 4. Kings. 2. Frith. 4. Kings. 2 Esaias. 38.
And Esaias. 38. Exechias was sick unto the death. And Esaias the Prophet and
son of Amos came unto him saying, this says the Lord, dispose thy house for
thou shall dye and not live. He turned his face unto the wall and prayed the
Lord saying, I beseech thee Lord, remember I pray thee, how I have walked
before thee in truth and in a perfect heart and have done that thing which is
pleasant and acceptable before thee. Then Ezechias wept with great cryeng:
these are the words of the text. We ca^ not perceive by the text that he was a
great sinner, but rather the contrary, for he says that he had walked before
the Lord in truth and in a perfect heart, and has done that thing which is
pleasant and acceptable before the Lord. And therefore it is nothing like that
he should fear Purgatory neither yet hell. Thou will peradventure ask me, if
he wept not for fear of Purgatory, why did he then weep? I will also ask you
a question, and then will A question to Master More.
I show you my mind. Christ did not only weep, but feared so sore that he
sweat like drops of blood runnyng down upon the earth, which was more then
to weep. Now if I should ask you why Christ feared and sweat so sore: what
would you answer me? A very apt similitude.
that it was for fear of the pains of Purgatory? forsooth he that would so
answer should be laughed to scorn of all the world, as he were well worthy.
Wherefore was it then? Verily even for fear of death, as it plainly appears
after: for he prayed unto his Father, saying: my father if it be possible let
this death pass fro me. Math. xxvj. So fearful a thing is Math. 26.
death even unto the most purest flesh. And even the same cause will I assign
in Ezechias, that he wept for fear of death and not for Purgatory. Now
proceeds he further and promises to prove it by plain evident textes, as it
is very needful for the text that he alleged before is somewhat to far
wrested and yet will it not serve him.

Have ye not (says he) the words M. More.
of Scripture written in the book of the kings, Dominus deducit ad in feros
and reducit: Our Lord brings folk down into hell, and brings them thence
again? But they that be in that where damned souls be, they be never
delivered thence again. Wherefore it appears well that they who^ God
delivers and brings thence again, be in that part of hell that is
Purgatory.

This text is written in the first Frith. 1. Kings. 2
book of the kings and in the second chapter, and they are the words of Anna
which says: The Lord does kill and quicke^ again: he ledeth down into hell
and brings again. Here he thinks to have good hold. But surely his hold
will fail him, for in this one text he shows him self twice ignorant.
First because he knows M. More here seems to be ignorant in the Hebrew
tongue. Gene. 42.
not that the Hebrew word, Sheol, does not signify hell, but a grave or a
pit that is dug. As it is written Gene. 42. Si quid aduersitatis acciderit
ei in terra ad quam pergitis, deducetis canos meos cum dolor ad inferos, that
is if any evil chance unto my son Benjamin in the la^d whether you go, you
shall bring down mine hoore hears with sorrow unto my grave, not unto hell nor
yet unto Purgatory, for he thought neither to go to hell nor Purgatory for his
son, but thought that he should dye for sorrow if his son had any
mischaunce.

Besides that he is clean ignorant M. More (...) of the manner of the speaking
of the Prophets.
of the common manner of all Prophets which for ye most part in all Psalms,
Hymns and other songs of praise (as this is) make the first end of the verse
to expound the last and the last to expound the first. He that observes this
rule shall understand very much in the Scripture although he be ignorant in
the Hebrew. So does this place full well expound it self without any
imagination of Purgatory. Confer the first part of ye verse unto the last and
you shall easily perceive it. The first part of the half verse is this. The
Lord does kill, and The Lord does kill and raise again.
that expounds the other half of this verse where she says, he leads
down to hell, so that in this place to kill and to lead down to hell is all
one thing. And likewise in the second part of the half verse, to quicken
again and bring again is all one thing. Now if any man be superstitious that
he dare not understand this thing as figurately spoken, then may he verify it
upon them that God raised from natural death as he did Lazarus. John. xj. And
all beit no man John. 11.
can deny but that this sense is good and that the text may so be understand,
yet in my mind we shall go more nigh unto the very and pure truth, if we
expound it thus. The Lord does kill and quicke^ again, he leads down to
hell and brings again: that is, he brings men into extreme affliction and
misery (which is signified by death and hell) and after turns not his face
unto them and makes them to follow him. And to this well agrees the. 78.
Psalm that speaks Psalm. 78.
of the children of Israel (which figure his elect Church and congregation.)
Their years passed over in perpetual trouble, when he destroyed or killed
^hen God says he kills and does quicken again, what the meaning thereof is.
them, then they sought him, they turned and besought him busely. He means
not here that he had first killed them by temporal death and after their death
made them to seek him: but that he had wrapped them in extreme afflictions and
perpetual troubles, and that he sore scourged them when they brake his
commandments and yet after turned his merciful face unto him.

Finally, if you will have the pure understanding of this place. Note the
words of the iij. children Daniell. 3. Daniell. 3.
which were cast into the furnace of fire and yet preserved from death
thorough the mighty hand of God, their words and song was this: Benedicite
Anania, Azaria, Misaell Domino, laudate and superexaltate eum in secula: quia
eruit nos de inferno, and saluos fecit de manu mortis, and liberauit nos de
medio ardentis flammae, and de medio ignis eruit nos. That is: bliss ye
anania, azaria, and misaell the Lord: praise and aduau^ce him for ever. For he
has plucked us out of hell, and has saved us from the power of death. He has
delivered A true interpretation of Scripture.
us from the midst of the burning fla^me and has plucked us out from the
mids of the fire. Here may you see the same manner of speaking and how the
last end expounds the beginning. These children say that God has plucked
them out of hell, and yet were they neither damned nor in Purgatory nor dead.
But the next part of this verse expounds their meaning which says: he has
saved us from the hand of power of death. So may ye know that to be plucked
out of hell, and to be saved from the power of death, are all one thing. And
again where they say that God has delivered them from the burning flamme, and
that he has plucked them from the mids of the fire, is all one sense as
every child may well perceive: and therefore is M. More to blame to be so A
foul fault in M. More.
busy seeing he understands not the phrase and manner of speech of the
Scripture.

THen brings he in the Prophet M. More.
Zachary which says. Tu quoque in sanguine Testamenti tui eduxisti vinctos
Zachary.
tuos de lacu in quo non erat aqua. Thou have in the blood of thy Testament
brought out thy bounden prisoners out of the pit or lake in which there was
no water. Now in hell is there no redemption, and in lymbo patrum the souls
were in rest? wherefore it appears clearly that those prisoners which he
brought out of their pain, he brought only out of Purgatory.

This text is spoken Zachary. 9. for Frith.
a full answer of this text I needed no more but to bring the authority of
Zachary. 9
my Lord of Rochester against him. For he expounds the place of the Psalm.
66. for Purgatory, which Psalm. 66.
says. Transiuimus per ignem and aquam and adduxisti nos in refrigeriu^, we
have gone thorough fire and water and thou have brought us into colenesse: If
this text of the Psalm serve for Purgatory which says that there is both fire
and water, as my Lord of Rochester does affirm and brings also Origin to
confirm it, then can not this place of Zachary serve, which says that there
is no water. And so must M. More needs be ouersene, for Origene and Rochester
be able to wey up him. Here might I say unto the^ More and Rochester can not
agree.
both that they should first agree with in the^ selves and then would I shape
them an answer. Howbeit I know my part so sure that I will confute them both,
and prove that neither other place speaks any thing of this paynfull
Purgatory that the describe. But my Lord of Rochesters authority shall be
differred until the third part which shall be a several book against him.

This place verily approves not How the saving of the Prophet Zachary is to
be understand.
Purgatory but shows the virtue of Christ's redemption which through his
blood redeemed his captives and prisoners that is to say them whom he found
bound with the strong bonds of sin to everlasting damnation which were
subjects unto the devil and the extreme enemies of God, but why calls he
them his? verily because they were chosen in Christ Jesus before the beginning
of the world, that they with him and through him should enjoy the everlasting
inheritance of heaven. Why are they called bound and prisoners? Surely
because they were captives, bound and imprisoned under the devil through the
sin that Ada^ committed. Roma. Roma. 5.
v. why says he that he delivered the^ out of the pit where in is no water?
Forsooth that is even as much to say, as he delivered them out of hell and
from eternal damnation. Thou will An objection and answer thereunto.
happily say, he delivered them not out of hell and from eternal damnation,
for his prisoners that is to say, they yt shall be saved never came there. I
answer, that they should without doubt have gone thither and have been damned
perpetually, except that Christ by his death had delivered and losed them. And
therefore says the Scripture that Christ delivers us out of hell, because he
saves and delivers us that we come not there, which else should surely enter
into it for ever. It is also a common manner of speech among us, if a man should
go to prison for debt or any such matter, and one of his friends come in yt
mean season which pacified the adversaries and pays that debt, then may we
well say, that he has delivered this man out of prison although he came not
there, but should have gone thither. And likewise when we say that such a man
has delivered his friend from the galowes, we mean not that he was all ready
hanged, for then were the deliuerau^ce to late but we mean that he delivered
him that he should not be hanged. Furthermore if a man might A question to
master More.
be bold to ask M. More whether Christ have redeemed, loosed and delivered him
in the blood of his Testament? I think he would answer yea. Now if we should
ask him further, from whence he has delivered him? I am sure he is not so
ignorant as to say that Christ has delivered him from Purgatory, but even
that be has delivered him from eternal death and damnation. And so has
Christ delivered us from the pytte wherein is no water, that is to say, from
hell and everlasting damnation, not yt we were in hell all ready (although we
were bound under sin and ready to be cast therein, but because we should not
enter into hell. This is the pure understanding of the text. Here might I
dispute with him both of A true and plain exposition of the prophet Zachary.
hell and of Limbus patrum but because I will be as short as possible is I will
defer yt until an other occasion yt I may reason with him somewhat at large.

AN other place is there also in M. More.
the old Testament that puts Purgatory quyte out of question. For (says he)
what is playner then the places which in the book of the Machebees make
mention of Machabeus.
the devout remembrance, prayour, asmose and sacrifice to be done for souls,
when the good and holy man Judas Machabeus gathered money among the people to
buy sacrifice withal to be offered up for the souls of them that were dead in
the battle. What shift find they here? Surely a very shameless shift Sore
spo^ of M. More.
and are feign to take them to that talkyng which is their shote anchor always,
when they find the storm so great that they see their ship goes all to
wrack. For first they use to set some false gloss unto the text, and if that
help not, then fall they to a shameless boldness, and let not to deny the
Scripture and all.

The place which he recites is Frith.
written. 2. Macha. 12. And to say the 2, Match. 12
truth, yt book is not of sufficient authority to make an article of our
faith: neither is it admitted in the Cano^ of the Hebrews. Here he obiecteth
that the Church has allowed it, and the holy Doctors, as S. Hierome. S.
Austine and such other I answer: S. Hieromes mind is opened unto us by the
Epistle which he wrote before yt Proverbs of Salomo^, his words are these.
Sicut Judith and Tobie Machabeorum libros, legit quidem cos ecclesia, sed inter
canonicas Scripturas non recipit, sic and haec duo volumina legate ad
aedificationem plebis, non ad authoritatem ecclesiasticorum dogmatum
confirmandum. That is like as the Church The books of the Machabees are not in
the Canon of yt Hebrews.
does read the books of Judith, Tobias, and the Machabees, but receaueth them
not among the canonical Scriptures, even so let it read these two books (he
means the book of Sapience and Ecclesiasticus) unto the edifieng of the
people, and not to confirm the doctrine of the Church thereby. And it is
nothing like that S. Austen should dissent from S. Hierome, for they were both
in one time, yea and S. Hierome out lived S. Austen. And therefore the Church
could not admit any such books either before S. Austens time or in his time,
but that S. Hierome should have known of it. And so may you gather that if S.
Austen allow these books, or else say that the Church has allowed them, you
may not understand that they have allowed and received them as canonical
Scriptures, for then you make S. Hierome a liar. But thus you must understand
it, that they have received them to be read for the edifying of ye people, and
not to confirm the doctrine of the Church or articles of the faith thereby,
according to S. Hieromes exposition. Now may you see that our shote anchor (as
he called it) is so strong that all his storms and waves can not once move it,
for we deny not but that the book is received of the church to be read, and we
show by S. Hierome for what intent it is received and read, not to prove any
article of our faith thereby, but only to order our manner of living thereafter
in such points as are not repugnaunt unto the canonical Scripture.

But yet for this once, to do the man pleasure we will let slyppe our shote
anchor and take the seas with him. And for all their furious wyndes and frothy
(...).
waves, we will never strike sail, so strong is our ship and so well
ballaunced. Be it in case that this book of the Machabees were of as good
authority as Esaias: yet can he not prove this fury and paynefull Purgatory
thereby. For it speaks not one word neither of fire nor pain, but it speaks
of a sacrifice offered for the dead, yt they might be losed from their sins
because there is a resurrection of yt ded. which may well be without any pain
or fire. So that this conclusion is very The meaning and true exposition of the
Machabees touching purgatory.
bare and naked? It is good to offer sacrifice for the dead that they may be
loosed from their sins, Ergo, there is a sensible fire which does punish the
holy and chosen people of God. I am sure there is no child, but he may perceive
that this argument is naught.

Besides that is to be doubted (...).
whether Judas did well or not in offering this sacrifice. And therefore ought we
not of a foolish presumption to solow his fact until we know how it was
accepted. Peradventure thou will say that the deed is commended in the said
text, where it says: But because he considered that they which with godlynes
had entered their sleep (that is their death) had good favor laid up in store
for them, therefore is the remembrance to pray for the dead holy and
wholesome, that they may be loosed from their sins. I answer, that the
persons which were slain in the battayl for whom this prayer and sacrifice
was made, were found to have under their clokes oblations of idols which were
at Iamniam, and for The slaughter of the Jews was is for idolatry.
that cause were they slain as it is plain in the text, yea and all the host
praised the right judgment of God. Now these men that were so slain were
damned by the law. Deuteronomy. vij. which says. The images of their Deutro. 7.
Gods thou shall burn with fire, and see that thou covet not the silver or
gold yt is on them nor take it unto thee lest Judas Machabeus was deceived in
his sacrifice.
thou be snared therewith, for it is an abomination unto the Lord thy God.
Bring not therefore the abomination unto thine house lest thou be a damned thing
as it is: But utterly defy it and abhor it for it is a thing that must be
destroyed. Of this may we evidently perceive, that albeit Judas did this thing
of a good mind, yet was he deceived, for his sacrifice could nothing help
them since they were damned by the law, and entered not their sleep with
godliness as he supposed.

Furthermore it is evident that the (...).
Jews had sacrifices for the sins of them that lived. Leuit. 4. 5. 6. etc.
But how knew they that these sacrifices would extend them selves unto the
sins of the dead? And they were commanded under the pain of cursing that
they should add nothing unto the word of God. Deuteronomy. 12. Verily it Deuteronomy. 12.
is like that the Priests even at that time sought their own profit, abused
the sacrifices, and deceived the simple people.

M. More also says, that the money 4
was sent to buy sacrifices which should be offered for the sin of the
slain. Now knows every Christen that all manner of sacrifices and offeryngs
were nothing but figures of Christ which should be offered for the sin of his
people. So that when By Christ's death all sacrifices ceased.
Christ came, all sacrifices and oblations ceased. If thou should now offer
a calfe to purge thy sin, thou were no doubt injurious unto the blood of
Christ, for if thou thought his blood sufficient, then would thou not seek
an other sacrifice for thy sin.

Yea I will go further with you 5
there was not one sacrifice in the old Testament that purged or took away
sin. For the blood of oxe^ or goats can not take away sin. Heb. x. But
Heb. (...).
all the sacrifices which were the^ offered, did but signify that Christ
should come and be made a sacrifice for us, which should purge our sin for
ever. Now were their sacrifices and oblations institute of God and yet could
they not take away sin: but only No sacrifice ca^ take away sin but only
the sacrifice made by Christ.
signified that Christ through his bl^d should take it away. What madness then
is come into our brains that we think that our oblations which are ordained
but of our own imagination should take away sin?

What if Judas gathered such an 6
offering in the old Testament, should it then follow that we must do so to,
which know that Christ is come and that all oblations are ceased in him? shall
we become Jews and go back again to the shadow and ceremony since we have
the body and signification The holiest men have fallen.
which is Christ Iesue? Be it that Judas were a holy man, might he not do yet
amiss? Be it in case that he did well, shall we therefore straight ways out of
his work ground an article of our faith? David was an holy man and yet
committed he both murder and aduoutry shall we without further ensearchyng the
Scriptures streightwayes follow his example? Abraham was an holy man and was
commanded of God to offer his own son: shall we offer our children
therefore? Gedson and Iosue destroyed the unfaithful Kings and Princes and did
well and were praised of God. Must we do so to? And wherefore shall we The
example of Judas Machabeus is profitable to ye church, and therefore it must be
followed.
more fellow the example of Judas the^ of the other? Shall I tell you why?
Verelye for this example of Judas brings money unto our spiritualty. These
xij. thousand drachmas shine so bright in their eyes, yt without other ca^dle
lantern or spectacles they have espied an article of our faith: you may not
consider that they have taken this text of. xij. thousand drachmes for an
Epistle in soul masses, for then peradventure you might fall into some shrewed
suspection, that they should do it of covetousness, which fault can not be
espied in our spirituality, as you know well enough.

He that holds any ceremony of 7.
the law as necessary, is bound to keep and fulfill the whole law. This is
evident of Paul. Gal. 6. where he says, Gallat 6.
If ye be circumcised, then are ye debtours to fulfill the whole law. That is
if ye put any confidence in circumcision or recounte it as necessary (for else
it is of it self, neither good nor evil) then make you your selves bound
under the law which burden neither we nor our fathers could bear, and tempt
God. Act. xv. And this sacrifice Acts. 15.
of Judas was but a ceremony and signified yt Christ should with his blood
Rastell.
quench our sins. Ergo, he that keeps or cou^teth this ceremony as
necessary (as are all the articles of the faith) does captive him self under
the law and tempts God to speak no more sharply.

Yet will I go a little nere unto you. 8.
Judas him self believed not yt there was a Purgatory. For in the time of The
scholeme^ say that in the time of the old Testament there was no Purgatory.
the old Testament there was no purgatory as the Scholemen grant themselves
but only a place of rest which they called Limbus patrum: wherefore they are
pitiously deceived that will prove Purgatory by the textes of the old
Testament, since, as they say themselves, there was no Purgatory at that time.

Finally, I ca^ not find a place that 9.
of it self more properly co^futeth this fantastical Purgatory, then does
this same text which they stick so sore to, imaginyng that it stablisheth
Purgatory. The text says on this manner, except he had hoped that they which
were slain should rise again, It should seem void and in vain to pray for
the dead. If you feign a Purgatory, the^ must this text needs be false: for be
it in case that the dead should not rise again. Now says the text that it
were void and in vain to pray for the dead if they should not rise again.
But if there were a Purgatory wherein they should be purged and punished in the
mean season: then were it not in vain to pray for them to deliver them out of
that pain, but rather very fruitful and necessary although they should never
rise again. And therefore if this text be of authority, is it impossible that
there should be any Purgatory, neither is there any text that in my judgment
can better undermine Purgatory and make it fall.

Peradventure you desire to know my mind in this place, and that I should
expound unto you what Iudasment A declaration of the meaning of Judas Machabeus
in offering his sacrifice for the dead.
in his oblatio^ since he thought of no Purgatory as yt foresaid text does well
specify. Verily I think that Judas believed that there should be a
resurrection, as this text praised him, saying, thinkyng well and devoutly of
the resurrection. For among the Jews there were many that believed not the
resurrection of our flesh, and they that believed it were yet so rude and
ignorant, that they thought they should rise but to obtain a carnal kingdom
and have their enemies subdued under them without rebellion. And thereto stick
the Jews unto this day. And it is most like that this should be his meaning,
we shall all rise again, and possess this land in peace, and these men which
are slain are out of the favor of God because they have contrary to the law.
Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 7.
vij. Take of the idols oblations, therefore is it best that we send a sacrifice
unto Jerusalem to pacify the wrath of God toward them, lest when they rise
again the Lord should send some plague amongst us for their tra^sgressio^
which they committed while they were here living. If any man can better Judas
Machabeus thought of no Purgatory.
guess I am well content to admit it, but this is plain enough: he thought that
this sacrifice could not help the^ before they should rise again, which does
fully destroy Purgatory. For where he says that it were void and in vain to
pray for the dead except they should rise again: Is even as much to say unto
him that has any wit as that this prayer and sacrifices can do them no good
before they be risen again from death: for else were it not in vain to pray
for them although they should never rise again. As by example, if I say to a
man that he shall never obtain his purpose except he should sue to the kings
grace, it is even as much to say to a man that has any wit, as he shall
never obtain his purpose before he has sued to the kings hyghnes.

Master More goes about to jest M. More is like to be proved an insipient.
them out of countenance which say that the book of Machabees is not
aute^tike because it is not received in yt Canon of the Hebrews and says that
by this reason we may also deny the book of Sapience and prove our selves
insipientes: but verily, if he admit the book of Sapience to be true and
autentike, I fear me it will go nigh to prove him an insipient for grauntyng
that there is a Purgatory. Read the. 45. argument against Rastell, and then
judge whether I say true or not.

Hitherto have I let slyp our shoteanker and have run the Seas with him,
grauntyng him for his pleasure that this book should be of as good authority
as Esaias. Not that the Church or holy Doctors, or any wise man supposes it of
so good authority, but only to see what conclusion might be brought upon it
(that once granted.) And if any man would require my John Frithes judgment of
y^ books of the Machabees.
judgment as concerning this book, I would shortly answer that either this
book is false and of no authority, or else that Christ and his Apostles all
holy Doctors and Scholemen thereto are false and without authority. For he
that admits prayers and sacrifice to be done for the dead, yea and also
affirms that they are holy and whole some for such sins as are damned by
the law of God (which are in deed very mortal) does not he against the word
of God, yea and also against the common consent of all me^? But this book does
so: which admits prayer and sacrifice to be done for the dead that were
slain in the battle for their offense, yea and also damned by the law. Deuteronomy.
7. Now conclude your selves what ye think of this book.

Thus much has M. More brought (to prove his purpose) out of the old Testament
and I think ye see it sufficiently answered. And now he entendeth to prove
his Purgatory by good and substaunciall authority in the new Testament also.

FIrst let us consider (says Master M. More.
More) the words of the blessed Apostle and Evangelist. S. John. 1. John. 5.
where he says. Est peccatum ad mortem, non dico vt pro eo roget quis. There
is says he some sin that is unto the death, I bid not that any man should
pray for that, this sin as the interpreters agree is understand Desperatio^
and impenitency are damnable sinners.
of desperation and impenite^ce, as though Saint John, would say: that who
depart out of this world impenitent or in despair, any prayer after made can
never stand him instead. Then it appears clearly that S. John means that
there are other which dye not in such case for whom he would men should pray,
because that prayer, to such souls may be profitable. But that profit can no
man take being in heaven where it needs not, nor being in hell where it
boteth not, wherefore it appears that such prayer helps only for
Purgatory, which thou must therefore needs grant except thou deny S. John.

The text is written. 1. John. 5. Frith. 1. John. 5.
which says: there is a sin unto the death, I bid not that any man shall
pray for that. In this place does M. More understand by this word death,
temporal death, and then he takes his pleasure. But we will desire him to
look two lines above, and not to snatch one piece of the text on this fashion.
I will rehearse you the whole text and then ye shall hear mine answer. The
text is this, if any man perceive that his brother does sin, a sin not unto
yt death, let him ask and he shall give him life, to them that sin not unto
death. For there is some sin that is unto death I bid not that any man should
pray for that. Now mark mine answer. Death and life be contrary and both
words are in this text, therefore if you understand this word death for
temporal death, then must you, also understand by this word life, temporal
life. And so should our prayer restore men again unto temporal life. But I
ensure you, M. More takes this word M. More is confuse in the interpretation
of the scriptures.
death so confusedly that no man can tell what he means. For in one place he
takes it for temporal death, saying: who so depart out of this world
impenitent. etc. And in an other place he is compelled to take it for
everlasting death. Therefore will I show you the very understanding of yt text.
And better interpreters desire I none then Christ him self which said unto the
Phariseis, every blasphemy shall be forgeuen, but yt blasphemy against the holy
ghost (which S. John calls a sin unto the death) shall never be forgeuen,
but is guilty unto everlasting damnation. Mark. iij. what sin or blasphemy
is this? verily Mark. 3.
yt declares S. Mark, saying. They What blasphemy and sin against the holy
ghost ^s.
said that he had an unclean spirit yt was yt sin unto death everlasting,
that was the sin, that should never be forgeuen. He proves so evidently unto
the^ that his miracles were done with yt spirit of God, that they could not
deny it. And yet of an hard and obstinate heart, even knowing the contrary, they
said that he had a devil within him. These Phariseis dyed not forth with, but
lived peradventure many years after. Notwithstanding if all the Apostles had
prayed for these Phariseis whiles they were yet living, for all that their
sin should never have been forgeuen them. And truth is that after they dyed
in impenitencie and desperation, which was the fruit of that sin, but not the
sin it self.

Now see ye the meaning of this The pure understanding.
text, and what the sin unto death or against the holy ghost is. If any man
perceive his brother to sin a sin not unto death, that is not against the
holy ghost: let him ask and he shall give him life, that is, let him pray unto
God for his brother and his sin shall be forgeuen him. But if he see his
brother sin a sin unto death, that is, against the holy ghost, let him
never pray for him for it boteth not. And so is not the text understand of
prayer after this life (as M. More imagines) but even of prayer for our
brother which is living with us.

Notwithstanding this sin is not lightly known, except the person knowledge
it him self, or else the spirit of God open it unto us. Therefore may we pray
for all men, except we have evident knowledge that they have so offended as is
before rehearsed. And this is his text taken from him wherewith he labors to
prove Purgatory.

What say they to the words of M. More. Apoca. 5.
S. John Apoc. 5. I have heard (says he) every creature that is in heaven and
upon the earth and under the earth, and that be in the Sea and all things
that be in them, all these have I heard say, benediction, and honor, and glory
and power for ever be to him, that is sitting in the throne and unto the lamb.
By the creatures in heaven he means angels. By the creatures upon the Note.
earth, he means men. By the creatures under the earth, he means the souls
in Purgatory. And by the creatures in the Sea he means men that sail on the
Sea.

By this text I understand not only Frith.
angels and men, but also heaven and earth and all that is in them, eue^ all
beasts, fishes, worms, and other creatures and think that all these
creatures do praise the Lord. And where he takes the creatures under yt earth
for the souls in Purgatory: I take (...) and More does not agree.
it for all manner of creatures under yt earth, both worms vermin and all
other. And where he draws the text and makes the creatures in the sea, to
signify men that are sailing on the Sea: I say that the creatures in the Sea
do signify fishes, and such other things, and that S. John by this textment
even plainly that all manner of things give praise unto God and the lamb, yea
and I dare be bold to add that even the very devils and damned souls are
compelled to praise him. For their just punishment commends his puysaunt
power and righteousness. Neither need thou to wonder or think this any new
thing, for David in the 148. byddeth Serpents beasts and birds to praise the
Lord, as it is also written Dani. iij. And Paul says Roma. 8. All manner A*
true exposition of the Scripture.
of creatures long for our redemption and praise God for it, yea and mourn
that the last day is not yet come that the elect children of God might enter
into rest: for then shall also those creatures be delivered from their
corruption and bondage into the liberty and glory of the children of God. Now
judge Christen reader which sentence stands most with the Scripture and
glory of God.

Does not the blessed Apostle. M More.
S. Peter as it appears. Acts. ij. say of our Savior Christ in this wise.
Quem Deus suscitauit solutis doloribus inferni. In these words he showed that
pains of hell were losed: but those pains were not the pains of damned
souls. And in limbo patrum there was no pain, Ergo, it was the pain of
Purgatory which he loosed.

Alas what shall I say? I am in a Frith.
manner compelled to say that this man wandreth in wilful blindness. For else
were it not possible that he should err so far as to bring in this text for
his purpose. The words of Peter are these: Ye men of Israel hear these
words, Jesus of Nazareth a man set forth of God for you with powers, wonders,
and tokens which God has done by him among you, as (you your selves know)
after he was delivered by the purposed counsel and foreknowledge of God, and
you received him of the hands of the wicked, ye crucified and killed him whom
God has raised, dissoluing the pains of death: for it was imposible that he
should be subdued of it. Here in stead of these words More purposely
corrupts the sense of the Scripture.
The pains of death, he sets the pains of hell (as it is most like) eue^
of a purposed deceit. For albeit the man would not take the pain to read the
greek, yet if he had but once looked upon the translation of his old friend
and companion Erasmus, it would have taught him to have said, solutis doloribus
mortis, that is, dissoluing the pains of death, according to the Greek, and
very words of Luke which wrote these acts in the greek tongue.

And albeit the old translation uses this word Infernus which is diversely
taken in scripture, both for death, for a grave, and for hell, yet in this
place is master More without excuse which calls it hell in our English
tongue. For albeit the word of it self were indifferent in the Latin, yet it
is not indifferent in the English: for there is no English man that takes this
word hell, either for death, or for a grave, no not master More himself. For
first he translateth the text falsely More falsely desca^teth upon the
Scriptures.
calling it hell, and then he descanteth on a false ground, and calls hell,
not death but purgatory: when S. Peter brought in these words for no other
purpose but to prove yt Christ was risen from death through the power of his
Father, meaning, that God the Father did raise his Son Christ notwythstanding
the sorrowful pains and panges which he suffered unto yt death, for it was
impossible that Christ should be utterly subdued of death. So that this text
proves no more purgatory, then it proves that master More was hired of the
spiritualty to defend purgatory. Besides M. More a proctour for Purgatory.
that, if it should serve for Purgatory (which no wise man will grant when he
seeeth the process of the Text) it should prove nothing, but that Christ
should lie in the pains of purgatory until God his Father had holp him out:
for the pains* which he speaks of were Christ's pains, which no man can
deny if he read the Text. But what a fond opinion were that, to feign that
Christ which was without sin, should be tormented in the pains of purgatory.

The blessed Apostle Paul in his M. More. 1. Cor. 3.
first epistle to the Corinthians the third chapter, speaking of our savior
Christ the very and only foundation of all our faith and salvation, says: If
any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay,
or straw, every man's work shall be made open, for the day of the Lord shall
declare it, for in the fire it shall be showed, and the fire shall prove what
manner of thing every man's work M. More would feign prove a purgatory.
is. If any man's work that he has builded thereon do abide, he shall have a
reward: if any man's work burn, he shall suffer harm, but he shall be safe, but
yet as by fire. And finally he concludes that this word fire, must needs
signify the fire of Purgatory.

He that considers the order or Faith.
process of the text shall easily perceive that this man erreth: for the Text
speaks of the preachers, and blames the Corrinthians that they made such
sects and dissentions among them selves, for one said that he was Paul's man,
and held on his side: an other said that he was Peter's man: the third did
stick to Apollo, and so forth, even as our friars do now a days, one sect
holds on S. Fraunces, an other of S. Dominike, the third of S. Austen. etc.
S. Paul rebukes these sects, and called the persons carnal, commanding
them to take Christ for their head, and to cleave only to him: and as for
Apollo, Peter, and Paul he says, that they are but ministers of the word*
every man according to the gift given him of God, the one more, the other
less.

Paul planted Apollo watered, that is, Paul set the Corinthians in the ground
of Christ's faith, and then came Apollo and preached them further of Christ,
and comforted them to abide in the way which they walked in: howbeit it was
only God that made them prosper in the word and gave the increase.
Nevertheless every He shall laboreth much in Gods by (...)nyard shall receive
much. etc.
man shall receive according to his labor: if he preach much, the more shall
be his reward: if he preach little, thereafter shall he be rewarded. For we are
Gods workme^ to preach his word, and you are Gods husbandry whom we must till
and dress in declaring you the word and perpetual will of God: you are
become Gods building thorough the grace of God which he has given me, whom we
must frame and so couch by the word of God, that we may make of you a temple of
living stones. Like a wise woorkemaister have I laid the foundation, for I
first began to preach you Christ. Now comes there an other and builds
upon this my foundation entendyng to instruct you further in the ways of
Christ. But let every man take heed how he builds or preach unto you, for no
man ca^ lay any other foundation then is laid already, for all our buildyng
and preaching leneth only on this point and principal stone, to declare unto
you what Christ has done for you.

If any build on this foundation What it is to build on gold, silver or
precious stone.
gold, silver, or precious stones, that is: if any man preach purely the word
of God, which is likened to gold, silver, and precious stones because that as
these are not consumed with matteriall fire, but rather made more pure, even so
the pure word of God suffers neither hurt nor damage in spiritual fire, that
is temptation and persecution.

Or else if any man build upon this What it is to buyld on wood, hay or stubble.
foundation wood, hay, or stubble, that is, if a man of good intent (but yet
thorough ignorance) preach and teach you to stick unto ceremonies and men's
traditions (although they seem never so glorious) and to such things as are
not grounded on Scripture (as S. Cyprian taught and defended to Cyprian.
rebaptise him, that was once Baptized and after fallen into heresy, yea and
many Bishops consented unto him, yet was it surely a great error) this is
wood, hay and stubble that ca^ not endure the fire of temptation and light of
Gods word.

Every man's work shall be declared for the day shall open it. Albeit it prospere
for a season in the dark and can not be perceived, yet when the day comes,
which is the light of Gods word, it shall be espied and judged. The day shall
open it that shall be reuelated in fire, and the fire shall prove every man's
work what it is. Fire signifies temptation, tribulation, persecution etc.
which shall prove every man's works. If any man's work that he has builded
do abide this How every man's work is tried by fire.
fire, that is, if the word that a man has preached do abide all assaults and
temptations, it is a token that they are surely grounded on the Scripture of
God, and then shall the preacher receive his reward. If any man's work be
burnt, that is if the preachers words will not abide the trial and light but
vanish away, then is it a token that they are not well grounded on Scripture,
and so shall he suffer hurt, for it shall be a great cross and vexation to the
preachers heart that he has been so deceived him self and has also led
other into his error. Notwithstanding he shall be saved, because of his faith in
the foundation, which is Christ, and his ignorance shall be pardoned since he
erreth not of a malicious purpose but of a good zeal. But yet shall it be as
it were a fire to him, for it shall grieve his heart to see that he had labored
in vain, and that he must destroy the same which he before through ignorance
preached: this is the process and pure understanding of the text.

There is no man but he grau^teth that these words, foundation, laying Words
figuratively spoken.
of foundation, buildyng, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay and stubble
are figuratively spoken: and why ca^ they not suffer that this word fire be so
taken to? But where they find this word fire, what soever the process be,
there plant they Purgatory by and by, without any further consideration. And
yet if they had any judgment at all, they might well perceive by Paul's own
words that he took not this word fire for material fire, as they grossly
imagine, but proceeded in his Allegory and spoke it figuratively: for Paul
says, He shall be saved, but so as it were thorough fire. Mark well his words,
he says not that he shall be saved through fire. But as it were thorough fire,
signifiyng that it shall be a great grief and veratio^ unto him. So that by these
words of Paul, a very child may perceive what he meant.

Furthermore, if they be so stifnecked that they will not bow to yt truth, but
still persevere in their own fantasies faynyng Purgatory out of this place:
the^ will I boldly say unto them that there shall no man enter into it but
only preachers. For in this place Paul only speaks of them, and affirms
that it is their preaching and learning that shall be so proved thorough fire,
and that such a Preacher shall be saved, but yet as it were thorough fire. And
therefore may the temporaltie be of good comfort, for I promise them that by
this text they shall never have hurt in this their painful Purgatory.

Does not our blessed Savior M. More. Math. 12.
him self say that there is a certain sin which a man may so commit against
the holy ghost, that it shall never be remitted* nor forgeuen, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come? Now when our Lord says that the blasphemy
against the holy ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come, he gives us clear knowledge, that of other sins, some
shall be forgeuen in this world, and some in the world to come.

Although this argument be a very Frith.
Sophisme, yet is there neither one rule in Sophistry that can prove this A
subtle sophisme.
argument, nor yet one Sophister so foolish as to grant it.

For if I should say unto mine enemy that I would neither forgive him as long
as I lived nor after my death, because he had done me some heinous trespass,
then would men count him worse the^ made that would say, Frith will not forgive
his enemy as long as he lives nor after his death, Ergo, some me^ will forgive
their enemies after their death. For when I say that I will not forgive him,
neither in my life nor after my death, I mean that I will never forgive him,
and make that addiction because he should not of foolishnes look for any such
forgiveness.

But thus follows the argument There is no remission of sins after this life.
well, It shall not be forgeuen in this world nor in the world to come, ergo,
it shall never be forgeuen. And even so does the holy evangelist S. Mark
expound these words of Christ in the third chapter. For Matthew says chap.
12. He that speaks against the holy Ghost shall never have it forgeuen in this
world nor in the world to come: Mark expounds it thus, Mark. 3.
he that speaks a blasphemy against the holy Ghost has no remission for
ever, but is guilty unto everlasting damnation.

But of this I have spoken sufficiently before (in soluting the Text 1, Ioh.
5.) both what the sin and also how the text is to be understand. Neither
affirms the Scripture in any place that any sin is forgeuen after this
life, but says, be ready for ye know not the time when the Lord shall come,
as who should say, in this life is remission and full mercy to be had: labor
therefore to attain it, for after this life is no such forgeuenes, but even as
the Lord finds thee, so shall he judge thee. His next and last argument of
scripture is this:

CHrist says, as it is rehearsed in M. More. Math. 12.
the xij. of Matthew, that men shall yield a reckenyng of every idle word, and
that shall be after this present life. Then wotteth every man that by that
reckoning is understand a punishment therefore, which shall not be in hell, and
much less in heaven, and therefore can it be no where else but in Purgatory.

Verily I have not heard of a patron Frith.
that so unprofitably defends his clyent, nor yet of any man that gives
himself such proper trippes to cast himself, except he went about M. More
does quyte overthrow him self.
to betray and utterly destroy the part which he would seem to favor: for
this text makes more against him, then any that he brought before seems to
make with him. The words of Matthew are these: I tell you that of every idle
word that men speak, shall they yield a reckoning in the day of judgment:
but that leaves he out full craftily. Now let us reason of this text. By the
reckoning is understood a punishment for the sin (as master More says
himself) and this reckoning shall be upon the day of dome, ergo, then this
punishment for sin, can not be before the day of dome, but either upon or else
after the day of dome: For God will not first punish them, and then after
reckon with them to punyshe them a new: And so is purgatory quite excluded:
Here by M. Mores argument, Purgatory is quyte excluded.
For all they that ever imagined any purgatory do put it before the judgment:
for when Christ comes to judgment then cease purgatory as they all
consent: neither is there any prayer or suffrage which at that time can do any
help at all. And so has master More by this text given him self a proper
fall.

Here may you see how strong his reasons are: and what will happen to him that
takes in hand to defend the falshode against the truth of Gods word: for
his reasons make more against him then wysh him. You may well know that if his
matter had been any thing lykely, he would have colored it of an other fashion.
But since such a patron so greatly commended for his conueyance and wisdom
handles this matter so flenderly, you may well mistrust his cause. This is the
last reason grounded of Scripture, wherewith he has labored to prove
purgatory. And after this reason he reckeneth up the doctors, and says for
his pleasure that al make for him: but as touching the doctoures I will make a
sufficient answer in the third part, which is against my Lord of Rochester.

Thus he leaves the Scripture, which he has full unmannerly handled, and now
endeavors himself to prove his purpose by some probable reasons. And first
he brings in his old argument that the church can not err, to the which
reason I need not to answer, for William Tyndall has declared abundantly in
a treatise which by Gods grace you shall shortly have, what the church is,
and also that it both may err, and does err, if the pope and his adherents be
the church, as M. More imagines.

AFter this he confirms his fantasy M. More.
with fantastical apparitions, saying: that there have in every country and
in every age apparitions been had, and well known and testified, by which men
have had sufficient revelation and proof of purgatory. How many have by Gods
most gracious favor appeared to their friends after their death, and showed
themselves helped and delivered thence by pilgrimages, almesdeedes, prayer.
etc. If they say that these be lies, then they be much worse then their master
Luther himself, for he consents in his sermons that many such apparitions
be true, and they be true: then must there needs be a purgatory.

Here plays master More the subtle M. More is a subtle Sophister.
sophister, and would deceive men with a fallace, which lies in this word,
true, so that when he says that such apparitions be true, this sentence may
be taken two manner of ways. One, that it is true that such fantastical
apparitions do appear to diverse, and that I think no man be so folish but he
will grant him.

And yet in deed are they no souls but very devils that so appear to delude
men, that they should fall from the the faith of Christ and make a God of their
own works trustyng to be saved thereby. But to suppose this true that they
are the souls of Purgatory which so appear, is very fond false and against
all Scripture, for Esaias says, shall we go from the quick unto the dead? that
is, shall we enquire Esaias. 8.
of the dead and believe them in such points as concern our wealth? Nay says
he, but unto the law and witness, that is unto God and his word.

And so are we monished by Esaias Truth is not to be sought of the dead.
in the. 8. that we believe no such fantasies, we are commanded by the law of
God, that we enquire not of the dead, not for the truth, for God abhors it.
Deuteronomy. xviij.

Besides that the parable of the rich man and Lazarus does utterly condemn all
such apparitions, that they are no souls which appear but very devils. For
when the rich man desired that Lazarus might go and warn Luke. 16.
his brethren, that they should not come into that place of pain, Abraham
answered, that they had Moses and the Prophets, addyng also, that if they
believed not them, then would they not believe although one should rise again
and tell it them.

And so may I conclude that it were in vain to send them any such apparitions
of souls, and that in very deed there are no souls sent of God, but that
they are verily devils which come to delude the people, and to withdraw them
from Christ. Furthermore all men grant that the appearyng of Samuel was but
an illusion of the devil, thou shall find the story. i. Reg. xxviij.

It is not long since such a question 1. King. ^3
was moved in Oxford, the thing was this, there was a poor man of the
country, which was sore troubled with such apparitions, for there came a
thing to him which desired him to go certain pilgrymages and to do certain
other ceremonies whereby it said that it should be delivered from innumerable
torments which it now suffered. The poor man believed that An apparition of a
spirit moved to certain of Oxford.
this thing said truth, and did as it commanded. Notwithstanding it came so
often unto him, that what with labor and what with fear, the man was almost
besides him self, and then was he sent to Oxford to ask counsel what was
best to be done. The question was moved to one Doctor Nicolas, and he
affirmed by and by that it was no soul but the very devil, and that he should
no more follow the fendes appetite. Then was it moved to D. Kyngton, and he
affirmed the same. Finally, they inquired of D. Roper what his mind was
therein, and he said that he would look on his book, and when he had looked
his pleasure, he gave this answer. Let him alone a while (quoth he) and I
warraunt you, that this fellow shall either hang him self, or drown him self,
or come to some other mischief. Thus determined these men which are a great
deal to superstitious to dissent from any of the old Doctors, yea or else from
their own Scholemen. And yet would M. More make us believe that they were very
souls, and that by such ceremonies they might be delivered.

Now comes M. More to solute those two reasons that were brought against
Purgatory in the Supplication of Beggars, which was yt whole occasion of his
book. And mark how slender his solutio^s are. The first reason is this. If
there were any Purgatory out of which the Pope might deliver one soul by his
pardon, then may he by the same authority deliver many: and if he may deliver
many, then may he deliver them all. The second reason is this. If he can
deliver them for money: then may he also deliver them without money. And then
is he a very cruel tyrant which keeps them in pains so intolerable (as he
imagines him self) until they pay money.

THe first he soluteth on this manner: M. More his solution of the two former
reasons.
Since our Lord sends them thither for satisfaction to be made in some manner
for their sin: the Pope should rather against Gods purpose deliver them free
then change the manner of their satisfaction from pain into prayer, almose or
other good works to be done by their friends for them in some point
profitable and necessary for the whole corpse of Christendom or some good
member of the same.

As concerning satisfaction, I have spoken sufficiently before against Rastell.
Frith.
The Scripture knows no other satisfaction to be made for sin toward God,
but only the blood of his son Jesus Christ, for if there were an other
satisfaction then dyed Christ in vain: yea and he that seeks any other
satisfaction for his sin (toward God) then Christ's blood (which must be
received with a repe^tyng heart through faith) does despise Christ's blood and
tread it under his feet. And so is the first part of M. Mores solution false,
that they should M. More his argument is false.
be shut in Purgatory to make satisfaction.

Besides that where he says that if the Pope should so deliver them, he
should deliver them free. I say nay. For the Pope can deliver no man from
thence until satisfaction be made, as both he and all his adherentes grant.
And therefore to find away how he might seem to deliver the^, he fayneth that
he has in his hands the merits of Christ's passion, and the merits of all
Saints to destribute them at his pleasure. And therefore might the Pope apply
the merits of Christ's passion and of other Saints unto these sely souls and
so deliver them. For those merits ar enough to satisfy for yt souls in
purgatory, if there were ten times so many. And so should the Pope deliver them
not free, but chau^gyng the manner of their satisfaction from pain, into
merits of Christ's passion and of all Saints. And so is this reason not
abated but rather stronger the^ it was before. Howbeit to say the truth, the
merits of Christ's passion are only distributed unto the faithful, and tha^
by God and his spirit and not by the Pope. And as for the merits of Saints
can not help other, for they have to little for them selves if God should enter
into judgment with them. Psalm. 104. And Christ says: Luke. 17. when Christ
says.
you have done all that is commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants.
To this well agrees the parable of the x. Virgins. Math. 25. which could not
depart with any of their oil, for fear that they should not have had enough
for them selves.

THe second reason byteth him somewhat, and therefore he calls it
unreasonable, and would avoid it by an example on this wise:

Presuppose that the Pope may M. M^^e(...)second reason.
deliver al souls out of purgatory, yet if he were therefore cruel as often as
he leueth any there. This unreasonable reason lays cruelty unto the blame of
God which may undoubtedly deliver al souls thence and yet he leaves the^
there. This blasphemye should also touch his hye majesty for keeping any soul
in hell, from whence no man doubts but that he might if he list deliver them
all for ever.

I answer, that the example is Faith.
nothing like, for God can deliver no man neither from hell, nor from purgatory
(if such one were) until his justice be counterpaysed, as I have sufficiently
proved against Rastell. And if you object his absolute power then answer I
that he has an absolute justice as well as an absolute power, and so can his
absolute power do nothing until his absolute justice be satisfied. And again
I say, that God has no power nor lust to do against his scripture and himself:
God cannot be against himself.
but his power and lust is to fulfill that he has promised: unto the
faithful, everlasting glory: and unto the wicked eternal damnation. So that
god by his scripture can deliver no man out of hell, for then had he power to
make himself a liar, and so were he no God: neither can he deliver any man out
of purgatory (supposed that there were one) until his justice be pacified. But
the pope (as he says himself) has the full satisfaction in his own hand
whereby Gods justice must be pacified: wherefore it is only the popes fault,
which has the satisfaction in his power, and will not give it till he have
money, and not Gods fault which must needs tarry until satisfaction be made.
And so is this reason as strong as it was before, and the pope proved a cruel
tyrant.

But yet to excuse the pope he says, It is not meet that the Pope M^ More.
should be so quick in deliuerau^ce: for so should he give a great occasion to
me^ boldly to fall into sin and little to care or fear how slowly they rise
again, and that were not mete for his office.

Forsooth this is a gentle reason. He Frith.
may not be quick in deliuerau^ce because he should give men occasion of
sin. But for one penny he will quyte deliver you and that with speed. For A
penny offered into S. Dominickes box works great matter.
if ye offer a penny into S. Dominikes box, as soon as ye hear ye penny ryng in
the box, even so soon is the soul in heaven. Call you not that quick
deliuerau^ce? If you give not that penny, then may he not deliver the soul, for
it should be an occasion of sin. But if you give that penny the^ is there no
such occasion of sin. Such great virtue Note what ve^ is in a p^y.
has that one penny in M. Mores sight, that it clean wypeth away the occasion
of sin.

Furthermore, if this redemption may be done for money, it shall be still an
occasion unto the rich that they regard not sin, and yet they had more need
to be brydeled then the poor: for where riches and abundance is there
raygneth sin most of all. Howbeit I have showed sufficiently before against
Rastell, that they which fear not to sin but for fear of purgatory, shall
never come into it, but be damned in hell. For we should not abstain from
sin for any fear, but for the pure love that we have to god our most
merciful Father. etc.

THen comes master More to this imagination, that we should say, how no man's
prayer or good M. More.
deed can help an other. And (says he) if that were true, the^ could not
Christ's bitter passion prosite us.

Sir mine opinion of Christ's death Frith.
is this: 1 We have al sinned in Adam without our own consent and work. Ioh.
Frith declares his opinion of Christ's death.


1 And we are loosed from sin thorough Christ without our works or
deseruinges. 2 Sin is come into the world through Adam, and is punished with
death. 2 The death through Christ is turned into a medicine, and clean
finisheth sin. 3 One man's sin which is Adam, has condemned many men. 3
One man's grace which is Christ, has vanquished sin and helped many. 4 If one
man's sin be able to condemn us without our works. 4 Then much more is Gods
grace of power to save us without our works. 5 Sin thorough Adam was planted
in us. 5 Grace thorough Christ is planted in us. 6 Sin has had dominion over
all men through Adam. 6 Grace prevails over us through Christ. 7 Death
thorough sin is planted in us. 7 Life through grace is planted in us. 8 Death
thorough sin has dominion over us. 8 Life through grace preuayleth over us.
9 Sin and death have condemned all men. 9 Grace and life have saved all men.
10 Thorough Adam, Adams sin was counted our own. 10 Thorough Christ,
Christ's righteousness is reputed unto us for our own.
Of this may you perceive that we think that Christ's death profits us, for
we take his death and resurrection for our whole redemption and salvation. Now
as concerning How men's prayers and good deeds do help one an other.
men's good deeds and prayers, I say that they profit our neighbors: yea and
good works were ordained for that intent that I should profit my neighbor
through them: And prayer ought to be made to God for every state. But if I
should grant that such works and prayers should help them that are departed,
the^ should I speak clean without my book, for the word of God knows no
such thing. Let them therefore that pray for the dead examine them selves well
with what faith they do it, for faith leans only on the, word of God, so
that where his word is not there can be no good faith: and if their prayer
proceed not of faith, surely it can not please God. Hebrews. xj.

NOw. suppose (says M. More) that Purgatory could in no M. More.
wise be proved by Scripture, and that some would yet say plainly that there
were one and some would say plainly nay, let us now see whether sort of these
twain might take most harm if their part were the wrong. First he that
believed there were Purgatory, and that his prayer and good works wrought for
his friends souls might relieve them therein, and because of that used much
prayer and almose for them, he could not lose the reward of his good will
although his opinion were untrue and that there were no Purgatory at all. But
on the other side, he that believes there is none, and therefore prays for
none: if his opinion be false and that there be Purgatory in deed, he leseth
much good, and gets him also much harm. For he both fears much less to
sin, and to lie long in Purgatory, saving that his heresy shall keep him
thence, and send him down deep into hell.

I answer, that he should take most Frith.
harm that believed there were a Purgatory, if his opinion were wrong and could
not be proved by the Scripture (as M. More supposed) for he should sin and
transgress against the law of God which says. Deuteronomy. xij. That I command
thee that only do unto the Lord, neither add any thing nor diminish. And
before in the iiij. chap. of the same book, ye shall not add unto the word
that I speak unto you neither shall ye take any thing from it. And again in
the v. chapter ye shall not decline neither to the left hand (doing that which
is good in your own sight) neither yet unto the right hand, doing that which I
manifestly forbid you as though he should say, do that only which I
command thee. And where M. More says that he can not lose the reward of
his good will, although his opinion be untrue. I answer yes for it is but
chosen holiness which Paul conde^neth. Collos. 2. which surely shall rather
be imputed unto him for sin then for any good work. And because It is better
not to believe that which the scripture aloweth not, the^ to make a faith where
we should not.
(as I said before) it can not be done through faith. I say that it is utterly
reproved of God. And on the other side he that believes it not, since it can not
be proved by Scripture, ca^ catch no harm at all, although his opinion were
false, but rather much good and praise both of God and all good men: because he
fears to swerue from the word of God, and had lever not to be leave that thing
which is true (be it in case that purgatory were) and not set forth in
Scripture, for so shall he be sure not to sin: then to believe for an article
of yt faith that thing which is false in deed, for so should he surely sin
and transgress against God and his holy word. And so is there great peril
to believe a thing for an article of the faith which is not opened nor spoken
of in Scripture: But if I believe it not (although it were true) yet is there no
right nor law that can condemn me. Now may you see, that to believe for an
article of the faith that there is a Purgatory, since it can not be proved by
Scripture, may condemn a man and make him lie for ever in the pains of hell,
where as the other should but a little longer lie in the pains of Purgatory
(if there were one) and so shall he be sure to catch most harm that believes
there is a Purgatory. Saving (says Master More) that M. More.
his heresy shall keep him from thence, and send him down deep into hell.

Before he supposed yt it could not be Frith.
proved by scripture. And now (standing the same suppositio^) he calls it an
heresy, and anheresie is a stiff holde^ opinion repugnant unto Scripture.
What is heresy.
If Purgatory can not be proved by Scripture (as he makes his supposition)
then ca^ not the contrary opinion be repugnaunt to Scripture, and thus of his
own suppositio^ he does evil to call it an heresy. And where he says, M. More
is a sore, judge.
that his opinion shall send him down deep into hell, verily he steppeth to
far in Gods judgment to conclude and determine so cruelly, and specially in
the same argument where he supposes that it can not be proved, for if it can
not be proved by Scripture, whereby will ye condemn him so deep that holds
the contrary? forsooth you are a fierce judge. God give you eyes to see.

FInallye, if ye pity any man in M. More.
pain, never knew ye pain comparable to ours, whose fire passes The fire of
purgatory is a meruellous hot fire.
as far in heat all the fires that ever burned upon earth, as the hotest of
all those passes a feigned fire painted on a wall.

Verily among all his other Poetry Frith.
it is reason that we grant him this. Yea and that our fire is but water in
comparison to it. For I ensure you it has alone melted more gold Behold here
the force of the fire of purgatory.
and silver for our spiritualties profit out of poor men's purses, then all
the gold smithes fires within England, neither yet therewith can the ragyng
heat be aswaged. But it melts castles, hard stones, lands and tenementes
innumerable. For all your sects of Religion, Monks, Friars, Chanons and
Nuns, with other Priests regulare and seculare, by this fire, multiplication
and alcumye have obtained their whole riches and pleasures: even the sweet of
England. And so must we grant him that this fire is very hot.

Now may you well perceive what a slender foundation their hot purgatory has.
For by this confutatio^ may you easily see that it has no ground nor
authority of Scripture. Notwithstanding it is the foundation of all religions
and cloisters, yea and of all the goods that now are in these spirituality.
Are not they witty work men which can build so much on so slender a
foundation? Howbeit they have made it so toppeheuye, that it is surely like to
have a fall. Thus has M. More fully answered to all that he can say for
purgatory.
Master More a full answer, both to his Scriptures which were to far
wrested out of their places, and also to his own apparent reasons. Howbeit if
his mastershyppe be not fully pacified, let him more groundly open his mind,
and bring for his purpose all that he thinks to make for it and I shall by
Gods grace shortly make him an answer and quiet his mind.

Thus ends the second book.
The third book, which answers unto my Lord of Rochester and declares the
mind of the old Doctors.
NOw will I address me to the third part, which shallbe an answer unto my
lord of Rochester. And all his reasons and arguments both of the Scriptures,
and doctoures, which are not before dissouled in the second part, will I clean
confute (by Gods grace) in this third book. Howbeit the cheifest of M. More
was the Bishop of Rochesters Disciple.
his scriptures has M. More perused and has in a manner nothing but that was
before written by my lord of Rochester: saving that he makes the selye souls
to pull, to help his matter withal. My lord of Rochester is Rochester the
first patron of Purgatory
the first patron and defender of this fantasy. And eue^ as M. More took
his work out of my lord of Rochesters: even so plucked Rastell his book out
of M. Mores.

My lord of Rochester to confirm his sentence, rekoneth up the doctors by
heap, M. John, M. William, M. Thomas, and omnes. But as concerning the
doctors, that they are not so fully on his side as he would make the^ seem,
is sone proved. And where should I better begin to confute him, then of his
own words? for he writes himself upon the xviij. article on this manner:

THere is no man now a days that Rochester.
doubts of Purgatory (says he) and yet among the old ancient fathers was
there either none, The Bishop of Rochesters own words.
or else very seldom mention made of it. And also among the Grecians even unto
this day is not purgatory believed? Let him read that will the commentaries of
the old Grecians, and as I suppose he shall find either no word spoken of it,
or else very few.

These are my lords words. I wonder what obliuiousnes is come upon him, that
he so cleaves unto the Doctors, whom he affirmed before Frith.
either to make no mention of it, or else very seldom. Notwythstanding I will
declare you somewhat of the Doctors, that you may the better know their meaning.

To speak of the Doctors, and what their mind was in this matter, it were
necessary to declare in what time they were, and what condition the world was
in their days. S. Austine, Ambrose, and Hierome were in one time, even about
iiij. hundred years after Christ, and yet before their time were there arisen
infinite heretics by whole sects, as the Arrians, Sects of heretics.
Domitians, Eunomians, Vigilanttians, Pelagians, with infinite other, which had
so swerued from the truth, and wrested the Scripture out of frame, that it was
not possible for one man, no nor for one man's age to restore it again unto the
true sense. Among these there were some which not only feigned a purgatory, but
also doted so far, that they affirmed that every man were he never so vicious
should be saved through that fire, and aleaged for them the place of Paul 1.
Corinthians 3. These holy doctors 1. Cor. 3.
perceauing those great erroures, thought it not best by and by to condemn
all things indifferently: but to suffer and dissemble with the less, that
they might weed out the opinions which were most noysom, as the Apostles
granted unto the Jews, that the Gentiles should keep some of Moses law,
Acts xv. that they Acts. 15.
might the better com to their purpose to save the Jews with the Gentiles. For
if they had at the first utterly set of the law, then would the Jews never
have given any audience unto the Apostles. And even so S. Austen S. Austen.
went wisely to work: First condemning by the Scripture that error which was
most noisome, and wrote on this manner. Albeit some might be purged through
fire, yet not such as the Apostle condemns when he says, that the persons
which so do, shall not possess the kingdom of heaven. And where they would
have stuck unto Paul's text 1. Cor. 3. and affirm that they should be saved
thorough fire, S. Austen answered, that Paul's text was understand of the
spiritual fire, which is, temptation, affliction, tribulation etc. This wrote
he in the 67. 68. of his Enchiridion, to subvert that gross error, that all
should be saved through yt fire of purgatory. Yet in the 69. he goes a little
near them and says, that it may be doubted whether there be any such
purgatory or not. He durst not yet openly condemn it, because he thought that
men could not at that time bear it. But after in his book which he entitled,
De vanitate huius soeculi, there does he fully show his mind in these words:
Scitote quod cum anima a corpore S. Austen shows what he thought of Purgatory
auellitur, statim aut pro meritis bonis in Paradiso collocatur, aut pro merit
is malis in inferni tartara praecipitatur. i. Wot ye well that when the soul
is departed from the body, either it is by and by put into paradise according
to his good deserts, or else it is thrust hedlong into hell for his sins.
Here he clean condemns purgatory: for if this be done by and by as soon as
the soul is departed from the body, then can there be no purgatory: and so
makes S. Austen wholly with us. Think ye that S. Austen dissenteth from his
companion S. Hierome, or from his own Master S. Ambrose? Saint Ambrose.
Nay verily: Howbeit I will allege their own words, and then judge.

SAint Ambrose dissenteth not from S. Austine, but does stablysh his sentence
as fully as is possible: for he writes in the second chapter of his book
which is called De bono mortis, on this manner bringing in the words of David
Psalm. 39. Aduena ego sum in terra, and peregrinus sicut omnes patres S. Ambrose
shows his opinion of Purgatory.
mei. Et ideo tanquam peregrinus ad illa^ sanctorum communem omnium patriam
festinabat. Petens pro huius commorationis inquinamento remitti sibi peccata,
priusquam discederet de vita. Qui enim hic non acceperit remissionem peccatorum
illic non erit. Non erit autem, quia ad vitam aeternam non potuerit peruenire,
quia vita aeterna remissio peccatorum est. Ideoque dicit, remitte mihi vt
refrigerer priusquam abeam. etc. that is, I am a stranger and a pilgrim in
the earth as all my fathers have been. And therefore as a pilgrim he hasted
unto the common country of all saints, requiring for the filthiness that he
had received in this bodily mansion, that his sins might be forgeuen him
before he departed from this life. For he that here has not received
forgiveness of his sins, shall not be there. He shall not surely be there,
for he can not come unto everlasting life, for everlasting life is the
forgeuenes of sins. And therefore he says, forgive me that I may be cooled
before I depart. Here may you evidently perceive, that S. Ambrose knew not of
purgatory, nor of any forgiveness that should be after this life: But plainly
affirms that he yt receaueth not forgiveness of his sins here (that is, in
this life) shall never come in heaven. And for a more vehement affirmation he
dubleth his own words saying: He that here has not received forgiveness of
his sins, he shall not be there, he shall not surely be there. He means
that he shall never come to Heaven, which here has not his remission.

SAint Hieromes mind may sone be Saint Hierome. Eccle. 9.
gathered by his exposition of the ix. chapter of Ecclesiastes upon this text:
The dead have no part in this world, nor in any work that is done under the
Sun. There adds All suffrages prayers and good deeds done for the dead are
in vain.
Saint Hierome, that the dead can add nothing unto that which they have taken
with them out of this life, for they can neither do good nor sin, neither can
they increase in virtue or vice. Albeit (says he) some will contrary this
exposition, affirming also that we may increase and decrease after death.

Here are three things to be noted: first, that the Text says, that the dead
are not partakers of any work that is 1.
done under the sun. And there may you see that all suffrages, offringes, and
diriges for the dead are in vain, and profit them not, for they are partakers
of nothing under the sun.

Secondarily, you may see S. Hieromes 2.
own mind, that the dead can neither do good nor evil, neither increase The
dead can neither do good or evil, nor increase in virtue.
in virtue nor vice. And so is purgatory put out: for if they can do no good,
what should they do in purgatory? And again, if they can not increase in
virtue, they be like to lie long in purgatory. Peradventure some man would
think that they do no good, but only that they suffer good. To that I answer
that he that suffers good, does good: for if a man should suffer his body to
be burnt for the faith of Christ, would you not say that he did a good deed?
and yet does he but suffer.

Thirdly ye may note, that S. Hierome 3
was not ignorant that certain (as they which did feign purgatory) would deny
his exposition, and say that we might increase and decrease in virtue and vice
after death, yet notwithstanding he held his sentence condemning their opinion,
which thing he would not have done (specially since he knew that he should have
adversaries for it) except he had been sure that his sentence was right. See I
pray you how that not only scripture, but even their own doctoures condemn
this fantastical purgatory: and yet my lords are not ashamed to say that all
make for them.

Nevertheless, I will go further with him. Be it in case that all the Doctors
did affirm purgatory, as they do not: what were my Lord The sayings of the
Doctors are no farther to be credited then they agree with yt scripture.
the nearer his purpose? Verily not one jot: for the authority of doctors by
my lords own confession extends no further, but is only to be admitted
whilst they confirm their words by Scripture, or else by some probable
reason. For my Lord writes on this manner, Article xxxvij. The Pope has not
so allowed the Rochester.
whole doctrine of S. Thomas, that men should believe every point he wrote were
true. Neither has the church so approved either S. Austine or S. Hierome, nor
any other authors doctrine, but that in some places we may dissent from them:
The doctors have erred in many things.
for they in many places have openly declared themselves to be men; and many
times to have erred.

These are my lords own words. Now since the doctors sometime err, and in
certain places are not to be admitted (as he grants himself) how should we
know when to approve them, and when to deny them? If we should hang on the
Doctoures authority, then should we as well allow the untruth, as the truth,
since he affirms both. Therefore we must have a judge to discern between
truth and falsehode. And who should that be? the pope? Nay verily: for he
being a man (as well as the Doctors were) may err as they did, and so shall
we ever be uncertain. Our Judge therefore must not be parciall flexible, nor
ignorant (and so are all natural men excluded:) but he must be inalterable,
even searching the bottom and ground of all thing. Who must that be? Verily
The word of God is the touchstone and tries all of all doctrine.
the scripture and word of God, which was given by his Son, confirmed and
sealed by the holy Ghost, and testified by miracles and blood of all martyrs.
This word is the judge that must examine the matter, the perfect touchstone that
tries al thing, and day that discloseth all iuggeling mistes. If the doctors
say any thing not dissonant from this word, then it is to be admitted and
holde^ for truth. But if any of their doctrine discord from it, it is to be
abhorred, and holden accurssed.

To this full well agrees S. Austen S. Austine
which writes unto S. Hierome on this wise: Dear brother, I think that you
will not have your books reputed like unto the works of the Prophets and
Apostles: for I (the Scripture reserved) do read all other men's works on that
manner, that I S. Austen read old auctors, and would also have all me^ read his
works.
do not believe them because the author so says, be he never so well learned
and holy, except that he can certify me by the Scripture or clear reason that
he says true. And even so would I that other men should read my books, as I
read theirs. These are S. Auste^s words. And thus have I proved both by S.
Austen and also by my Lords own words, that no man is bound to believe the
Doctors, except they can be proved true either by Scripture or good reason not
repugnaunt to Scripture. Therefore let us see what Scripture or good reason my
Lord brings to approve his doctors withal. For else they can not help him
(as we have declared both by S. Austen and my Lords own confession,) although
they all made with him, as they do not. First he brings in the sin against
the holy ghost. Math. 12. And Paul. 1. Cor. 3. And. 1. John. 5. And Apoca. 5.
which textes I pass over because I have answered unto them before in the
second book, against M. More.

THe first reason that my Lord has which is not before soluted (for as I said
the reasons that are already dissolved will I now ouerhyp) is this which he
groundeth on diverse Scriptures. Of the souls that are departed, some are all
ready damned in Rochester. Luc. 16.
hell, and some are all ready in heaven. And to prove this true, he alleges
the parable of the rich man. Luke xv. I am sure my Lord is not so ignorant as
to say that a parable proves any thing. But the right use of a parable is
this, to expound an hard text Parables in yt scripture prove nothing, but
only open and expound dark and hard things.
or point, that was before touched and could not enter into every man's
capacity. Neither are all things like which are spoken in a similitude,
neither yet all things true that are touched in a parable: but we must
consider the thing wherefore they be spoken, and apply them only to that they
are spoken for, and let the residue go: as William Tyndall has well declared
unto you in the parable of wicked Mammon. This parable is very hard to be
expounded. The cause is this, no man can well espy by the text for what purpose
it was spoken. But this should seem to be the cause, that there were many of
the Phariseis and other multitude which would not believe the preaching of
Christ although he confirmed his words with the authority of Moses and the
Prophets, but they were curious and some deal fantastical and therefore
would they not believe his words except some apparitions had been made unto
the^ that they might have been assured by them that were before dead, that his
words were true.

Unto such it is like that he speaks this parable, plainly concludyng that
they should have no such apparitions of the dead, and also that it was not
necessary: but that they had Moses By Moses and the prophets is meant the old
Testament.
and the Prophets, to whom if they would give no credence, then should they
not believe although one of the dead should rise again and tell it them.
Notwithstanding let me grant it him, that some are all ready in hell and some
in heaven (which thing he shall never be able to prove by the Scripture, yea
and which plainly destroys the resurrection and takes away the arguments
wherewith Christ and Paul do prove that we shall rise) yet I say let me
grant it him to see how he will conclude. What follows on that?

Neither it is credible (says he) Rochester.
that all which are cast into hell should straight way go to heaven, therefore
must we put a Purgatory where they may be purged.

I answer: All that live are faithful Frith.
or unfaithful. If he be unfaithful There is but ii. places after this life,
that is, heaven and hell.
then is he damned. John. 3. If he believe then is he not condemned, but is gone
from death to life. John. 3. 5. The righteous man when he dies shall rest in
peace. Sapi. 3. And every faithful man is righteous before God, as yt whole
Epistle, to the Romans proves: Ergo, then every faithful man shall rest in
peace and be tormented in the pains of Purgatory. And as touching this point
where they rest, I dare be bold to say that they are in the hand of God and
that God would that we should be ignorant where they be, and not to take upon
us to determine the matter.

Peradventure you would enquire of me (since the parable says that Lazarus
Abraham's bosom, what it signifies.
rested in Abraham's bosom) what Abraham's bosom is? To that would I answer
that Abraham's bosom were nothing else then Abraham's faith. For all we are
called the children of Abraham because of his perfect faith which we ought to
follow. In this faith are many and in a manner infinite degrees: notwithstanding
if it be no greater the^ a mustard seed that is to say very small, yet shall it
save us. He that departs in this faith rests in peace, and wayteth for the
last day when God shall give unto his faithful, that is, to his elect (for
only are the elect faithful and the faithful elect) the crown of his glory
The elect are faithful and the faithful are elect
which he has prepared for them that love him. This crown does Paul say that
he shall receive it in that day. 2. Timo. 4. that is in the day of judgment.
And in the mean season God has so provided for us, that they shall wait
until the number of their brethren which daily suffer and shall suffer for
Christ, be wholly fulfilled, and so shall they not be made perfect without us.
Hebr. xj. If my Lord will understand by Abraham's bosom heaven, I will not be
contentious, let the Christen judge which sentence seems most true. But this
is once a Abraham's bosom can prove no purgatory.
clear case that of this he ca^ prove no Purgatory. For the unfaithful are
all ready damned, and the faithful rest in peace, let him call that what he
will, whether to rest in heaven or to rest in their faith until the last day.
For I am sure there is no man so mad To rest in peace is not to lie in
torments.
as to say, that to rest in peace should signify to lie in the pains of
Purgatory.

Furthermore, this text shall rather make sore against him the^ any thing with
him. For Lazarus whiles he was living was not without sin, nor no man else.
1. John. 1. so that no 1. John. 1.
man as long as he has breath in his body can say that he is without sin,
for then should he make S. John a liar. And yet was not Lazarus carried into
purgatory to be purged of his sins which were remainyng in his body the hour
of his death: wherefore A good conclusion against purgatory.
I may conclude that there is no such Purgatory. For God is as just unto him as
unto us, and therefore would he purge him as well as us, and again he is as
merciful unto us as unto him, and will as well forgive us as him, without
broyling on yt coals in purgatory: for his justice and mercy are ever one and
not alterable. But our perfect purgatio^ is the pure blood of Christ which
washes away the sin of the world. And albeit we ever have the remnauntes and
dregs Christ's death has ouercom^^ our death, and turned it into life.
of sin, and rebellion of our members as long as we have life, yet are they
wholly finished in death: for of such efficacitie is Christ's death, that it
has turned the death of his faithful (which was laid upon us as the pain of
sin) into a medicine against sin which fully cures it and makes an end of
it, as it was well figured in Golias that was slain with his own sword.

ANd where as my Lord brings Rochester. Math. 12.
for his purpose. Math. xij. that me^ shall give accoumptes of every idle word.
I have soluted that before against Frith.
M. More, that I think he shall say him self that he is answered. For if men
shall give a rekonyng for them on the day of dome (as the text says) that
should rather argue that there were no Purgatory wherein those sins should be
purged, for if they had been purged before of them, then should they not give
an accoumpte for them. And if it proved If there be any purgatory it must be
after domesday, for before there can be none.
any thing at all, it should prove that there were a Purgatory after domesday
which no man was ever so foolish as to grant.

But the true understanding of this text is this. There are two kinds of men
one faithful, the other unfaithful. The faithful through their faith in
Christ's blood are all ready fully Faithful.
purged in their heart, and their rebellious members through death are wholly
subdued. These men shall give no reckoning, neither of idle word, nor evil
deed: for all their sins are covered of Christ, and his blood shall give the
whole accomptes for them. The unfaithful to their utter confusion shall have
the book of their conscience Unfaithful.
opened, and there shall be presented before them all their evil deades,
words, and thoughts. And these are they that Christ speaks of which shall
give this great account. Note also that in the text they are called men, which
word in Scripture is Men.
ever for the most part taken in the worste sense, and signifies wicked men,
fleshly men, and men that follow their own lusts and appetites.

THen confirms he purgatory out of the 66. Psalm, which says: Rochester.
Psalm. 66.
we have gone through fire and water and thou have brought us into colenesse. I
am sure you have not forgotten that M. More alleges the Frith. Zachary. 9
Prophet Zachary in the ix. and affirms that th^re is no water in Purgatory.
It were hard to make these Rochester and More agree not,
two agree, for when me^ ground them on a lie, then for the most part their
tales and probations are contrary and will not well stand together.
Nevertheless in one point they agree full well, that is, both of them say
untruly: for neither another text serves any whit for Purgatory. And as
concerning the place of Zachary: it is sufficiently declared what it means.
And now will I also declare you the under standing of this text, and first that
it can not serve for purgatory. I beseech you that have the psalter once to read
the Psalm and I think you shall wonder at their do^yng dreams and ignorance
which allege this text for Purgatory. The text of ye Psalm is this: A true
interpretation of the 66. Psalm.
Thou have brought us into a strait and laden our backs with trouble or
heaviness. Thou have set men upon our heads, we have gone through fire and
water and thou have led us out again into a place of refreshyng. The textes
before and after in the same Psalm will not suffer that this place should be
understand of Purgatory. For the text immediately before says, thou have set
men upon our heads. But the chiefest defenders of Purgatory (and eue^ M. More
him self) say that they are not men, but devils which torment the souls in
Purgatory, notwithstanding my Lord of Rochester More and Rochester cannot agree
(good man) affirms that they are angels which torment the souls there:
but never man doted so far as to say that men torment the souls in
Purgatory, wherefore I may conclude that this text is not meant of purgatory,
but that the Prophet me^t that men ran over the children of Israel and
subdued them, and wrapped the^ in extreme troubles which in the Scripture are
signified by fire and water. Besides that the textes following will not admit
that this should be understand of Purgatory for it follows immediately, I will
enter into thy house with ^urt offrynges, I shall offer unto thee fat
sacrifices with the reke of wethers I shall burn to the Oxen and Goats. Now
is there no man so mad as to think that the souls of Purgatory Souls in
purgatory cannot offer Oxen nor goats in sacrifice.
should offer unto God any such sacrifices. So that the text is plainly
understand of the children of Israel, which through the Lord were delivered
from their afflictions and enemies and then offered their loyal sacrifices of
praise and thanks to the Lord their shield and protection.

Now flies my Lord unto the Church and says, that because the Rochester.
Church has affirmed it we must needs believe it, for the Church ca^ not
err. As touching this point I Frith.
will refer you unto a work that William Tyndal has written against M.
More wherein ye shall well perceive what the Church of Christ is, and that The
chirch says Rochester, meaning the popes church can not err.
his Church never determined any such thing. But that it is the Sinagoge of
Satan that makes articles of the faith and binds men's consciences further
then the Scripture will.

THen waxes his Lordshyp somewhat hot against Martine Luther, because he
would that no man should be compelled to believe Purgatory. For my Lord says
that it is profitable and well done to compel men to believe such things whether
they will or will not. And to stablishe his opinion he plucketh out a word of
the parable of Luke. xiiij. that Luke. 14.
a certain man made a great supper, and said unto his servants, go forth
quickly into the ways and compel them to enter in.

Verily there Christ meant no other Frith.
thing, but that his Apostles should go forth into all the world and preach his
The parable of Luke 14. truly interpreted.
word unto all nations, openyng unto them the miserable state and condition
that they be in, and again what mercy God has showed the^ in his son
Christ. This would Christ that his Apostles should expound and lay out so
evidently, by reasons, Scriptures, and miracles unto the Gentiles, that they
should eue^ by their manifest persuasions be compelled to grant unto them that
he was Christ, and to take upon them the faith that is in Christ. On this manner
did Christ compel the How men should be compelled to believe.
Saduces to grant the resurrection. Math. xxij. And by these means compelled
he the Phariseis to grant in their consciences that he did his miracles with
the power of God, and yet afterward of very hate knowing in their hearts the
contrary, they said ye he did them by the power of the devil. Math. xij. But
to say that Christ Christ was meek and gentle and no tyrannous schole master.
would have his Disciples to compel men with prisonment, fetters, scourgyng,
sword and fire is very false and far from the mildness of a Christian
spirit, although my Lord approve it never so much. For Christ did forbid his
Disciples such tyranny, yea and rebuked them because they would have desired
that fire should descend from heaven to consume the Samaritanes which would not
receive Christ. Luke ix. But he commanded them that if Luke. 9.
me^ would not receive their doctrine, they should depart from thence and
spryncle of the dust of their feet to be a testimony against the unfaithful
that they had been there and preached unto them the word of life: But with
violence will God have no man compelled unto his law. Paul also testifies. 2.
Cor. 1. that he had not rule over Paul says he had no power over their faith.
the Corinthia^s as touching their faith. By our faith we stand in the Lord,
and by our infidelity we fall from him. As no man can search the heart but
only God, so can no man judge or order our faith but only God thorough his
holy spirit.

Furthermore faith is a gift of God, which he distributeth at his own
pleasure. 1. Cor. 12. If he give 1. Cor. 12.
it not this day, he may give it to morrow. And if thou perceive by any exterior
work that thy neighbor have it not, enstruct him with Gods word, and pray God
to give him grace to believe: that is rather a point of a christen man, then to
compel a man by death or exterior violence.

Finally, what does thy compulsion Faith is not procured by violence, but is
the mere and only of gift of God
and violence? Verily nothing but make a stark hypocrites: for no man can
compel the heart to believe a thing except it see evidence and sufficient proof.
I have herd tell of a boy which was present at his fathers burning for his
belief, and as soon as the officers had espied the boy, they said each to other,
Let us take him and examine him also, peradventure we shall find him as great
an heretic as his father. When the boy saw that his father was dead, and that
the catchpoles began to snatch at him, he was sore dismayed, and thought that
he should dye to. And when one of them apposed him, asking him how he believed,
he answered, Master I believe even as it pleases you. Even so by torments and
crafty handling a man may be compelled to say that he believes the thing which
he neither thinks, nor yet can believe: for Fear makes faith no faith at all.
a ma^s faith is not in his own power.

But how does God accept this thing, to say that I believe that which indeed I
believe not? Verily he utterly condemns it, whether the opinion be true or
false. For if the opinion be true (as by example, that the faith in Christ's
blood justifies me before God) and I confess it before all the bishops in
England with my mouth, and believe it not with mine heart, then am I nothing the
better, (for I should have no part of Christ's blood) but I am much the worse.
For first God condemns me, which judges me after mine heart, and also mine
own heart condemns me, because I have openly granted that mine heart denies.

And contrariwyse, if I should believe this fully in mine heart, and yet Faith is
first the gift of God and proceeds from the heart, which may not be compelled.
for fear of persecution should deny it when I were examined openly of my
faith, then shall I be condemned of God (except A repent,) and also mine own
heart shall be a witness to condemn me. And so it is very noisome and ungodly to
be compelled unto any thing: for God ever searches the heart which can not be
compelled. But my Lord obiecteth writing upon Rochester.
the xviij. article saying: If a man take away Purgatory, for what intent
shall we need any pardons? As long (says he) as no man regarded purgatory,
there was no man that sought any pardon: for all the estimation of pardons
hangs Pardons.
thereof, so that we shall have Rochester says herein very truly and yet was
not ware of it.
no need of them, if there be no purgatory.

Verily I care not though I grant him that to. And I think that mouy was the
mother of them both. For out of the scripture shall he be able to prove neither
another.

But Mammon is a great god, eue^ of power enough to innent such knackes, yea
and to make them articles of the faith, and to burn those Purgatory and
pardons have been goodly marchaundise for the clergy.
that can not believe them. And it was a preaty practice to make such points
articles of the faith. For after that our holy fathers had given up preaching,
and would take no more pains, neither serve their brethren any more, then
set they up such articles of the faith, as should bring in money to uphold
their estate withal. And he that would not believe them, rid him out of the way
for fear of disclosing their iugling: for he that doubts of pardons and
purgatory, he plucketh our holy father by the bearde.

NOtwithstanding my lord confirms Rochester.
both pardons and purgatory, by the text that Christ spoke unto Peter, Math.
16. To the will I give the kayes of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou
bindest upon the earth, it shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou losest
on the earth it shall be losed in heaven. But these words (says my lord) had
been spoken in vain if he could not give pardons, and lose men out of
purgatory. etc.

As touching the kayes, albeit they Frith.
have oftentimes been declared, and in manner in every treatise that has been
put forth in the english tongue, yet will I somewhat show my mind in them.
There is but one kaye of heaven, which Christ calls the kaye of knowledge.
Luc. 11. And this kay The kayes Luke. 11.
is the word of God. Christ rebuked the law geuers for taking away this The
kay of knowledge is the word of God.
kay from the people: for they with their traditions, and false expositions had
fully excluded the kaye of knowledge which is the word of God, and had clean
shut up the Scripture, as ours have done now a days. It is also called the
kaye of David, which shuts, and no man opens: opens, Apoc. 3.
and no man shuts. Apoc. 3. And because of these two effects which it
works (for it both shuts and opens) has it the nomination of kayes, and
yet (as I said) indeed it is but one, which is the word of God. This kay or
kayes (now call it as you will since you know what it means) Christ delivered
unto Peter, and unto his other Apostles a like, which you shall easily perceive
if you mark where and when they were given. For Mat. 16. they were Math. 16.
only promised, and not yet given: for Christ said, I will give thee the
kayes, and not, I give thee. But after he was risen from death, then performed
he his promise, and gave the kayes to all indifferentlye, as thou may see,
Ioh. 20. And Luke cap. 24 John. 20. Luke. 24. How christ gave the kayes to
Peter and the rest of the Apostles.
expounds it, that he opened their wits to understand the Scripture, that
repentance and forgiveness might be preached. etc. Therefore it is the word
that binds and loses thorough the preaching of it. For when thou tellest
them their vices and iniquities condemning the^, by the law then bindest thou
them by the word of God: And when thou preachest mercy in Christ unto all
that repent, To open, and to shut, to bind and to lose, what it is.
then do thou loose them by the word of God. Therefore he that preaches not
the word of God, can neither bind nor lose, no though he call him self
pope. And contrariwise, he that preaches his word, he binds and loses as
well as Peter and Paul, although he be called but Sir John of the country.
And consequently, to say that the pope ca^ deliver any soul out of purgatory
(if there were one) is but a vain lie, except he can prove that he goes down
unto them, and The pope can deliver no soul out of purgatory, except he first
go thither, and preach unto them.
preaches unto them the word of God (which is the salt that must season
them, and kay that must let them out) for other loosing there is none. And
likewise, to say that the Pope can give any pardon to redeem sins, except he
preach me that Christ's blood has pardoned me, is even like vanity.

Me thinks also that he wadeth to deep to descend to purgatory by this
text. For the text says, that what soever he binds on earth, shall be Math.
16.
bound in heaven, and whatsoever he loses on earth, etc. But now they grant
themselves, that purgatory is Purgatory is not on earth, but as Rochester says
is the third place in hell.
not on earth, but the third place in hell: And therefore it passes his bonds
to stretch his hand to purgatory: and so this text can not serve him.

NOtwithstanding my lord is not content to give him this power only, but he
has so far waded in the popes power, that he has granted him full
authority to deliver all men from hell, if they be not damned already: For
(says he) whosoever has committed a capital crime, Rochester.
has thereby deserved damnation: Rochester is in this place far beside himself.
and yet may the Pope deliver him both from the crime, and also from the pain
due unto it. And he affirms that three times in the xxj. article for fear of
forgetting.

Upon this point will I a little reason Frith.
with my Lord, and so will I make an end. If the Pope may deliver any man from
the crime that he has committed and also from the pain due unto it, as you
affirm, then may he by the same authority deliver. xx. an hundred, a
thousand, yea and all the world: for I am sure you can show me no reason why
he may deliver some and not all. If he can do it, then let him deliver A plain
declaration of ye popes tyranny.
every man that is in the point of death both from the crime and from the
pain, and so shall never man more neither enter into hell nor yet into
Purgatory: which were the best deed and most charitablest that ever he did,
yea and this ought he to do (if he could) although it should cost him his own
life and soul thereto (as Moses and Exodus (...). Roma 9.
Paul give him example) but yet there is no ieoperdy of neither other. Now if
he ca^ do it (as you say) and will not, then is he the most wretched and cruel
tyrant that ever lived, even the very son of perdition and worthy to be
damned in an hundred thousand helles. For if he have received such The Pope a
proud shameless and tyranous Antichrist.
power of God that he may save all men and yet will not, but suffer so many to
be damned, I report me unto your selves what he is worthy to have?

Now if any man would solute this reason and say that he may do it, but that it
is not meet for him to do it, because that by their pains Gods justice may be
satisfied: I say that this their evasion is nothing worth, neither yet ca^ I
imagine any way whereby they may have any appare^ce to escape. For my Lord says
him self that the Pope must pacify Gods justice for every soul that he
delivers from Purgatory, and therefore A blasphemous pope and the devils
vicar.
has he imagined that the Pope has in his hand the merits of Christ's
passion which he may apply at his pleasure where he will. And also he says
that the merits of Christ's passion are sufficient to redeem all the sins in
the world. Now since these merits on their part are sufficient to satisfy ye
justice of God and redeem the whole world, and also that the pope has them in
his hand to distribute at his pleasure, then lacks there no more but even the
Popes distribution unto the the salvation of the world. For he may pacify Gods
wrath and satisfy his justice (says my Lord) by applying these merits to
them that lack good works. And so if the pope will, Gods justice may be fully
satisfied and the whole world saved. Now if he may so justly and easily save
the whole world (charity also mouyng him unto it) and yet will not apply these
merits The pope is the son of perdition worthy of more pain then can be
imagined, if Rochesters doctrine be true.
so frutefully, then is the fault only his, and he the son of perdition and
worthy more pain then can be imagined. And so is not the reason improued but
much more stablished, and as I think inevitable.

Behold I pray you whether my Lord of Rochester has brought our holy father
in auauncyng his power so high, even into yt deepest pit of hell. which (if my
Lord said true) it is impossible for him to avoid. But it chances unto him
even as it does customably where such pride reigns: for when they are at the
highest, then fall they down headlong unto their utter confusion and ruin.

If any man feel himself grieved, and not yet fully satisfied in this matter,
let him write his mind, and by Gods grace I shall make him an answer, and
that with speed.

Pray christen Reader that the word of God may increase.
Amen.
An other book against Rastell, named the subsedye or bulwark to his first
book, made by John Frithe prisoner in the Tower.
IT neadeth not Christian reader (I think) now that thou have ouerread and
diligently pondered in thine inward senses that the treatise of John Frith,
wherein he confuteth all the reason which Rastel, More, and Rochester, made for
the maintenance and upholding of the bitter pains of purgatory: to commend
unto thee this brief work following, named a subsedy, A subsedy, defense, or
bulwark.
defense, or bulwark to the same. And much les needs it to dehorte thee from
the vain and childish fear, which our forefathers have had of that place of
purgatory, as their good works which at this day remain upon the earth
founded for their thence deliverance, do testify. And forasmuch as thou art a
Christen man, and reioysest in Christ, I dare boldlye affirm for thee, that
thou take neither pleasure nor joy of that place, like as some persons Much
joy made for yt finding of purgatory although it were to small purpose.
do, which triumphed of late, and with much joy and clapping of hands sent
tidinges into all parts, that purgatory was found again: because they read
in a book named the Institution of a Christen man, this word Purgatory. And
yet have I not heard hitherto, that the self same persons have showed any
tokens of gladness, for Gods word translated into english: so that to me they
seem to rejoice more, to have the sely souls purged with punishments when
they be departed, then to have them purged with the word of God while they be
here. Who will think but as they have uttered their hearts concerning Purgatory
with their tongues, even so say they in their stomakes, that their holy father
the Pope (whom we may as justly call the Bishop of Rome, seeing Christ is
divided into Peter and Paul.
he is there the head of S. Peter's church: as we may call the head of S. Paul's
church in London, Bishop of London) has recovered again here in England his
old authority, yea that he never yet lost, because they find in their churches
copes, ropes, bells and beads, with other like holiness, and on themselves
long gowns, shaven crowns, and fingers anointed with the holy oil of
idleness. For who will say but that these holy relics declare the bishop of
Rome as clarkly as this word purgatory proves a place to be where souls
after the departure from their bodies suffer pains and punishments. Does not
this preaty pageant of purgatory signify and prognosticate what Tragedye they
will play hereafter, when the word of God shall blow and scatter from the face
of the earth, the dark clouds and mistes of men's inventions, and shall scour
away yt rust of fleshly understanding of the scriptures in other things
likewise as it has done in this, if ought may be found in that book wherewith
they may resist? that such things may be picked out of it, the fruit which
commonly has come of all counsels, conuocations, and synodes since the
Apostles time (very few excepted) causes me somewhat to fear: for if a man
wey the good with the bad that has sprung from them, he will perchance think
that the lay people of all estates may well and justly say, farewell the one
with the other: and no maruayll, for they have not been all the children of one
father that have been in counsels, as they have not been all sheep that have
gone in sheep clothing: and often times the greater part overcomes the
better. Which things gathered by experience and by reading, causes me
oftentimes to wish, that they which would be counted sinceere and true
ministers of the Gospel, either might and would clean abstain from such
counselles, that they have no part in them, or else that they would give no more
place to the fruits of infidelity (I mean man's inventions and carnal
interpretations which the faith in Christ never begatte) then S. Paul gave to
Peter his colleague, when he left the table of the Gentiles and went to the
Jews, which fact of Peter in my judgment Paul might more conveniently have
approved, seeing Peter did it to the intent he would not offend his weak
brethren the Jews with his eating: then the true and sincere ministers of
Christ in the Gospel may wink at many things used in these days among the
disciples of the Gospel: much less may they approve the^ with the fashion of
their own living, and confirm them with the auctoritye of a Counsel, and with
preching they say it is not time to speak against the^: yet is it time to
leave them, and no longer to seem to allow them, unless they entend always
to walk in them. Had the author of this book looked after a time, as some do,
he had not written against Purgatory when he did. I fear me some maintain
blindness more with their simulation, then they open the light with their
preaching. But this have I spoken (good Reader) besides my purpose, which was
none other then to admonish the Rochester More, and Rastel, are all three
defenders of one herely.
that although Rochester, More, and Rastell, have all three (as thou perceiuest
by reading this former treatise) stiffely defended one heresy, yet should
thou not have of all three, one judgment or opinion.

More and Rochester were men of high dignity in this world, the one a Bishop,
the other Chauncelor of this noble realm of England, both ancient in years,
of so great wit, and so More and (...)of (...) and (...).
singular erudition in all kind of learning, esteemed as well of themselves,
as of many other, that no two like might in all this land be found: it was
thought that for their dignity no man durst, for their years wit and
learning no man was hable to gay^^ayt them: wherefore they were persw^d to be
the most meet of all other to ^ake in hand the defense of the terrible pains
of purgatory, either the very ^ou^datio^, or else the chief building se^ upon yt
fou^datio^ of ye church of Rome. Rastell had nothing common with them. But only
many years, and a wit sophistical, which he called natural reason. As
Rastel was but an ^rior to Rochester and More.
appartayning to Gods word, he acknowledged himself ignorant thereof:
notwtstanding he had such opinion of his wit, that he thought he could as
well prove purgatory by it, as the other two had done by the scriptures, wherein
I think he was not deceived. And as these three persons were not like, so
took they the answer made to them not a like: More and Rochester More and
Rochester thought foul ^ne of John F^^th^^ answer.
thought foul scorn (see what the glory of this world, and high estimation of
our selves does) that a young man of small reputation should take upon him so
clean contrary to their opinion to write against them, and (to be short) took
the matter so greuouslye, that they could never be at quiet in their stomachs
until they had dronken his blood. Rastell though he perceived his natural
reason to be sore said to, yet was he not malicious, as the other were: and
therefore wrote he again. Which work of Rastell came Rastel was not malicious,
but gladly recognized his ignorance.
to his hands, when he was prisoner in the Tower of London, where he made the
answer following to the same: which answer after Rastel had read, he was
well content to count his natural reason foolishnes, and with hearty thanks
given to God, became a child again, and sucked of the wisdom which comes
from above and saves all that be norished therewith: In the which he continued
to his lives end with the honor and glory of God. To whom be praise for ever.

Amen.
Here follows the Preface of this book.
BRother Rastell I thank you that it has pleased you to be so favorable unto
me a poor prisoner, as to show me a copy of your book which you have
written to confute my reasons and Scripture that I have alleged against
Purgatory, for that has caused me to make a subsidy defense and bulwark to
my book, which by Gods grace shall be an occasion to open more light, although
not to you, yet at the lestwise unto them whose hearts the prince of this world
has not blinded but 2. Cor. 4.
that the light of the Gospel and glory of Christ may shine in them. And
where as you write and protest that you will bring no Scripture against me. But
only rehearse my Scripture again which I have alleged vnperfeitly and wound
me with mine own darts, and will but even do as one that plays at tennes
with an other tossing the balle again, I do very well admit your
similitude.

Notwithstanding you know right well that it is not enough for a man playing at
tennes to toss the balle again, but he John Frith seems that he could pla^
well at ten^e.
must so toss it that the other take it not. For if the other smite it over
again then is the game in as great ieoberdy as it was before, besides that he
must take heed that he neither smite to short of the line not yet under, for
then it is a loss and he had been better to let it go. And finally sometime a
man smites over and thinks all won, and yet an ungracious post stands in
the way and makes the ball to rebounde back again over the cord and so
loses the game. And that will anger a man, and I assartayne you that ye have
tossed never a ball but ye offend in one of these points, and yet besides
that some time ye play a touch of legerdemayne and cast me a ball which when
it comes I perceive to be none of mine, and all the court shall judge the
same. These points shall be declared when we come to them and now I will
answer in order.

Rastell.
IN your Prologue you assigned two causes of the making of your first book of
purgatory with out allegyng any textes of scripture for ye proof thereof, which
are the controversy of two sorts of people. One sort you Rastel alleges
two causes why he made his first book in the defense of purgatory.
say be those that believe not in Christ, but deny Christ and his Scripture as
be the Turks Paynimes and such other miscreauntes. An other sort be they that
believe in Christ and his scripture nor will deny no text of holy scripture, but
yet they will construe expound and interpret these texts after their own
wills and obstinate mind. etc.

Now let us consider your foresaid causes and ponder whether your book have or
may do any such good as you say pretended, and whether it have converted those
sorts of people, or else be any thing lykely to do such a fact. And first let
us see what it profits yt first sort which are infidels not beleuyng in
Christ nor his scripture. Our savior Christ says, he that believes John. 3
John Frith answers to Rastels two causes.
is not damned, and John Baptist confirms the same saying: he that believes
in ye son has everlasting life, but he that believes not in the son shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. Here it is evident not by
my exposition, but by the consent of all Christen men, that those infidels are
damned, for what intent then should Rastell teach them that there is a
Purgatory: without Christ there is no way but damnation, as scripture and all
faithful men testify. Then would I know by what way he would persuade that
there were a Purgatory (which should be away and a mean to salvation and not
to damnation) for the^ which believe not in Christ. This Rastelles first cause
proved to be in vain.
I am sure of (and I think Rastell be leueth it also) that the infideles shall
never come in it though there were one? This you may see that his first cause
is very vain, and that if they did believe it they were in deed deceived.

Now let us proceed unto the second sort of people (which believe in Christ and
his scripture) and yet misconstrue it expoundyng it after their own wills. And
let us see what fruit they take of this book and what it profits them and we
shall find that it less serves these men then the first: for if this men
believe in Christ and in his Scripture, then is it not possible that they should
receive or admit that thing which is against the Scripture both by the
exposition of them selves and of all the world. For this is both against
Scripture and all faithful me^ that there should be any way to health if we
exclude Christ and his Scripture. And since Purgatory is counted away to health,
he that would go about to prove it (secludyng Christ and Scripture) is against
Scripture and all faithful men.

Besides that if they be so obstinate that they will not receive the very
Scripture but expound it after their own wills and wrest it after the same,
then will they much less receive your book which is so plain against
scripture, and therefore if you would think that they could be tamed by your
book which notwithstanding so wresteth Scripture, then may I very well In apt
and good example.
lyken you to him that has a wild horse to tame which when he perceives that
he can not hold him with a scoktishe snafle will yet labor to break him with
a roote^ twine threde: So that I can espy no manner of profit that ca^ come of
your book if you can allege no better causes then you yet show, but that it
had been a great deal better unwritten.

And brother Rastel where you say Frith answers gently Rastels bitter
tauntes.
that I auaunce and boast my self much more then becomes me, and that I
detract and slander my neighbors, and that I provoke all men that read my
book rather to vice then to virtue with such other things as ye lay to my
charge, I trust I shall declare my inconvenience and give you a sufficient
answer.

An answer to Rastels first chapter which reproves me for boastyng my self.
IN the first chapter of this book Rastell Rastell.
labors to prove that I am sore over seen in laudyng and boastyng my self
and that I like my self so well that he is sure that other men do like me the
less, and that he fears that God will therefore like me and favor me rather
the worse then the better.

Here he iuggeleth with me, and Frith.
would make me believe that he tossed me mine own ball again, but when I
behold it, I perceive it to be none of mine: for he has cut out all that
Frith meteth here with a false ball.
should make for me, so that he has given it clean an other shape then ever
I intended that it should have, as it appears by his writing which rehearses
my words in this manner.

I am sure, there are many that Rastell.
marvel that I being so young dare attempt to dispute this matter against these
three persons. But my words Frith.
are these: I am sure that there are many that will much marvel, that I being
so young and of so small learning dare dispute this matter. etc.

Here Rastell leaves out the words, (and of so small learning) for if he had
put that in, he had bewrayed himself. For I think no man so mad as to say,
that he which says himself to be both young and of small learning, should
praise and boaste him self.

Also immediately after the words Note here the modesty of John Frith.
of his first allegation I say on this manner: And as touching my lerning I must
needs acknowledge (as the truth is) that it is very small, which I think is
but a base boasting: and anon after I say, I would not that any man should
admit my words or learning except they will stand with the scripture, and be
approved thereby. Lay them to the touchstone, and try them with Gods word, if
they be found false and contrary, then damn them, and I also shall revoke them
with all mine heart. etc.

Finally, I exhorted them to read my book, not aduertising who speaks the
words, but rather what is spoken: by which words you might well see, that I
intended not to boast my self, and all this have I written, and be left it out
eue^ in the first page (as he calls it) wherein he reports that I boast my
self.

Notwithstanding one thing does Rastell.
sore vex him, that I should recite the Epistle of S. Paul, whereby he says I
would have men believe that I had the spirit of God, and think that though I
be young that I see visions and espy the truth, and that mine elders have
dreamed dreams and wandered in fantasies.

This he recounteth to be a great Frith.
boast, and that this one place should win him the field: whereunto I
answer that indeed my words do not prove that thing which you seem No man
ought to condemn, that which he has not seen.
so surely to gather of them: but my words do argue on this manner, that no man
ought to condemn a thing before he read it, and then to give sentence, and
because you seem ignorant in the matter, I shall declare it unto you, and how
it stands, It is a color of Rhetorike, and is called Auantopodosis, that is
to say, An answer to an objection that a man might have here made, on this
manner: thou grauntest thy self young and of so small learning, do thou then
think that we shall once read or regard thy book, specially since it is
written against ancient me^ both of great wit and dignity? To these two
points I answer preventing their objection, that they should not despise it
because of my youth: for as the spirit of God is bound to no place, even so is
he not addict to any age or person, but enspyreth where he will, and when he
will, and bring in for an example God inspireth youth as well as age.
that he enspyred young Timothy proving thereby, that the youth of it self is
not to be despised, but according to the learning which it brings, and that
therefore they may not despise my youth, but first read what doctrine I bring,
and thereafter to judge it. No more in this I prove not, that I am enspyred, and
have the spirit of God as Timothy had, but only prove that God may enspyre
youth, as he did Tymothe, and that therefore ye ought first to read before you
condemn: for you know not who is enspyred, and who not, until you have read
their works, or seen their factes. Thus you may see that my words define
not, that all youth is enspired, although some may be: but I exhort (...).
These. 1.
that no man despise prophesies, but prove all, and approve that is good. And
to make the matter more plain I shall bring you an example out of Paul to the
Hebrews, which Hebr. 13.
exhorts them to hospitality, for by that some men unawares have received
Angels to harbor, be not therefore unmindful of it. Here Paul exhorts you
to hospitality, and showing you that by those means some men have received
angels into their house, he would not have you think yt all the gestes that
you shall receive shall be angels, but some shall be lewd losels. And likewise
I in exhorting you to read my book, and not despising my youth, because that
sometime God enspireth the young, would not have you think that the books made
of young men (which ye shall receive) shall be wholesome doctrine, but some men
be lewd and unfruitful, nevertheless even as if they received not those gests
they should also put away angels if any came. So if you despise to read such
books as be written by young men, you may also fortune to despise them which
are written by the inspiration of Christ's spirit, and therefore ye ought to
read.

But be it in case I had indeed praised Frith speaks to cauillers.
my self (as I have not) and that I had said that I had the Spirit of God,
what inconvenience should follow thereof? would you thereof argue that my
doctrine were false? If that were a good argument, then were Christ's Doctrine
false, then were Paul a false prophet, and our faith nothing: for Christ said
to the Jews John 8.
that he was the light of the world. And again he said, It is my Father that
glorified me, whom ye call your God. Now if it had been a sufficient A man may
use godly and modest boastyng.
argument to condemn his doctrine because the world calls it boasting, the^
should we have believed no truth at all. Besides that Paul seems not 2. Cor.
11.
a little to boast him self, if men look on it with a carnal eye, for he
says, that he thincketh not him self inferior unto yt highest Apostles: and
says again, that if they glory to be the ministers of Christ (though he
speak unwisely) he is more copious in labors, in stripes above measure, in
prison more often, often at the point of death. etc.

Should we for these words think that his doctrine were not right? Nayverely
that does not improve the doctrine, but that it may be good and wholesome for a
man may boast him self and do well so he refer yt praise to God from whom
all goodness comes: but be it in case that I should say that God of his mere
mercy and for the love that he owes me in Christ and his blood had given me
his spirit This is a thankful, and godly boasting.
that I might be to his laud and praise to whom be thanks for ever. Amen.
would you think that this were so great a boastyng that the doctrine should
be impaired thereby? Ah blind guides I pray God give you the light of
understanding, I beseech you brother Rastell be not disco^tent with me if I
ask you one question, be ye a Christen man or no? I am sure you will answer
yes, then if I brought you the text of Paul which says, he that has not yt
spirit of God is none Roma. 8.
of his, I pray you how will you avoid it, notwithstanding if you would avoid
yt text, yet will I lay an other block in the way that you shall not be able to
remove, and that is the saying of Paul. 2. Corin. 13. Know ye not 2. Cor. 13.
your selves that Christ is in you? except ye be reprobate persons, now how
soever you would judge of your selves, I think verily that I am no such and
therefore whereas before I did not so write. Now I certify you that Frith the
faithful servant and true martyr of Christ.
I am Christ's, conclude what ye will, and the day shall come that you shall
surely know that so it is, albeit in mean season I be reputed a laughyng stoke
in this world for I know in whom I trust and he can not deceive me.

Then brings he against me that Rastell.
I say we have been long secluded from the Scripture and also that our fore
fathers have not had yt light of Gods word opened unto them.

I marvel what Rastell means Frith.
by bryngyng this for his purpose, for Rastell shows himself to be very
ignorant.
I think it no boastyng of my self, but if ye think that it be untrue, I
think he is very blind. For what Scripture has the poor commons been
admitted unto even til this day? It has been hid and locked up in a strange
tongue and from them that have attained the knowledge of that tongue has it
been locked with a thousand false gloses of Antichrists making and innumerable
laws. And where I say our forefathers have not Frith shows his meaning how
yt scripture was kept from our forefathers
had the light of Gods word opened unto them, I mean that they have not the
Scripture in their own mother tongue, that they might have conferred these
iugglyng mistes with the light of Gods word as the process of my words can
testify which he has holy left out, but I beseech the Christian reader once to
read the place for my discharge and his confusion, ye shall find it in the
second leaf of my book.

And now he alleges against me that I should say this: judge Christen Rastell.
reader what reasons Rastell has brought and how he has soluted the^, for in
my mind both his reasons and solutions are so childish and unsavory, so
unlearned and baren so full of faults and fantasies that I rather pity the
man's deep ignorance and blyndnes which has so deceived him self through
Philosophy and natural reason, then I fear that he by his vain probations
should allure any man to consent unto him.

I think Rastell lays not this against Frith.
me, because I boast my self in these words: And verily as touching the truth
of those words I will add thus much more unto the^, that I never wist man yt
was counted wise which has brought so slender reasons except he intended to
destroy a thing which ye seem to have build.

And finally where as I exhort all men to judge and confer the Scriptures
Rastell.
which Sir Thomas More and my Lord of Rochester allege for their opinions
and would have them to ponder their reasons and my Rastell cauileth.
solutions unto them annexyng these words I am sure yt my small learning has
condemned their high eloquence, that my folly has brought to naught their
wisdom and that my youth has disclosed their festered ignorance.

There Rastell thinks that I stand Frith.
well in my own conceit and boast my self above the Moon because I touch M.
More his kynsman: but let Rastell take this for an answer, if M. More would
keep him within his own bonds that is with meddling of More would not be
ignorant in any thing and therefore understood nothing as he should have
understand, neither his duty to the prince, nor yet to God.
worldly matters only, I would never compare with him, yet he must remember
that a dawber may correct him in his own craft, but it is even as Socrates
says, when a man is wise in one thing then will he take upon him to define
all things and be ignorant in nothing and so disdayneth the gift that he has
and proves him self unwise.

Furthermore I see no great praise that I here attribute unto my self: but
confess my small learning, my folly, and my youth: nevertheless if he recount
it a praise, because I say it has condemned their hie eloquence and their
wisdom, and disclosed their ignorance, then let him also annexe the words
that I wrote saying. And it is even the old practice of God, to choose the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, to choose the weak to
confound the mighty, A good conclusion made by John Frith against Rastels first
chapter.
and to choose the vile things which are of no reputation to confound the^ of
hye degree, that no flesh might bost it self in his sight, to whom only be
praise and thanks for ever. Amen.

Where all men may see that I refer all praise to him which only is worthy:
and so I may conclude, that you have not looked indifferently on my book.

An answer unto Rastels second chapter, which improueth me for railing and
dispraising others.
IN the second chapter he raungeth Rastell.
the field, and searches out with all diligence, what word I have spoken that
might be taken in the worst sense, and calls them railing, gesting, and
scolding words: And because he would have me to be abhorred of the Reader, he
alleges not only these words that are spoken against himself, but also
that are spoken against my lord of Rochester, and sir Thomas More, not that he
entendeth to answer for them, or to defend their parties ye may be sure, but
only to leave nothing behind which should seem to make for him, like a noble
orator, the words that he reproves are these:

There Rastell takes his foundation Rastell.
upon a stark lie, and there he makes two lies: and there he makes three
lies.

Here I would desire my brother Frith.
Rastell to pardon me of a little ignorance, for surely I thought it had been
no more offense to call a lie, a lie, then to call a sheep a sheep:
notwithstanding since he recounteth it to be railing, gesting, and scolding, I
will hereafter temper my self, and change my words, and will say that when he
lies (that by his leave) he makes a fitten.

It angreth him when I say, that Rastell.
Rastel has lost his wit in purgatory, and therefore I will say so no more.
Frith.
But this I will affirm (be Rastell never so furious) that whosoever makes
such reasons and solutions, and counts them good in earnest, that he has no
wit in his head, wheresoever he lost it: but if you would read Rastels first
argument which I have set in my book in the twelf leaf, then you shall
perceive whether I say the truth, or not.

Also he aleageth that I should say, that Rastell.
saying of Rastell is against scripture: but if ye count that railing, and and
would not have me say so much unto him, I will count the man somewhat Frith.
stately: and this I ensure him, that if God suffer me to live, I will say so
again, take it as he will.

Also he recites as a great reproach Rastell.
that I should say, I marueyll how our scholemen may abide this fellow. And
surely the same I say again, for Frith.
he proves both saint Thomas and them also foles and double f^oles, which if
I should so do, would be counted baynous heresy.

Then he rehearses what I say of Rastell.
M. More, and my L. of Rochester, and all to help his matter, that when I say,
the small probations and slender reasons that those two witted men, Sir Thomas
More, and my Lord of Rochester had brought to confirm Purgatory, made my
heart to yerne.

What railing or jesting this is, let Frith.
other men judge, but this I dare auow that I said the truth: for what should a
man do or say, to see them so contrary in their tales. M. More says,
Rochester contrary to More, and More contrary to Rochester.
that there is fire and no water in purgatory: and my lord of Rochester says,
that there is both fire and water. M. More says, that the ministers of
punishment are devils: and my lord of Rochester says, that the ministers of
punishment are angels. M. More says, that both the grace and charity of them
that lie in the pains of purgatory are increased: my lord of Rochester says,
the souls of purgatory obtain there neither more faith, nor grace, nor
charity the^ they brought in with them. Now judge good Reader, whether I have
rayled, or said the truth, but all this does Rastell leave out full craftily:
he recites full diligently both the head and tail, but the middle which
expounds the matter will he not let you see.

He alleges also against me, that Rastell.
I say, M. More is sore deceived, and set on the sand even at the first brunt,
and in the beginning of his voyage, and that I would wish M. More a little more
wit.

Even that I say again, and affirm Frith.
it to be true, and is so evidently proved in the beginning of mine answer
against M. More, that I need to say nothing, but only refer the reader unto
the place.

Also he improueth me for saying in Rastell.
an other place, that M. More shows him in one text twice ignorant, and yt
he is to buste, for he understands not the phrase of scripture.

This and such other sayings he Frith.
alleges (which I pass over:) for I count it folly to spend paper and
labor about the rehearsing of them, for if you read my book, you shall see
all these points so plainly proved that he might be ashamed to make mention of
them.

This he counts gesting, slaundering, Rastell.
and railing, saying that no reasonable man will think these points to be
things belonging to virtue, but rather spices and branches Rastell is a
bitter taunter.
of pride, and that I show not my self therein charitable but rather malicious,
nor no wisdom therein but rather ^olly, adding that if I had been half a
year at two schools, that is to say, the schole of discretion, and the schole
of charity, I should more have prospered in virtuous learning, then I have
done in other schools this vij. year: and says, that I have been at the
schools of slaundering, railing, and gesting.

Dear brother, if it had been so, Frith.
that I had spoken certain words in deed, which might have seemed in your
eyes to be railing, detracting, and slaundring (as I have not, saving a little
gesting) would you disprove my doctrine thereby? What will you then say to S.
John baptist which calls Math. 3.
the pharisees (then heads of the church, as are now our doctoures) generation
of vipers? would you therefore conclude that his doctrines were naught? I
think you be not so chyldish. And it seems this one sentence to be more
railing, and slaundering, then all that I have written.

What will you say to Christ which called the scribes and pharisees hypocrites,
Math. 15. 16. 22. And in the 13. he seems to rail above measure where he
calls the^ hypocrites, The reproving of the papisticall hypocrites must not
be called railing.
and blind guides, painted sepulchers, which outwardlye appear righteous, but
within are full of hypocrisy, serpents, and generation of Vipers. Besides that
he calls Herod Fox. Luc. 13: and the Jews Luc. 13.
he called a froward and aduouterous generation, Math. 12. 16: and in the 17.
he says, O unfaithful and overthwart nation: would you think it should
excuse the Jews which refused his doctrine to say that he rayled, and that no
reasonable man would think those things to be points, belonging to virtue,
but rather spices and branches of pride and that he showed not him self
charitable, but malicious, nor no wisdom therein but folly, would it excuse
them to say (as you do to me) that if he had been one half year at schole of
discretion and charity, he should more have prospered in virtuous learning and
that he had been at the schools of sclanderyng, railing and iestyng.

Finally S. Paul in your eyes might appear to rail and slander and to be
clean destitute of Gods spirit, which as Luke says replenished Luc. 13.
with the holy Ghost said to Clemas that resists him. Acts. 13. O thou full
of all suttelty and deceit thou son of the devil and enemy of all
righteousness cease not to peruerte the rightwayes of the Lord. I can bring
many ^^o such sayings of Peter, John, James, and Judas, and yet I think you
will not improve their doctrine thereby but because I study to be short, I
shall count it sufficient to have warned the reader of this. Notwithstanding
peradventure Rastell will not yet be answered, but will say that albeit I have
touched enough as concerning those things that appear railyng and slanderyng
in his eyes, yet I brought none that jest as I do, whereunto I may answer and
allege for me Helias the The Prophets and Apostles were great reprouers of
the ungodly and wicked.
Prophet which both mocked the false Priests and iested with them, saying call
loud unto your Gods for peradventure they are a sleep and ca^ not here, or
else they be gone out of town. I cannot enough meruell that my brother Rastell
would use such manner of reasoning with me as to improve my doctrine because of
my raylyng and iestyng.

For there with he has made a foul hole in his kinsmans best coat for every
man perceives that M. More his books are so full of railing, gestyng and
baudye tales, that if the furious Momus and Venus had take out their parts
there should be very little left for Vulcanus.

Rastell.
After this Rastell dissenteth to the purpose of his matter and would prove that
my expositions of Scripture are not good because they are an occasion to bring
yt people to boldness of sin and to move the people to delight in other men's
faults, and to laugh thereat, and to put you an example: he says, if I should
take upon me the exposition of this text. In principio erat verbum and verbum
erat apud deum etc. and expound it after this manner.

As it is a fond exposition, so it is false meter.
In the beginning of this year
John Frith is a noble Clerk
He killed a mylstone with his spear
Keep well your geese your dogs do bark.
I trow says Rastell all wise men would think that this were a fond
exposition and yet this exposition would please children fools and mad men, as
well as the exposition of S. Austen or S. Hierome or any other Doctor of ye
Church, because it would make them to laugh, so (says Rastell) Frith makes
such expositio^s with iestyng and railing to make the people laugh, not
regardyng to edify the people, nor to provoke them to virtue mekenes or
charity nor to leave their sin, but rather gives them boldness and to believe
that there is no Purgatory nor A sore and fond saying of Rastell.
hell, but mocketh and iesteth at those reasons that be made for proof of
Purgatory.

Now as touching the first part, Firth.
where he says that my expositions be an occasion to bring the people to
boldness of sin, I ask him why? his answer is because I give the^ boldness
that there is no Purgatory, nor yet hell, thereto Rastell by his leave (makes
a fitten) I dare not say he Frith is a good scholar and sone has learned his
lesson, he will say no more they lie, for that is bitter.
makes a lie for that he would call railing for I never denied hell, but
affirm in many places of my book and eue^ in the first side of mine answer
against him I affirm hell, and perpetual damnation, but when ye come to the
proof of his words, then you shall see how wisely the man concludes, for he
thinks that ab inferiori ad suu^ superius confuse distribue, men shall think
it a good consequent as if I should say that we lack fire in prison, then
would he conclude that there lacked fire in all Middlesex. Or if I would say
their were no wit in Rastels head then would he conclude that there were no
wit in no ma^s head, but he has so long studied Philosophy, that he has
clean forgotten his principals of Sophistry, notwithstanding we will forgive
him this fault for the man is somewhat aged and therefore I think it is long
since he read them, and that they are now out of his memory: nevertheless he
will say that his argument is not soluted for although I deny not hell, yet I
deny Purgatory, and so I give the people an occasion to sin, because they
fear not Purgatory, whereunto I have so sufficiently answered in Rastels vij.
argument that I wonder that he is not a shamed to bring the same again but he
trusts that my books shall never be read, and his may go surely abroad, and
therefore he may say what he will only he cares not what he says so he hold
not his peace.

And where he reports that I Rastell.
make expositions to make the people to delight to hear of other men's fautes
and to laugh thereat, thereto will I say nay, till he be at laysure to prove it,
Frith.
and where he says, if he should take upon him to expound, In principio erat
verbum in this manner.

Rastell.
In the beginning of this year
John Frith is a noble Clerk
He killed a mylstone with his spear
Keep well your geese the dogs do bark.
Saying that all wise men would say that this were a fond exposition.

Thereto I answer that, saying: Frith.
for the ryme and meter they might well say that a goose had made it for any I
goose would have made better ryme and meter then Rastell did.
reason, that is therein, and yet as touching the meter, the second verse
lacks a foot, and is shorter then his fellows, but if you put out this word
Frith, and put in this word Rastell for it, then shall his meter also be
perfect, and that halting verse shall run merely with his fellows upon his
right feet on this manner.

In the beginning of this year
John Rastell is a noble Clerk
He killed a mylstone with his spear
Keep well your geese the dogs do bark.
Thus I have amended his meter, Frith takes pain to amend Rastels meter, but
not his reason.
but as for the reason I leave it to him self to amend it at his laysure. In
the end of his second chapter he says that I entende with my expositions to
bring the people to believe in four other great errors, whereof the first is
that there is no hell, ordained for any that is of Christ's faith, although he
do never so many sins but let us see how he proves it.

An Answer to Rastels third Chapter, which would prove that I deny hell.
IT seems (says Rastel) by the reasons Rastell.
that Frith has alleged that his intent is to bring the people in belief
that there is no hell, for I allege in my answer to Rastels dialoge the saying
of S. Paul. Ephe. 1. Christ Ephe. 1.
chose us in him before the beginning of the world, that we might be holy and
without spot in his sight, and again Ephesians. 5. Christ loved his congregation
Frithes answer to Rastels third chapter.
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it in the fountain of water
through the word to make it without spot or wrincle or any such thing, but that
it should be holy and without blame.

And upon these textes I conclude, Frith.
that if Christ have so purged us that we are without spot, wrinckle or blame in
his sight, (as Paul testifies) then will he never cast us into Purgatory. For
what should be purged in them, that are without spotte, wrinckle or blame. And
then somewhat to declare the matter how we be sinners as long as we live, and
yet without sin in the sight of God, add these words which I would that
all men did well note, and because Rastell leaves out the best of the matter,
I will rehearse my own words again.

Peradventure every man perceives not what this means that we are rightwise
in his sight, seeing that every man is a sinner. 1. Ioh. 2. therefore I will
breefely declare the meaning of the Apostel. This is first a clear case, that
there lives no man upon the earth without sin, not withstanding all they
that were chosen in Christ before the foundation of How we are righteous in the
sight of God, and yet ^e sinners.
the world were laid, are without spot of sin in the sight of God. Ephesians. 1.
so that they are both sinners, and rightwise if we consider the imperfection of
our faith and charity, if we consider the conflict of the flesh and the
spirit. Galath. 5. if we consider our rebellious members which are under
sin. Romans 7. then are we grievous sinners: and contrary wise, if we believe
that of that merciful favor God gave his most dear son to redeem us from
our sin, if we believe that he imputes not our sins unto us, but y^ his
wrath is pacified in Christ and his blood, if we believe that he has freely
given us his Christ, and with him all things, so that we be destitute of no
gift. Romans 8. then are we righteous Roma. 8.
in his sight, and our conscience at peace with God, not through our selves,
but through our Lord Jesus Christ. To. 5. So may thou perceive Roma. 5.
that thou art a sinner in thy self, and yet art thou rightwise in Christ,
for We are sinners in our selves and yet righteous in Christ.
through him is not thy sin imputed nor reckened unto thee, and so are they to
whom God imputes not their sins, blessed rightwise without spot, wrinkle, or
blame. Romans 4. Psalm. 31. Roma. 4. Psalm. 31.
And therefore will he never thrust the^ into purgatory, and for proof of this
I allege (as Rastel bears me witness) diverse texts of S. Paul. Ephesians. 2. Romans
4. 5. 7. 8. but that notwithstanding Rastell.
Rastel says that I have not recited them sufficiently, for I have left out
somewhat which I have rehearsed for the opening of the truth, and then brings
in that S. Paul exhorts and bids us we shall use no fornication,
uncleanness, avarice, filthe or foolish speeches, for such shall have no
inheritance in the kingdom of heaven, and even so say I too, but judge good
Fi^^h.
reader, what is this to the purpose: for it neither makes for purgatory,
neither against it. This text I could have alleged if I had endeavored my
self that we should do good works (which I never knew christian man deny)
but else as touching my matter it is nothing to the purpose, and as well he
might have improued me because I bring in no text to prove that yt father of
heaven is god, or to prove that which never man doubted of.

Then he alleges Paul. To. v. vj. Rastell.
saying, though grace do reign through Christ, shall we therefore dwell in
sin, nay God forbid says Paul, and even so say I again: he alleges Romans
viij. that there is no dampnation Rastell sets a trap wherein he will be taken
him self.
to them which be in Christ Jesus if they live not after the flesh, and even so
say I, but Rastell will say the contrary anon.

Besides that he alleges Romans iij. we be freely justified by grace, by
Christ's redemption to show his justice for the remissyon of sin done before
(and yet says Rastell) Paul says that the law is not destroyed by faith but
made stable, but this has Frith left out of his book to cause the people to
believe that they be clean purged by the blood of Christ only, and that there
need no purgatory.

By these words you may evidently Frith.
perceive what Rastell means by this alleging of Paul, for the establishing
of the law, verily that the work of the law should justify and The works
of the law can not justify us.
clean purge you from sin which is contrary to Paul and all scripture, for
even in this same Chapter that he alleges, Paul says: that of works of the
law no flesh shall be justified in his sight, and says that the rightwisenesse
of God comes by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe.
But as touching good works, I will touch more hereafter.

Furthermore Rastell says, that if Rastell.
my arguments could prove that there is no purgatory, it must follow
Rastelles blind argument.
as well that there is no hell for us that be christen men though we continue
still in sin: for if we be blessed with out spot, wrinkle, or blame, and that
therefore he will not cast us into purgatory, then he will not cast us into
hell whatsoever sin we do commit.

Here Rastell utters his blindenes Frith.
unto you, and shows you what understanding he has in scripture: first he
armeth himself with a false supposition, and yet thereupon he concludes his
argument falsely. His supposition is this, that al men which are baptized with
material water are very Christen men and have the true faith, Note well this
worthy and learned argument.
and be those which Paul affirms to be without spot, blame, or wrinkle. But
thereto I say nay, for even as the outward circumcision made not the Jews the
elect people and children of salvation, so does not the outward baptism make
us the faithful members of Christ: but as they were the children of God, which
were inwardly circumcised, even so they that are washed inwardly from the
concupiscens of this world, are the members of Christ, whom Paul affirms so
to be purged through his blood. Again, you may know that Rastell knows none
other faith but that which may stand with all manner of sin, but the faith
which we speak of, is the same which works through charity, whereof Paul,
speaks Gal. 5. They that have this faith, are borne of God and sin not,
these Gallat. 5. 1. John 3.
that have this faith do hope and look daily for deliverance out of this
thraldom and body of sin: and in the mean season they purify themselves 1.
John. 3. (...). John. 2.
as he is pure. For if a man will say that he knows Christ or believes in
him, and keeps not his commandments, he is a liar, and we renounce him to
be any of this number that we speak of. And when Rastell says, I would
conclude there is no hell for them that be Christen men, though they continue
still in sin. I Frith.
answer, he that commits sin is of the devil, and I say again, that the
Christen that we spoke of, which are the children of God cannot continue Such
christen people as are the children of God, will not dwell nor abide in sin^e,
and so for the^ there is no hell.
still in sin, but seek all means to fulfill Gods commandments.
Notwithstanding the christen which Rastel speaks of which are the children of
the devil, may do as they list: and indeed they had need to make a friend of
Rastell to help them into his purgatory, if it be any better then hell: for
they shall never come in heaven, except they repent and walk innocently Luke.
12.
in this world, as Christ and his little flock have ever done: for they that
walk otherwise are none of his, though they wear miters.

This little flock it is that are so The smaller number belong to Christ, and
not y^ greater.
purged (and not Rastels multitude) and for this is there neither hell nor
purgatory ordained, even as for the hope that continues still in sin is
ordained no heaven. And that there is no hell ordained for these faithful
folowers of Christ, I will prove even by this word of Paul which Rastel
rehearsed before. Romans 8. That there Romans 8.
is no damnation to them that be in Christ Jesus, if they live not after the
flesh. Here Rastell has smitten the ball quite under the cord, and has Here
Rastel is taken in his own trappe.
alleged that, that shall condemn him. For if there be no damnation, but
because you are somewhat slow in perceauing the matter, I shall reduce it into
a Sillogismus on this manner: There is no damnation unto them Mayor.
that be in Christ Jesus if they live not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. Every hell is damnation. Ergo, there is no hell to them that be in
Christ Jesus Minor.
if they live not after the flesh but after the spirit. This is in the first
figure made by Relarent. not by any profit that I think that the poor
co^mo^s can take by such babblyng but only to satisfy your mind and
pleasure. Notwithstanding one thing I must Rastel falsyfieth the scripture.
put you in remembrance, that you have falsely translated the text for the text
has not that co^ditional although I was contented to take it at your hands to
see what you could prove, but the text says thus there is no damnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh but after the sprite:
where Paul does certify you that they which are in Christ Jesus, walk not
after the flesh but after 1. Cor. 8. Galath. 2.
the spirit, so that you may gather by Paul that if they walk not after the
spirit they are not in Christ Jesus, that is to say: they are none of Christ's,
although Rastell will call them Christen men, therefore dear brethren look
that no man deceive him self, for Christ is not yt minister of sins. If we
be delivered from sin through Roma. 6. 1. John. 2. Phil. 2. Pet. 1.
Christ, then must we walk in a new conversation of our life, or else we are
still in darkness. Remember that we have this precious treasure in frail,
britell and earthy vessels, let us therefore with fear and trembling, work our
health, and make stable our vocation and election, for if we retain the Roma.
1.
truth and knowledge of God in sin and unrighteousness we shall shortly
perceive the wrath of God upon us with infinite delusions, and the end of us
shall be worse then the beginning: awake therefore and understand your health.

Now you may see how he concludes that I establyshe this error, that there is
no hell, for seeing mine arguments, There is no hell to those that are in
christ Jesus.
and Paul Romans viij. do conclude that there is no hell nor dampnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, and are his faithful followers, he thinks it should
well follow that if there be no hell for them, that there is no hell for no
man: for in his second chapter, and also in the beginning of the third, he
says that I deny hell, There is a ^or such as fear not God nor (...) his
commandments.
and when we come to his probation, there is nothing said but that which Paul
confyrmeth, that is, there is no damp^ton for them that are in Christ Jesus,
which walk not after the flesh, but after the sprite, which are through Christ
without spotte wrynkle or blame. And so though Rastel appear to himself to
conclude like a sage Philosopher, yet I answer you he concludes like an
ignorante Sophyster as all me^ may see, for it follows not: Paul and Fryth
say there is no hell, as contrariwise it follows not there As there is no
heaven for good and evil, so there is* no hell for good and evil.
is no heaven for Rastelles Christen men which continue still in sin, Ergo
there is no heaven for the devil their father, and yet is there heaven for
Christ and his elect. I have before declared how Christ's elect are sinners
and no sinners. And now because you should not mistake the tertes of S. John
which I before alleged, I will show you how they do commyt sin, which I did
also fufficiently touch in my answer against Rastels dialoge, even two leaves
from the end, and yet I will touch it again, because you shall not thyncke
that I would not lead you in ignorance and darkness.

There are two parts in a faithful There are two parts in man, that is. the
outward man and the inward man.
man, which rebel each against other, and are at contynuall strife, and both
of them have diverse names in serypture, the one is called the inward man, the
heart, the mind, the will, and the spryte: the other is called the outward
man, the rebellyous members, the body of sin and the flesh, and these in a
faithful man keep contynuall war, and allbeit the one be subdued and taken
prysonner of the other, yet never consents to his ennemy, he can not leave
him, neither will make peace with him, but will labor what he can, and will
call for all that he thinks will help him to be delivered from his ennemie,
and then warreth upon him a fresh, what time the faithful man is brought to
the knowledge of God, and believes in Christ, and has his will and mind
renewed with the spryte of God that consents to the law of God, that is good,
ryghteous and holy, and begins to love the law, and has a will and a
desire to fulfill the law of God, and not to despise his heavenly father, and
look how much he loves the law, countyng it ryghtwise and holy. Even so
much does he hate sin which the How the inward man resists the assaults
of the outward man.
law forbids and abhoreth it in his heart and inward man, and then albeit
the outward man and rebellious members do at time beseege him and take him
captyue under sin, yet does not the inward man consent that this sin is
good and the law naught, which forbyddeth it, neither does the heart delighte
in this same sin, neither can it delyght in such sin, because the spirit
of God testyfieth unto him that it is abhomynable in the syghte of God, and
then fyghteth the inward man against the outward with faith, prayer, almose
deeds and fasting, and labors The faithful man fears Gods displeasure.
to subdue the members, lamenting that he has been overcome, because he
fears to displease God his father, and desires him for the blood of his
son Christ, that he will forgive that which is past, and his diligence that
he takes in tamyng his members, is not recompense toward God for the sin
that is paste, but to subdue the flesh yt he sin no more, this rebellion had
Paul. Romans 7. saying, that he did not that good thing Roma. 7.
which he would, but the evil which he hated, that he did, that is, he did not
fulfill yt good law of God, as his heart, will, and inward man desired, but did
the evil as touching his flesh and outward man which he hated, and so he
sinned with his outward man, then how is this true, that he that commits
sin is of the Devil, and he that is of God commits no sin, was not
Paul of God? yes verily, and all be it he commits sin with his members
and outward man, yet he sinned not, for he says. If I do that thing that I
hate, then How a man may commit sin, and yet sin not.
is it not I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me, and even likewise
the faithful folowers of Christ commit no sin, for they hate it, and if they
fortune to be entangled with sin, it is not they that do it (as Paul says)
but the sin that dwells in them, which God has left to exercise them, as
he left yt Philistians to exercise and nurtoure the children of Israel, and if
the remnauntes of Sinneremaineth in our outward members, to exercise the
inward man in resisting of sin.
sin fortune at any time to look aloft and begin to reign, then he sends
some cross of adversity or sickness to help to suppress them. And thus
shall it be as long as we live, but when we be once dead, then our members
rebel no more, and then needs neither purgatory nor any other cross, for
the outward man is turned into vanity, and our inward John. 15.
man was ever pure through believing the word of God, and never consented to
sin, and needs another purgatory in this world nor in the world to come,
but only for subduing the outward man, and therefore after this life he shall
never have any purgatory. Mark well what I say and read it again, for more
shall read it then shall understand it, but he that has ears let him hear.

The second error that Rastell lays to my charge, is, that I would bring
the people in belefe that repentance of a man, helps not for the remission of
his sin.
IN proving this second error against me, Rastel takes so great pains,
Rastell.
that he is almost besides him self. For he says that I would make men Frith.
believe that it forces not, whether they sin or no. Why so brother Rastel?
verily because I allege S. John, Rastelwold feign canel, but he cannot tell at
what.
S. Paul, Erechiell and Hieremie to quench the hot fire of purgatory, and
allege no aucthorities to prove good woorks, whereunto I answer (as I did
before) that it is nothing to my purpose, for the prouyng of good works does
neither make for purgatory nor against it, I could have alleged all those
textes if I had intended my self to prove that I should do good works
(which I never knew christen man deny) but as touching my matter it is
nothing to the purpose, and as well he might have improued me, because I bring
in no textes to prove that the father of heaven is god, or to prove that which
never manne doubted of, notwithstanding if Rastel had indifferent eyes, I spoke
sufficiently of good works in the. 34. argument against his dialoge, let all
men read the place and judge.

Rastel takes the matter very grievously that I attempt to allege how S. John
and S. Paul send us to Christ, Rastell.
and then add that we know no other to take away sin but only Christ, and
because I add this word only, therefore he thinks that I clean destroy
Frith. There is no mean to put away sin, but only by Christ.
repentance, whereunto I answer, that I added not this word only for
naught, but I did it by the authority of S. John, which says: if we walk in
the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with each other, and in
the blood of Jesus Christ his son, purifyeth us from all sin, whereupon I
say that for us which are in the light, his blood only is sufficient, but for
your christen men which continue still in sin, and walk in darkness after
their father the Devil, must some other means be For such as dwell in the
light of Christ, his blood only to sufficient.
found, or else they shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven.

But because I will be short, let Rastell note that I find two manner of
repentance, one is without faith, and There are two manner, of repentances.
is such a repentance as Judas and Rastels christen men which continue still
in sin have at the latter end, which does rather purchase them an halter
then the remission of sins.

An other repentance follows, justification and remission of sins, and is a
flourishing fruit of faith, for when True repentance is a flourishing fruit of
faith.
by faith we do perceive the favor and kindness that our loving father has
showed us in his son Christ Jesus, and that he has reconcyled us unto
himself by the blood of his son. The^ begin we to love him, the more we
hate the body of sin, and lament and be sorry that our members are so frail,
that they can not fulfill the law of God, and so in mourning and bewayling our
infirmity, it causes us to abstain from both meat and drink and all
worldly pleasures, which is What pure fasting is.
is the pure fasting that we talk of, but you understand it not: and this
repentance comes not to purge the sins which is committed before, but only
takes an occasyon by the sins before committed, to know what poison there
remained in our sleshe, and seeks all means to make us hate this body of
sin, and to subdue it with all manner of works that God has appointed, to
the entente that it should in time to come no more displease God our most
merciful father, which of gentleness so often pardons and forgeueth us, as I
have touched before. This is the manner of repentance which I find in
scripture, but this helps that we should sin no more, but what Rastell
dreameth, I wot not. But to express to the uttermost what I mean Repentance
lively declared by an example.
by repentance, mark this example. If a man build an house which does cost
him much labor and money, and have laid no sure foundation, but that when a
tempest comes, his house does fall, then will he be very sorry, and repent
that he has so foolishly bestowed his money and labor. Not wtstanding, all
this great sorrow and repentance can not set up his house again which is
fallen, but only it takes an occasion by the ruin of the house, to teach the
owner wit against an other time, that when he builds again, he may make a
sure foundation. Even so though thou repent never so much, that can not get
remission for the sins that is past, but that must be pardoned only by the
faith of Christ's blood. Nevertheless it does teach thee wit, and learn
thee to tame thy body and subdue it, and cast a low fou^dacion, that in time
thou may the better resist the assaults of the devil, the world and the
flesh. This does Frith teach of repentance, let the world take it as they
will, but Christ's sheep do hear his voice.

The third error which Rastell lays against me is, that I would make men
believe that they need not to do penance for the satisfaction of their sins.
EVery child may answer him to this if he ever read or perceive what I wrote
before of repentance, for as they take repentance for the sorrow and mourning
that follows the crime, even so they call penance the good works that ensue
of repentance, and these good woorks which follow do mortify the members, and
How good works do mortify our members.
exercise us in Gods commandments that we sin no more: but they can get no
more remission of the sin which is once past, then that which they call
repentance: and yet do we neither destroy sorowing for sin, nor good works
as he falsely reports by us, but we teach you how they ought to be done, and
that they are fruits of faith, and mortify our members, and are profitable to
our neighbor, and a testinony unto us Good works are the fruits of faith.
that we are the children of our heavenly Father, as by example I say, that
neither the sun nor the moon do iustiu^e us, or purchase remission of our
sins, and yet I would not that Rastell should say, that I deny or destroy
the sun and the moon, for I say that without them we can have no light, and
that we can not be without them. And as touching the solution of this, that
penance taking in his largest signification, both for good works and taking
of pains, is not satisfaction for sins. I must tell you once again that
there are two manner of satisfactions, the one is to God the other to my
neighbor. To God There are two manner of satisfactions.
can not all the world make satisfaction for one crime: insomuch that if every
grass of the ground were a man as holy as ever was Paul or Peter, and should
pray unto God all their life long for one crime, yet could they not make
satisfaction for it, but it is only the blood of Christ, that has made full
satisfaction unto God for all such crimes. Heb. 7: or else were Hebr. 7.
there none other remedy, but we should all perish. There is an other
satisfaction which is to my neighbor whom I have offended, whom I am
Satisfaction to our neighbor.
bound to pacify as we two can agree, and as the laws of the realm determine
between us, as if I had defamed him, then am I bound to pacify him, and to
restore him to his good name again: if I have murdered any man, then by the
laws of the Realm I must dye for it, to pacify my neighbor and the common
wealth: But yet I am sure Rastell is not so childish, as to think that this
ciuyle satisfaction is the very satisfaction which pacifieth Gods wrath for
breaking his law: For if thou murder a man, and should dye a hundred times for
it, yet except thou have satisfaction of Christ's blood, thou shall be damned
thereto: and so I spoke that no te^porall pain was instituted of God for the
intent that we should satisfye Gods wrath thereby, as it is plain in my book
if Rastell could see.

The fourth error that he lays against me is, that I would persuade the
people that good works ar nothing auailable.
NOw are we come to the fourth error, where Rastell untruly reports on me
that I would persuade the people that good works done by any man in this
world is nothing auayleable unto him that does them, and that it is no hurt
nor hindraunce unto any man, though he never do none. Because I say they
justify not before God, therefore he thinks that other men would understand
me as wisely as he does, and argue that they are no thing auayleable, but I
must desire him to put on his spectacles and look again upon my book, and
he shall find these words. Peradventure Good works are to be done and why?
thou will answer unto me, shall I then do no good deeds? I answer, yes:
thou will answer me, wherefore? I answer, thou must do them because God
has commanded the^. I answer, thou art living in this world with men, and
have conversation with them, therefore has God appointed thee what thou shall
do to the profit of thy neighbor and taming of thy flesh, as Paul
testifies, Ephe. 2. We are his work in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.
unto good works, which works God has prepared that we should walk in
them. These works God would have us do that the unfaithful might see the
godly and virtuous conversation of his faithful, and thereby be compelled to
glorify our Father which is in heaven. Math. 5. and so are they both
profitable unto thy neighbor, Good works are profitable to our neighbor and
also a testimony that we are the children of God.
and also a testimony unto thee, by the which a man may know that thou art the
right son of thy heavenly Father, and a very christ unto thy neighbor: and
after teaches that we ought to do these works without having respect either
to heaven or hell, but attending through charity the wealth of our neighbor.
etc.

I wonder that Rastell is not ashamed to say that I would make them believe that
they are not auaylable, therefore good reader note my words, first I say we
must do them because God has commanded them, is it not auaylable to keep the
commandments of God? secondaryly I say that they are to the profit of my
neighbor: is it not auaylable? thirdly I say that they tame our flesh, is it
not auailable? fourthly I say they are to the glory of God, is it not
auailable? Fifthly I say they are a testimony to them that does them by the
which me^ may know yt he is yt very son of God, is that not auaylable? belyke
Rastell cou^teth nothing auailable but that which justifies before God, he
will say the son is not auaylable because it justifies not, fire is not
auaylable in his eyes because it justifies not. etc.

Then Rastell says that I make a wonders work with yt Scripture, and
alleges certain textes yt we ought to do good works (which I never denied)
and thereupon would conclude that works save and justify, and plays me the
ball lustly over the cord, but as God would there stood a post right in the
way and he hytte it so full, that it made the ball to rebou^d over again
backward, for in the alledgyng of his purpose Paul says. Ephe. 2. he has
clean lost the game: Ephe. 2.
the words are these, by grace you be saved by your faith and that is not of
We are justified by grace and faith, which is not of our selves, but is the
gift of God.
you, it is the gift of God and not of works that no man should glorify him
self, we are the works created of God in Christ Jesus which God has prepared
that we should walk in them, here because he would have the latter end of the
text to serve for his purpose which teaches good works (which I never
denied) he brings in that thing which clean confuteth his opinion, for his
opinion (which in all places he has labored to prove) is that we are saved by
good works, but now mark what he alleges out of Paul by grace you be saved
by your faith: and that is not of you, it is the gift of God and not of works.
For that no man should glorify him self, here Paul says plainly that our
salvation is not of works: and so has Rastell cast down that he Rastell has
here overthrown all that he has before built and set up.
built before, and may be likened to a shrewde cow, which when she has given
a large mess of milk turns it down with her hele.

Thus have I answered to as much of Rastels treatise as I could get, if there
be any more which may come to my hands I shall do my diligence to disclose
his disceite so that God give me leave to keep the court with him he shall
win but little, except he convey his balls more craftly, and yet the truth to
say we play not on even hand, for I am in a manner as a man bound to a post, and
can not so well bestow me in my play, as as if I were at liberty, for I may
not have such books as are necessary for me, neither yet pen, ink, ne
paper, but only secretly, so that I am in continual fear, both of the
Lefetenau^t and of my keeper, lest they should espy any such thing by me: and
therefore it is little meruell though the work be imperfect: for when soever I
hear Ihon Frith was straightly kept.
the keys ryng at the door, strayte all much be conveyed out of the way (and
then if any notable thing had been in my mind) it was clean lost, and
therefore I beseech thee good reader count it as a thing borne out of season,
which for many causes can not have his perfeite form and shape, and pardon me
my rudenes and imperfection.

FINIS.
John Frithes judgment upon master William Tracyes Testament. 1531.
John Frith to the Christian Reader.
THere is nothing in this world that is so firm, stable or godly, but that it
may be undermined, and frowardlye wrested of me^, and specially if they be void
of charity. As it is evident by William Tracyes Testament and last will that
he left, against the which many men, and that of long continuance have
blasphemously barked. Whether of a godly zeal, or of a dasing brain, let
other me^ judge. But this I dare boldly profess, that his godly sayings are
ungodly hand led, which thing I can not so justly ascribe unto ignorance, as
unto rancour, unto the furies I had almost said, for if they had conferred all
things unto the rule of charity, which enuyeth not, which is not puffed up,
which is not styrred to vengeance, which thinks none evil: but suffers
all things, believes all things, trusts all things, and bears all things,
they would not so heddely have condemned those things, which might have been
full devoutly expounded, howbeit they have not only attempted that thing, but
have proceeded unto such madness, that they have taken upon them to strive with
dead folks, for it is a most common jest in every ma^s mouth that after the
maker of this Testament was departed, and buried, they took up his body and
burnt it, which thing declared their furye although he felt no fire, Therefore
we humbly require our most redoubted Prince, withal his nobles, and present
assembly, that even as all other things do of right depend of their judgment,
that even so they would by their discret advise, cure this disease, ponderyng
all things with a more equal ballaunce. So shall this enormous fact be
looked upon with worthy correction, and the condition of the common wealth
shall be more quiet, mark you therefore what things they are, which they so
cruelly condemn.

Master Tracie.
IN the name of God. Amen.

I William Tracie of Todyngton in the County of Gloceter Esquier, make my
Testament and last will, as hereafter follows. etc.

The rest of which Testament you shall find before in the works of William
Tyndall. fol. 429.

John Frith.
IT is marvel but here be somewhat that they improve, for their mind is so
intoxicate that there is nothing, but they will note it with a black coal,
and yet all may be established by the testimony of Scripture, for faith is the
sure persuasion of our mind, of God and his goodness toward us. And whereas
is a sure persuasion of the mind, there can be no doubtyng or mistrust, for he
that douteth is like the floude of the sea which is tossed with wyndes and
carried with violence, and let not that man think that he shall obtain any
thing of God Ia. i. And therefore, S. Austen says, if I doubt I shall be no holy
seed, furthermore whereas he looks through the grace and merits of Christ to
obtain remission of his sins, surely it is a faithful saying, and worthy to
be commended, for it is even the same that Peter professed Acts. xv. where he
says, unto him do all the Prophets bear witness, that through his name as
many as believe in him shall receive remission of their sins, moreover in that
he trusts through Christ to have resurrection of body and soul they have no
cause to blame him, for thus does Paul argue, if Christ be risen, then shall
we also rise and if Christ be not risen, then shall not we rise, but Christ is
risen, for his soul was not lest in hell, therefore shall we also rise (who^
Christ shall bring with him) and be immortal, both body and soul. 1. Cor. 15.
And therefore he does both righteously and godly deduce his resurrection by
Christ's, by whom the father has given us all things, or else we should not
be, but there are some, that gather of his words, that he should recount the
soul to be mortal which thing after my judgment is more suttelly gathered
then either truly or charitably, for seeing there was never Christen man that
ever so thought (no not the very Paganes) what godly zeal, or brotherly love
was there which caused them so to surmise, for a good man would not once
dream such a thing: but I pray you why should we not say that the soul does
verily rise which through Christ rising from the filth of sin, does enter
with the body into a new conversation of life, which they shall lead together
without possibility of sinnyng, we say also of God (by a certain phrase of
Scripture) that he arises, when he opens unto us his power, and presence:
And why may we not say the same thing of the soul which in the mean season
seems to lie secret, and then shall express unto us (through Christ) her power
and presence, in taking again her natural body, why should ye then condemn
these things? There is no man that can receive venom by those words, except
he have such a spyderous nature that he can turn an honey comb into perilous
poison. Therefore let us look on the residue.

Master Tracie.
And as touching the wealth of my soul. etc.

Frith.
Here he only cleaves to God and his mercy, being surely persuaded that
according to the testimony of Peter, who so ever believes in him, through his
name shall receive remissyon of sins. Act. 15. Paul also affirms, that who
so ever trusts in him shall not be confounded. To. 10. And who can deny but
this is most true, when it is understand of that faith which is formed with
hope and charity, which yt Apostle calls faith, that works by charity.
Gal. 5. Now since these things may be expounded so purely, forsoothe he utters
his own envy, which would otherwise wrest the mind of the maker of this
Testament.

And as touching the addition of this particle without any other man's work, or
works: it seems that he had respect unto this saying of Peter, which
declares that there is none other name under heaven given unto men, in which
we should be saved. Act. 4. Besides that, S. Paul commits the power of
sanctifying to Christ only. Heb. 2. where he says, both he that sanctifyeth
(that is to say Christ) and they that are sanctified (that is to say the
faithful) are all of one (that is God) and surely if we labored to precel each
other in love and charity, we should not condemn this innocent, but we
should rather measure his words by the rule of charity, in so much that if
a thing at the first sight did appear wicked, yet should we take it in the
best sense, not judging wickedly of our brother, but referring that secreate
judgment unto Christ which can not be disceyued, and though they be
disceiued by the pretense of charity, yet therein they may rejoice, and
therefore they would be loathe to condemn the innocent, but let us pass
these things, and see what follows.

Master Tracie.
My ground and my belief is, that there is but one God. etc.

Frith.
Why look you so sowerly good brethren? why do you not rather give him great
thanks? sith he has opened unto you such a proper distinction, by the
which you may escape the scholasticall snares and mases, he only deserves the
name of a mid dealer, which being God, became man to make men Gods. And who ca^
by right be called a mid dealer between God and man, but he that is both God
and man, therefore sith we have such a mid dealer, which in all points has
proved our infirmity (saving only in sin) which is exalted above the
heavens, and sits on the right hand of God, and has in all things obtained
the next power unto him, of whose Emperie all things depend, let us come
with sure confidence unto the throne of grace. Heb. 4. All other be calls
peticioners which receive grace, but are not able to empress and power thereof
into any other man, for that does only God distribute with his finger (that is
to say, the spirit of God) through Christ, I marvel that you are angrye with
him that has done you such a great pleasure, how be it I do ascribe this
condemnation rather unto the canonistes than unto deuines. For the godly
deuines would never dote so far, as to condemn so proper sayings, but
peradventure this might move their patience, that he will distribute no portion
of his goods, for that intent that any man should say or do for the weal of
his soul, are you so sore afraid of your market? Be not afraid, ye have
salues inoughe to souple that sore, ye know that he is not bound under pain
of dampnation to distribute his goods on that fashion, for then those holy
fathers were in shreud cause, which continuing in long penury, scant left at
their departing, a half penny. Thou will peradventure say, that they shall
suffer the greenous pains of purgatory, be it so, yet may they be quenched
both with less cost and labor, the popes pardon is ready at hand, where both
the crime and the pain are remytted at once, and verily there is such plenty
of them in all places, that I can scantly believe that there lives any man
that is worth an half penny, but that he is sure of some pardones in store, And
as for this man he had innumerable. Notwithstanding this distribution is not of
necessity (for unto him that is dampened, it profits nothing, and he that is
not dampened, is sure of salvation) why are ye so hot against this man? are not
his goods in his own power? he shall give a reckoning of them unto God, and
not unto you, here you may see of how light judgment you have condemned
these things, now let us ponder the residue.

Master Tracie.
And as touching the burying of my body. etc.

Frith.
What has he here offended which rehearses nothing but the words of S.
Austine. If you improve these things then reprove you S. Austine himself. Now
if you can find the means to allow S. Austen, and charitably to expound his
words, why do you not admit the same favor unto your brother, especially
seeing charity requires it? Besides that, no man can deny but that these
things are true, although S. Austines authority were of no reputation with
you, for if these things were of so great value before God, then Christ had
evil provided for his martyrs, whose bodies are commonly cast out to be
consumed with fire and wild beasts: notwithstanding I would be afraid to say
that they were any thing the worse for the burning of their bodies or tearing
of it in pieces. Be therefore charitable toward your brother and ponder his
words (which are rather Saint Austines) somewhat more justly.

M. Tracie.
As touching the distribution of my temporal goods, my purpose is. etc.

Frith.
There is no man doubts, but that faith is the root of the tree, and the
quickening power out of which all good fruits spring, therefore it is necessary
that this faith be present, or else we should look for good works in vain:
for without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11. Insomuch that S.
Austine called those works that are done before faith, swift running out of
the way. Moreover that our merit cannot properly be ascribed unto our works
does the Evangelist teach us saying, When ye have done all things that are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servant, we have done but our duty.
Luke 17. By the which saying he does in a manner fear us from putting any
confidence in our own works: and so is our glorious pride and high mind
excluded: then where is our merit? Hark what S. Austine says, The death of
the Lord is my merit: I am not without merit as long as that merciful Lord
fails me not. etc. This death of the Lord can not profit me except I
receive it through faith: and therefore he rekoneth right well that the faith in
Christ is all his merit, I mean the faith which works through charity,
that is to say, faith formed with hope and charity, and not that dead
historical faith which the devils have and tremble. Iam. 2. Furthermore what
S. Austine judges of our merit he expresses in these words: mark the
Psalm, how the proud head will not receive the crown when he says he that
redeemed thy life from corruption: which crowns thee (says the Psalm)
Hereuppon would a man say, which crowns thee, my merits grant that, my
virtue has done it, I have deserved it, it is not freely given, but give care
rather to the pleasure, for that is but thine own saying, and every man is a
liar: but hear what God says, which crowns thee in compassion and mercy, of
mercy he crowns thee, of compassion he crowns thee, for thou wast not
worthy that he should call thee, and whom he should justify when he called
thee, and whom he should glorify, when he justifies thee: For the remnantes
are saved by the election which is by grace and favor. Romans 11. Now if it be
by grace the^ is it not of works, for then were grace no grace. Romans 4. For
unto him that works is the reward imputed not of grace but of duty. Romans 4.
the Apostle says, not of grace but of duty, but he crowns thee in
compassion and mercy: and if thy merits have proceeded, God says unto thee,
boult out thy good merits, and thou shalt find that they are my gifts, this
is the righteousness of God, not meaning the righteousness whereby he
himself is right wise, but the righteousness wherewith he justifies them whom
he makes rightwise, where before they were wicked. These are Austines words.

Finallye, let not that move you where he adds, that a good work makes not
a good man, but rather a good man makes the work good, for there is no man
but he is either good or evil. If he be evil then can he not do good but
evil: for according to Christ's testimonye, A rotten tree bears no good
fruit. Math. 7. And again he says, How can you say well seeing you your
selves are evil. Math. 12. But if he be good, he shall also bring forth good
fruit at his season: howbeit that fruit makes not the man good, for except
the man be first good he can not bring forth good fruit, but the tree is
known by the fruit. And therefore faith, as a quickening root must ever go
before, which of wicked makes us ryghtwise and good, which thing our works
could never bring to pass. Out of this fountain spryng those good works
which justify us before me^, that is to say, declare us to be very
rightwise, for before God we are verily justified by that root of faith, for
he searches the heart, and therefore this just judge does inwardly justify or
condemn, giving sentence according to faith: but men must look for the
works, for their sight cannot enter into the heart, and therefore they first
give judgment of works, and are many times deceived under the cloak of
hypocrisy.

You may see that here is nothing, but that a good man may expound it well
albeit the children of this world (which with their wiles deceive the^ selves
enteryng so presumptuously in to Gods judgment) do seek a doubt where none
is, Go ye therefore and let charity be your guide, for God is charity, and
though our Lawyers heart would break, yet must you needs judge him a Christian
man, which says nothing but that Scripture confirms. And verily the
judgment of this cause came out of season and eue^ ungraciously unto our
Canonistes, for they are clean ignorant of Scripture and therefore condemn
all things that they read not in their law, wherefore we renounce their
sentence and appeal unto the deuines, which will soon know the voice of
their shepherd and gladly admit those things which are allowed by the
Scripture whereunto they are accustomed.

FINIS.
A Letter which John Frith wrote unto the faithful folowers of Christ's
Gospel, whiles he was prisoner in the Tower of London for the word of God.
Anno. M. D. xxxij.
Grace and peace from God the father through our Savior Christ Jesus be with
all them that love the Lord unfeignedly. Amen.
IT can not be expressed (dearly beloved in the Lord) what joy and comfort it
is to myhart to perceive how the word of God has wrought and continually
works among you: so that I find John. 2.
no small number walkyng in yt ways of the Lord, according as he gave us John.
15.
commandment, willing that we should love each other, as he loved us. Now have
I experience of the faith which is in you, and can testify that Roma. 12.
it is without simulation, that ye love not in word and tongue only, but in
work and verity. John. 3.


What can be more trial of a faithful heart, then to adventure not only to
aid and succor by the means of other (which without danger may not be
admitted unto us) but also personally to visit the poor oppressed, and see
that nothing be lackyng unto the^, but that they have both ghostly comfort and
bodily sustenaunce, notwith sta^dyng the strayte inhibition and terrible
manacyng of these worldly rulers: even ready to abide the extreme ieoperdies
that tyrau^ts can imagine.

This is an evidence, that you have prepared your selves to the Cross of
Christ, according unto the council of the wise man which says: my son when
thou shall enter into the way of the Lord, prepare thy self unto tribulation.
This is an evidence that ye have cast your accomptes, and have wherewith to
finish the tower which ye have begone to build. And I doubt Luke. 14.
not but that he which has begone to work in you, shall for his glory
accomplish Phil. 1.
the same, eue^ unto the coming of the Lord, which shall give unto every man
according to his deeds.

And albeit God of his secret judgments Roma, 21.
for a time keep the rod from some of them that ensue his steps yet let them
surely reken upon it for there is no doubt but all which will devoutly live
in Christ, must suffer 2. Ti. 3.
persecution: for whom the Lord loves Heb. 12.
he corrects, and scourges every child that he receaueth: for what child is
that, whom the father chastises not. If ye be not under correction of which we
are all partakers, the^ are ye bastardes and not children.

Nevertheless we may not suppose that our most loving father should do that
because he reioiseth in our blood or punishment, but he does it for our
singular profit, that we may be partakers of holiness, and that the remnaunt of
sin (which through the frayltie of our members) rebel against the spirit
and will, causing our works to go vnparfectly forwards, and may somedel be
suppressed, lest they should subdue us and reign over us, as I have
sufficiently declared in the Epistle of my book which entreats of
Purgatory, to the which I remit the^ that desire to be further instructed in
this matter.

Of these things God had given me the speculation before, and now it has
pleased him to put in ure and practice upon me. I ever thought and yet do
think, that to walk after Gods word, would cost me my life at one time or an
other. And albeit that the kings grace should take me into his favor and not
to suffer the bloody Edomites to have their pleasures upon me, yet will I not
think that I am escaped, but that God has only differred it for a season to
the intent that I should work somewhat that he has appointed me to do, and
so to use me unto his glory.

And I beseech all the faithful followers of the Lord, to arm them selves
with the same supposition, markyng the^ selves with the sign of the cross,
not from the cross as the superstitious multitude does, but rather to the
cross in token that they be ever ready willingly to receive the cross, when
it shall please God to lay it upon them. The day that it comes not, count it
clear won, geuyng thanks to the Lord, which has kept it from you. And then
when it comes, it shall nothing dismay you: for it is no new thing, but eue^
that which ye have continually looked for.

Cor. 10.
And doubt not but that god which is faithful shall not suffer you to be
tempted above that which ye are able to bear, but shall ever send some
occasion by the which ye shall stand steadfast: for either he shall blind the
eyes of your enemies and diminish their tyrannous power, or else when he has
suffered them to do their best, and that the Dragon has cast a whole floudde of
waters after you, he shall cause even the very earth to open her mouth and
swalow them up. Apoc. 12.
So faith full is he and careful to ease us what time the vexation should be too
heavy for us.

He shall send a Joseph before you against ye shall come into Egypt, yea he
shall so provide for you, that ye shall have an hundred fathers for one, an
hundred mothers for one, an hundred houses for one, and that in this life, as I
have proved by experience. Mark. 1.
And after this life, everlasting joy with Christ our Savior.

Not withstandyng since this stedfastnes comes not of our selves (for as S.
Austen says) there was never man so weak or frail no not the greatest
offender that ever lived but that every man of his own nature should be as
frail and commit as great enormities, except he were kept from it by the
spirit and power of God I beseech you brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ and
for the love of his Roma. 15.
spirit, to pray with me that we may be vessels to his laud and praise, what
time soever it pleases him to call upon us.

Ephe. 1.
The father of glory give us the spirit of wisdom understanding and
knowledge, and lighten the eyes of our mind, that we may know his ways,
praising the Lord eternally. If it please any of our brethren to write unto us
of any such doubts as peradventure may be found in our books it should be
very acceptable unto us, and as I trust not unfruitful for them. For I will
endeavor my self to satisfy the^ in all points by Gods grace. To whom I
commit to be governed and defended, for ever.

Amen.
John Frith the prisoner of Jesus Christ, at all times abydyng his pleasure.

A treatise made by the said John Frith whiles he was prisoner in the Tower of
London. Anno. M. D. xxxij. called a Myrrour or glass to know thy self.
I Was desired of a faith full friend (to whom I am so much bound that he might
lawfully have commanded me) that I would make him a little treatise, by the
which he might be somewhat instructed to know himself, and so give God
thanckes for the benefits which he has so abundantly poured upon him. This
thing I took upon me very gladly, partly to fulfill his right wise request,
which I trust shall be to the great profit of Christ's flock, and partly to
declare what I think both of my self, and of all other.

Herein may all men see, what they have received of God, and how they ought to
bestow the talent that is committed unto them, which if you note well, it will
cause you to say with the wise man Solomon: Vaiuersa vanitas omnis homo viuens,
that is, Every man Eccle. 1.
living is nothing but vanity: which also the Prophet David confirms Psalm.
62.
saying, If all men living were pondered in one balance, and vanity hanged in
the ballaunce against them, it Eccle. 5.
should quite way them down, and be heavier then all they. As by example, if a
man praise a very fool and think Note.
his wit good and profounde, then is that person in deed more fool the^ the
other. And eue^ so u^th man does praise and commend riches, honor, beauty,
strength, and such other vain and transitory things which are but as a
dream, and vanishe like a flower in the field, when a man should have most
need of them, it follows well that he himself is more vain then those
things which are but vanity. For if it were possible that thou should have
al these things an hundredth year continually without any trouble or adversity
as never man had, yet were it but a vain dream if it be compared unto that
everlasting life, which is prepared for Christ's elect and faithful
followers. So that all flesh is as hay, and all his glory like a flower of the
hay is withered, Esaias. 40.
and the flower fallen, but God and his word endure for ever.

Heb. 9.
Therefore let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, neither ye strong man in
his strength, nor the rich in his riches. But he that reioyseth, let him
rejoice in the Lord, to whom be all honor and praise without end. (...)
Amen.

The first Chapter. That all goodness comes of God, and all c^ o. ourselves.
THe Philosophers to (...) God had enspired(...)of Ro^.
truth, knowledged that the ch^ point of wisdom and direction of a man's
life, was to know him self, which sentence the scripture establysheth so
clearly, that no man may dissent from the truth of the same. For Solomon
says that the fear of the Prouer. 1.
Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Now who can fear the Lord, but only he
that knows himself, as the scripture teaches him? For if I perceive Roma. 8.
not the imperfection of my nature, which is subject unto corruption and void
of all stablenesse: If I perceive Roma 7. Math. 25.
not the unstableness of my flesh being prone to all sin, and rebellyous to
rightwysenesse, and that there dwells no goodness in me: If I perceive not
the poison of the old serpent and hell, and sin which lies hid within me,
unto which are prepared pains intolerable, I shall have none occasion to
fear God, but rather to advance my self equal ^^yth God, Esaias. 14. Daniell.
(...). Acts. 12.
as Lucifer, Nabuchodonozor, Herod and such other have done, which after were
sore chastened for their follye.

What have thou (vain man) whereof thou maiste rejoice? For the scripture
testifies that every good and persecte gift comes from above from the
father of light, with whom is no Roma. 3. ^am. 1
transmutation. So that whether they be outward gifts or inward, pertaining
either to y^ body or soul, if they be good, they come from above from the
father of light. For if thou behold Math. 6.
the proportion of thy body, stature or beauty, thou shall easily perceive that
it comes of God, even by the words of Christ which exhorts us not to be
careful. For there is none of us all Math. 5.
though we be never so careful, that can add one stature, either make one
white hear or black.

And as touching our wisdom, eloquence, long life, victory, glory, and such
other, the scripture testifies that they come of God and not of our selves.
For S. James says: If any James. 1
lack wisdom, let him ask it of god, which gives it abundantly. As it is
evident by Solomon, which of God desired wisdom to judge between (...).
King. 3
good and evil. And the Lord made him answer, that because he asked that
thing, and not long life, nor riches, nor the destruction of his enemies, but
rather wisdom to discern in judgment. Behold, I have given unto thee an
heart full of wisdom and understanding, in so much that none before thee
has been like unto thee, neither yet after thee shall any be like unto thee.
And besides that, I have given thee riches and glory.

Furthermore, the most glorious gifts concerning our souls, come from God
even of his mere mercy and favor which he shows us in Christ, and for
Christ, as predestination, election, vocation and justification: and albeit M.
More with his painted Mores miste.
Poetry and craftye conueyance do cast a miste before your eyes, that you
might wander out of the right way, endeavoring him self to instruct you that
God has predestinate and chosen us before the beginning of the world,
because he knew before that we should do good works, yet will I set you upon
a ca^del which shall shine so bright, and so clearly dispel his mist and vain
Poetry, that you shall plainly perceive him daunsing naked in a net, which
notwithstanding thinks M. More daunsing in a net, thinks him self
invisible. John. 15.
himself to go invisible. And although there be scriptures inoughe, both Tit.
3. and Romans 11. to prove the same true, yet will I let that pass, and allege
for me S. Austine, which is the candell that I speak of, which shall disclose
his iuggling, and utter his ignorance: for S. Austine says, some man will
affirm that God did choose us, because he saw before that we should do good
works: but Christ says not so, which says: ye have not chosen me, but I
have chose^ you, for (says he) if he had chosen us because he saw before
that we should do good works, then should he also have seen before that
we should first have chosen him, which is contrary to the words of Christ,
and mind of the Euangeliste. Here may you see how evidently S. Austine
confuteth M. Mores Poetry, and opens his serpentine deceit.

Finally S. Paul says Ephesians. 2. Ephe. 2.
that we are saved through grace, and that it comes not of our selves, it is
the gift of God, and comes not of works, least any man should boste
himself, which words M. More might be ashamed to hear if he were not an other
Lucian, neither regarding God nor man. But S. Austine adds thus much more
unto it: Non erit gratia vllo modo nisi fuerit gratuita omni modo: That is to
say, that it ca^ in no wise be grace or favor, except it be always free. And
therefore I may conclude that it is neither of the works going before, nor of
the works coming after, but only of the free favor of God.

And this are we sure of, yt whom soever he chooses, them he saves of his
mercy: and whom he repelleth, them of his secret and unsearchable judgment
he condemns. But why he chooses the one and repelleth the other, enquire not
(says S. Austine) if thou will not err. In so much that S. Paul could
not attain to the Roma. 11
knowledge thereof, but cried out: O the depth of the riches and wisdom of
the knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and how
incomprehensible are his ways. But M. More had lever loud to lie, and far
to err, than to let God alone with his secrets, or to acknowledge his
ignorance in any thing.

And to be short, S. Paul says, what have thou that thou have not received?
If thou have received it, why do thou auaunce thy self, as though thou
had not received it? So we may conclude that all goodness comes of God,
and all sin or mischief of our own poisoned nature. In so much that we
may say with the Prophet Daniel: Tibi domine gloria, nobis autem confusio
faciei. O Lord all glory be unto thee, and unto us shame and confusion, so that
he that reioyseth, may 1. Cor. 1.
rejoice in the Lord.

The second Chapter. For what intent God gives us these gifts, and that they
are rather a charge and a careful burden, then any pleasure to rejoice at.
LIke as there are many members of our body, and every member 1. Cor. 11.
has his office appointed unto him which he must do, not for his own wealth
and sauegard only, but for the preservation of the whole body, in so much that
the most honest member must serve the vilest at his necessity, for if the
hand would not serve the ^lowe belly, they should both perish together,
even so has God appointed his gifts, and distributed them in this world unto
us (which should be as one body) that every nation has need of other, every
occupation need of an other, and every man need of his neighbor. This is so
plain that it can not be denied. Nevertheless I will more specially touch the
matter, because I would have it so rooted in you, that you might endeavor
your selves to fulfill it toward each other.

If God have opened the eyes of thy mind, and have given thee spiritual
wisdom thorough the knowledge of his word, boast not thy self of it, but
rather fear and tremble, for a chargeable office is committed unto thee,
which (if thou fulfill it) is like to cost thee thy life at one time or other
with much trouble and persecution. But if thou fulfill it not, then shall that
office be thy damnation. For 1. Cor. 9.
S. Paul says: Woe is to me if I preach not. And by the Prophet Ezechiel
Ezech. 23.
God says: If I say unto the wicked that he shall dye the death, and thou show
him not of it, the wicked shall dye in his iniquity, but I shall require his
blood of thy hand.

But peradventure our Divines would expound these textes only upon them that
are sent and have cure of souls. Whereunto I answer that every man which has
the light of Gods word reuelated unto him, is sent when soever he sees
necessity, and has cure of his neighbors soul. As by example. If God have
given me my sight, and I perceive a blind man going in the way, which is ready
for lack of sight to fall into a pytte wherein he were like to perish, then am
I bound by Gods commandment to guide him till he were past that ieopardy,
or else if he perish there in, (where I might have delivered him) his blood
shall be required of my hand. And likewise if I perceive my my neighbor like to
perish for lack of Christ's doctrine, then am I bound to instruct him with the
knowledge that God has given me, or else his blood shall be required of my hand.

Paraduenture they will say that there is all ready one appointed to Objection.
watch the pit, and therefore if any man fall into it he shall make it good,
and that therefore I am discharged and need to take no thought. Whereunto I
answer I would be glad that it Solution.
so were. Notwithstanding if I perceive that the watchman be a sleep, or run
to yt ale house to make good cheer, or gone out of the country a whorehunting
and thorough his necligence espy my neighbor in danger of the pit, then am
I nevertheless bound to lead him from it, I think that God has sent me at
that time to save that soul from perishyng. And the law of God and nature
byndeth me thereto, which charge me to love my neighbor as my self, and to
do unto him as I would be done to. And I think there is no man (that is in
this case) but he would have his neighbor to help him, and therefore Math. 7.
is he bound to help his neighbor if he be in like ieopardy. And even thus
art thou bound to give good counsel to him that lacks it, and to distribute
what soever talent thou have received of God unto the profit of thy neighbor.
Moreover besides that ye can not avoid this my solution, yet I desire you to
note how the text it self which I alleged does condemn your vain objection,
the words are these Ezech. iij. If I say unto the wicked that he shall dye the
death, and thou show him not of it, the wicked shall die in his iniquity, but
I shall require his blood of thy hand. Mark I pray you that the Prophet says
not as you object that he which should show the wicked his iniquity, and does
not so, shall perish only, and the wicked him self to be saved, because his
faut was told him, by him which take charge to teach him: But contrariwise ye
wicked shall perish in his iniquity (says God by his prophet Ezechiel) and
his blood shall be required of the hand of him which should have instructed him
in the truth.

If God have given thee faith in Roma. 11.
Christ's blood, be not proud of it, but fear: for since God has not spared
the natural branches (I mean 2. Pet. 2.
the Jews which were his elect people) since he spared not the angels that
sinned, but has cast them into hell, to be reserved unto judgment, sith he
spared not the old world, but overwhelmed them with waters, deliueryng Noe
the preacher of righteousness, take heed lest he also spare not thee. Truth it
is that where faith is present no sin can be imputed, but this faith is not
in thy power, for it is the gift of God. And therefore if thou 1. Cor. 12.
be unkind and endeavor not thy self to walk innocently, and to bring forth
the fruits of faith, it is to be feared that for thine unkindness God will
Math. 3.
take it from thee, and hyer out his vyneyard to an other, which shall restore
the fruit in due season, and then shall thine end be worse then thy beginning.
Let us therefore with fear and tremblyng seek our health and make stable our
vocation and election, Math. 21, Math. 12. Phil. 2. 2. Pet. 1.
mortifiyng our members and man of sin, by exercising our selves in Christ's
precepts, that we may be the children of our father that is in heaven, and
fellow heyers with our Savior and brother Christ Jesus.

If God have given thee riches, Math. 5.
thou may not think that he has committed them unto thee for thine own
use only, but that he has made thee a stuard over them to destribute them to
the profit of the commontie. For indeed thou art not the very owner of them,
but God is the owner, which says by the Prophet Agge, Gold is mine, and
silver is Agge. 2.
mine: and he has committed them for a ceason to thy hand, to see whether
thou will be faithful in distributing this wicked Mammon, according Luke. 16.
to his commandments. And that it so is thou may well note by the parable
of the rich man, which was clothed in silk and fared delicately in this
world, and after was buried in hell. Wheruppon S. Gregory notes that he was
not damned because he despoiled any other man's, but because he did not
distribute his own, as yt process of y^ Text does also well declare. Wherefore
if we must give accounts of all that is given us, then have we little cause to
glory, but rather to fear and tremble, and to count him most happy, to whom
least is committed. For God to whom this accomptes must be made, can not be
deluded, although the world may be blinded.

If God have given thee thy perfect limbs and members, then get to some
occupation, and work with thine own hands, that thy members which are whole
and perfect, may minister to their necessity that lack their members: for
that is acceptable in the sight of God, and the contrary so detestable, that
if thou withdraw thy members from ayding thy neighbors, thou shall of God be
recounted for a thief and a murderer. And therefore I affirm that all our
holy hypocrites and idle bellyed Monks, chanons, and priests, whether they be
regulare or seculare, if they labor not to preach Gods word are thieves
and also murderers: for they maintain their strong members in idleness,
which ought to labor for the profit of their neighbors, that their perfect
members might minister unto the necessity of them that lack their members. As
the eye must minister her fruit of sight unto the feet, hands and other
members which lack it: or else are they in ieoperdie to perish at every pit,
and the eye guilty of their destrution for withdrawing her office from them.
And this may we establish by the words of S. Paul which says, Ephesians. 4.
He that did steal, let him steal no more, but rather labor with his own
hands that he may have to distribute to them that lack. And some doctoures do
very well expound it of certain persons that walked inordinately, and would
not work themselves though they were sturdye lubbers, but lived on other men's
charity, which thing the Apostle calls theft, and exhorts them to work
with their own hands, that they may both help themselves and other.

And for because some persons which feel them selves grieved, because they are
guilty, will not be content to allow this exposition I will allege an other
text of the Wise man, which shall not only allow this sentence, but also bite
them better: for he says, Panis egentium vita pauperis Eccl. 34.
est, qui autem defraudat eum homo sanguinis est. that is to say, The bread of
the needy is the life of the poor, and he that defraudeth him of it is a
murderer. This text holds their noses so hard to the grindstone that it
clean disfigureth their faces, for it proves our Bishops, Abbotes, and
spiritual possessionaries double thieves and murderers, as concerning the body
(besides their murdering of the soul for lack of Gods word, which they will
neither preach, nor suffer any to do it purely, but persecute and put them
unto the most cruel death) first they are thieves and murderers, because
they distribute not that which was appointed by our faithful forefathers to
the intent it should have been ministered unto the poor (for then they seemed
to be very virtuous) but now they bestow it upon hawks, hounds, horses, etc.
upon gorgious apparel and delicate fare. And glad are yt poor when they may
get the scrappes. They may have not so much as a pigge of their own sow, no
scant a fether of their own goose. For he that may dispend four or v. thousand
marks a year, would think it were too much if he gave xx. nobles of it unto
the poor, which notwythstanding are the owners under God of all together the
ministers living deduct, which (as the Apostle says) having their food and
clothes to cover them ought therewith to be content. 1. Tim. 6.
And thus they defraude the poor of their bread, and so are they thieves, and
(because this bread is their life) as the aforesaid text testifies, he that
defraudeth him of it, is not only a thief, but also a murderer.

And when they think to bestow it very well and bestow it in buildyng palaces
of pleasure, yet are they therein much to be reproved. For as an old Doctor
says, they are in that point worse then the devil, for the devil would have
had that Christ should have turned stones into breed (which might have
suckored y^ poor) and these builders turn the bread into stones. For they
bestow y^ good which should be given to the poor for their sustenaunce, upon
an heap of stones.

But here they will object (as they Objection.
are never without euasions) that if they should distribute it among the poor
according as they are bound, within a while all would be spent, and no good
should come of it, nor no man know where it is become or who fares the better
for it. Whereunto I Solution.
answer that in deed ye be to wise for me, for since ye go about to correct
Christ, and to fet him to schole and learn him what is best, it were but folly
for me to meddle with you. For Christ's mind and commandment is that we
should distribute it and not Eccle. 4.
withhold it from them. And says by his Prophet: woe be to them that couple
Esaias. 5.
and knit houses together, which I think may justly be verified upon you.
Nevertheless this I dare say, that if a Bishop which may dispende four
thousand mark would unto the poor of his Dioces distribute every year, but
the one half geuyng unto one man. xl. shillyng, and lendyng to an other. xx.
nobles to set up his occupation with all, and so give and lend as he sees
need, he should within. v. or. vj. years make a florishyng Dioces. And I
think verily that his face should more be allowed before God, then if he had
builded a thousand Abbayes: for Gods commandment ought first to be done, and
is much more acceptable to him then all the works that proceed of our
imaginations and foolish fantasies.

Besides that they are thieves and murderers for withdrawyng their perfect
members from labor whereby they might minister unto their neighbors necessity
(I speak of as many as are not occupied about preaching Gods word) for in
that they withdraw their members from succouryng their poor neighbors, they
are thieves. And because this succor is called their life, they are murderers
for keepyng it from them.

Here our beggyng orders of Friars would think to be exempt, because they have
not received rentes to be distributed. Notwithstanding if we ponder this text
well we shall find them condemned as deep as the other. For they enter into
every ma^s house, and with vnshamefasted beggyng polle them so nigh, that in a
manner they leave nothing behind for the very poor which are sick, lame,
creeple, blind and maimed. For there is not the poorest desolate widow, but
with his fair flatteryng he will so deceive her, that he will be sure either of
money or ware: but dear brethren maintain ye no such murderers, lest ye be
partakers of their sins, but rather follow the counsel of the Apostle, which
charge us in ye name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we withdraw our selves
from every brother that walks inordinatly and works not and byddeth if he
will not 2 Thessalonians. 3.
work he should not eat.

Now if they object that they live in contemplation and study of Scripture, and
say that they ought not to be let from that holy work: for Christ said that
Marye had chosen the best part which should not be taken from her.

Thereunto may I make the same answer which that holy father and Abbot S.
Siluane made. This Siluane was an Abbot an holy man, having many Monks under
him, who^ he caused after their prayers (which were nothing so long as our
Monks use now a days) which think for their many words to be heard, like
as did the Phariseis whom Christ rebuked, he caused them I say to labor for
their living, according to the mind of Paul. And upon a time there came a
religious man to his abbay, and when he saw his Monks working, he asked the
Abbot why he so used them, and why they gave not them selves to holy
contemplation, seeing that Marie had chosen the best part. The Abbot made few
words, but gave this Monk a book, and sent him into a sell, to be there
occupied in study and contemplation. And at dinner time ye Abbot called all
his monks to meat, and let him sit in contemplation. After noone when he began
to ware very hu^gry, he came out again to the Abbot Siluane, and asked whether
his Monks had not yet dined: And he answered, yes. And why called you not me,
quod the Monk, to dine with them? Verily said the Abbot, I thought you had
been all spiritual, and had needed no meat. Nay quod the Monk I am not so
spiritual nor fervent in contemplation, but that I must needs eat. Verily
said the Abbot, then must you also needs work, for Mary has need of
Martha. When the Monk heard that, he repented and fell to work as the other
did. And I would to God that this answer would cause our religious even so to
do, and to fall to work, that they might succoure their needy neighbors.

And as touching their study in scripture, S. Austine says: how shall thou
better learn to understand the scipture, then by going about to fulfill that
thou there read? And if thou go about to fulfill it says he, then must
thou work with thy hands, for that does S. Paul teach thee. Of this I have
compiled an whole book, which if God have appointed me to finishe it, and set
it forth, shall be a rule of more perfection unto our religious, then any that
they have used this hundredth year.

The third Chapter. The conclusion of this treatise, that no flesh should
rejoice, but fear and tremble in all the gifts that he receives.
HEre maiste thou perceive that no man lives but he may fear and tremble,
and most he may fear, to whom most is committed, for of him shall much be
required: and much are we bound to thank God in all things. For of our
selves have we naught but sin and vanity, but through his gracious favor
have we all goodness, and be that we be. And since all our goodness comes of
him, we must again be thanckefull unto him, and keep his commandments. For
else we may fear least he take his gifts from us, and then shall we receive the
greater dampnation.

If thou have received the knowledge of his word, give him thanks, and be a
faithful minister thereof: for else he shall deliver thee unto thine own
fantastical imaginations, and cast thee headlong into an heap of heresies,
which shall bring thee into utter destruction.

If he give thee faith in his word, give him thanks, and bring forth the
fruits thereof in due season, for else he will take it away from thee, and send
thee into final desperation.

If he give thee riches, then give him thanks, and distribute them according
to Gods commandment, or else he shall take them from thee (if he love thee)
either by thieves, by water, by death of thy cattle, by blasting thy fruits,
or such other scourges, to cause thee love him, because he would Esai. 5.
Ierem. 7.
alienate thine heart from them, this I say he will do, if he love thee, to make
thee put thine whole trust in him, and not in these transitory things. But if
Ier^m. 12.
he hate thee, then will he send thee great prosperity, and increase them
plenteously, and give thee thy heaven in this world unto thine everlasting
dampnation in the life to come, and therefore fear and take good heed whiles
thou have leisure.

If thou ask me what his honor, praise, and thanks are? I answer, that his
honor, praise and thanks, is nothing else but the fulfilling of his
commandments. If thou ask me what his commandments are as touching the
bestowing of thy goods? I answer, his co^maundeme^ts are that thou bestow
them in the works of mercy, and that shall he lay to thy charge at the day
of judgment. He shall ask you whether you have fed the hungry, and given
drink to the thirsty, and not whether you have builded abbayes or chauntries.
He shall ask you whether you have harbored the harborlesse, and clothed the
naked, and not whether you have gilded images, or given copes to churches. He
shall ask you whether you have visited the sick, and gone to the prisoners,
and not whether you have gone a pilgrimage to Walsingham or Canterburye. And
this I affirm unto thee, that if thou build a thousand cloisters, and give as
many copes and chalices to churches, and visitest all the pilgrimages in the
world, and espiest and see a poor man whom thou might help, perishing
for lack of one grote, all these things whereon thou have bestowed so much
money, shall not be able to help thee. Therefore take good heed, and say not
but that ye be warned.

If God have given thee thy perfect limbs and members then give him thanks,
and use them to the tamyng of thy body, and profit of thy neighbor. For else
if God love thee he will send thee some main or mischief and take them from
thee, that thy negligence and none using of them be not so extremely imputed
unto thee. But if he hate thee, he shall keep the^ whole and sound for thee,
that the none using of them may be thy greater damnation. Therefore beware and
fear giving him thanks according to his commandments. For we are his
creatures, and are much bound to him that he has given to us our perfect
members: for it is better for us to have our limbs and to work with them
distributing to other, then that other should distribute unto us: for it is a
more holy thing to give the^ A^. 2.
to take: yea we are much bound unto him, although he have made us imperfect
and mutilate: for we were Ierem. 18.
in his hands (as we are yet) to have done with us whatsoever had pleased him,
even to have made us the vilest creature upon the earth.

I have read of a shepherd which keeping his sheep in the field espied a
foul Toade, and when he had well marked her, and conferred her shape and
nature, unto himself and his nature, he fell a weeping and cried out
piteously. At the last came a Bishop by, riding right royally: and when he saw
the shepherd so sore lamenting, he reynde his horse, and asked him the cause
of his great wayling. Then answered the shepherd, Verily sir I weep for mine
unkindness toward almighty God: for I have given thanks to God of many
things, but yet I was never so kind since I was borne, as to thank him of
this thing. What is that, said the Bishop? Sir (quod he) see you not this foul
tode? Yes (quod the Bishop) what is that to the purpose? Verily (said the shep
heard) it is the creature of God as well as I am, and God might have made me
even such a foul and unreasonable beast as this is, if it had pleased him, and
yet he has not done so, but of his mercy and goodness he has made me a
reasonable creature, after his own shape and likeness: and yet was I never so
kind as to thancke him that he had not made me so vile a creature, which thing
I greatly bewail, and mine unkindness tauseth me now thus to weep. With yt
the Bishop departed, and I trust learned to do thereafter. And I beseeth God
that we may so do, and be the faithful folowers of our Savior Christ Jesus, to
whom be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
A myrrour or lookyng glass wherein you may behold the Sacrament of Baptism
described. Anno. M. D. xxxiij.
By me John Frith.
Considering the manifold and lamentable errors wherewith not the ignorant
people only, but also the learned (as they seem) have been seduced long as
touching the blessed Sacrament of Baptism. I thought it expedient therein to
write my mind. Trustyng by that means to bring again the blind hearts of
many unto the right way, and I doubt not but that John. 10. 1. Cor. 2.
the elect and chose^ of God, that know their shepheardes voice, and have the
spirit to judge all things, shall Gods elect perceive easily the spiritual
meaning of his Sacraments.
easily perceive whether this be conformable to their masters voice, and shall
hereby be monished to leave their wanderyng in the dark and loathsome ways
which lead unto death, and to walk without stumblyng in Walking in the truth
brings rest of conscience. Phil. 4. Papists, through the gross
understanding of Baptism condemn infantes vnbap^ized.
the comfortable light which brings their consciences to rest, and such peace
that passes all understanding.

One error is this. They put so great confidence in the outward sign that
without discretion they condemn the infantes, which dye or they be Baptized
unto ever lastyng pain, an other is this. They cleave so strongly unto the
weak ceremonies, that they think if a dronken Priest leave out a word, as
Volo say ye, or Credo say External signs with out spiritual^ sense taught and
believed of the blind papists.
ye, or forget to put spittell or salt in ye childs mouth that ye child is not
christened, yea so much give they thereunto the beggarly salt, that they will
say spill not the salt, for it is our Christendom, and use also to swear by
it. Saying by this salt that is my Christendom. Alas what blyndnesse is this,
these two errors are the principal that I do entend at this time to confute.
For when they are fallen, the other that are grounded on these must needs
decay. First we must mark three things in every Sacrament Three things ought
to be considered in every Sacrament.
to be considered the sign, the signification and the faith, which is given
unto the words of God. The sign in Baptism is the ploungyng down in the
material water and liftyng up again by the which as by an outward badge we
are known to be of the number of them which profess Christ to be their
redemer and Savior.

This outward sign does neither Outward signs neither minister unto us Gods
spirit nor his grace.
give us the spirit of God: neither yet grace that is the favor of God. For
if thorough the washyng in the water the spirit or grace were given, then
should it follow that who soever were baptized in water should receive this
precious gift, but that is not so, wherefore I must needs conclude that this
outward sign by any power or influence that it has, brings not the spirit
or favor of God. That every man receives not this treasure in Baptism it is
evident: for put the case that a Jew or an infidel Mark well this example.
should say that he did believe, and believed not in deed, and upon his words
were baptized in deed (for no man ca^ judge what his heart is, but we must
receive him unto Baptism if he confess our faith with his mouth albeit his
heart be far from thence) this miscreant now thus Baptized has received this
outward sign and Sacrament, as well as the most faithful man beleuyng. Howbeit
he neither receives the spirit of God, neither He that receives the sign of
a sacrament outwardly and not the signification inwardly in heart, receaueth his
damnation.
yet any grace but rather condemnation. Wherefore it is evident that the
exterior sign gives not this gift which is also as certain in all other
Sacraments, yea in the Sacrament of the altar which may be called a double
Sacrament. For it is not only a remembrance that the natural body of Christ
was broken and his Note.
blood shed for our redemption as the Evangelists do testify, but also it is
his spiritual body which is the congregation of the faithful as S. Paul
testifies: saying, the bread which we break is it not the partaking (that is
to say we that are partakers) of the body of Christ? For we (says he) though
we be many yet are we one bread and one body. But for all that, the receiuyng
of this Sacrament gives us not the spirit of God neither yet his favor: for
the wicked receives it as well as ye good. Howbeit that receiuyng is to their
damnation. Wherefore it follows that the outward sign gives no man any
grace. Moreover if the spirit of God and his grace were bound unto the
Sacraments, then The spirit of God is not bound to the outward signs of
sacraments.
where ye Sacraments were ministered there must ye spirit of grace wait on, and
where they were not ministered, should be neither spirit nor grace. But that is
false, for Cornelius and all his household received ye holy ghost before they
were Baptized. In so much that Acts. 10.
Peter said may any man forbid that these should be baptized with water which
have received the holy ghost as well as we. And so he commanded them to be
baptized, in the name of the Lord, here may we see that as the spirit of God
lights where he Gods spirit not bound to any place.
will, neither is he bound to any thing. Yea and this example does well
declare unto us that the Sacraments are given to be an outward witness unto
all the congregation of that grace which is given before privately unto every
man.

So is Baptism given before the congregation unto him which before he receive
it, has either professed the Religion of Christ, or else has the word of
promise, by the which promise Infidels must first believe in Christ, and after
receive Baptism as the ^ge of your faith(...)(...).
he is known to be of the sensible congregation of Christ and for this cause
when we baptize one that is come unto the age of discretion we axe of him
whether he believe, if he answer yea and desire Baptism then is he baptized
so that we require faith in him before he be baptized (which is the gift of
God) and comes of grace, and so it is an outward sign of his invisible faith
which before was given him of God. If an infant be brought unto baptism whom
his friends offer up willing to sanctify and fulfill the commandment and
ordinance of God, we enquire of his friends before the congregation whether
they will that their child be baptized and when they have answered yea, the^
receives he Baptism. Here also went before the promise of God that he of his
grace reputeth our infantes no less of the congregation then the infantes of
the Hebrews and thorough Baptism does the congregation receive him which was
first received thorough grace of the promise, thus may we see that Baptism
brings not grace, but does testify unto the congregation that he which is
baptized had such grace given him before, so is Baptism a Sacrament, The
desinition of Baptism.
that is the sign of an holy thing eue^ a token of the grace and free mercy
which was before given him a visible example of invisible grace which is done
and given through the gentleness of God. By this may we perceive how gross
their ignorance is which without discretion condemn the infantes that depart
out of this world not baptized in our material water. For if that water give
no grace as I have sufficiently proved, why should they condemn more before
that washyng, then after. Beside that the election of God is free and follows
Faith follows our election.
not our faith, but faith follows the election as it is written. And there
believed even as many as were ordained unto everlasting life for Acts. 13.
they that are chosen from ye beginning are no doubt chosen before they had
faith, we ought not therefore to give such unadvised judgment on these Rash
judgment in mystical matters not lawful.
children which by their age have not yet heard our faith, seeing Gods election
is hid from our eyes.

The children of Israel were a Israelites, Gods peculiar people.
people which God had chosen from among all nations of the world, and gave
them Circumcision for a token and memorial of that election, which
Sacraments, and figures thereof, grossly understood breed errors.
circumcision was a figure of our baptism, and they thought that the gentiles
which were not carnally circumcised had been all condemned. But their opinion
deceived them for there were also of the Gentiles which although they were not
circumcised outwardly were elect of God and were spiritually circumcised,
which only is the thing that God regards, as Paul testifies, saying, He is
not a Jew which is a Jew outward, neither is that circumcision any thing Roma.
(...).
which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is hid within the
circumcision of the heart, which is the cutting off, of carnal desires, and is
the true circumcision. This circumcision was in price with God, with the which
the gentiles (as Job) were circumcised. And in like manner may we say of our
Baptism, he is not a Christen man which is washed with water, neither is that
baptism which is outward in the flesh: but that is the very baptism which
God allows, to be baptized spiritually in the heart, that is, to subdue and
weed out the branches of sin that it reign not in your mortal bodies, and
bring the^ into bondage under it: of ye which our Baptism is but a sign. And
there are many (I doubt not) which are thus spiritually baptized although their
bodies touch no water, as there were gentiles thus spiritually circumcised and
yet never cut of the foreskinne of their privy members.

Furthermore the children of the uncircumcision are of the people and
congregation of God as well as the children of the Hebrews under the law were
members of their congregation. I take the congregation of Gods church largely
taken, what it is.
God in this place even somewhat largely, that is, for all them that are
thought or counted to be the members of Christ, as it is taken, Matthew 13.
Math. 13.
where Christ compares it unto a net which receives both good fish and
evil: and again Matthew 25. Math. 25.
where he likeneth the kingdom of heaven, that is to say, the congregation of
God unto x. virgins, of the which v. were wise, and v. foolish: Gods elect
Church is without spotte and only known to God.
but I speak not in this place of the elect sanctified and invisible
congregation, which is without spotte and wrinckle, and only known unto God
which has chosen her before the foundations of the world were laid, neither
is it to be esteemed but that God is as merciful unto us which are of the
spiritual Israel, as he was unto the carnal Israel. S. John, S. Paul and
such other were they not (being infantes) of the congregation of God elect in
Christ Jesus before the creation of the world? howbeit in their infancy they
neither had faith, nor yet knew any thing of this election. Matthew, Zacheus,
the thief Man is uncertain of his election until the holy ghost working in
him assure him thereof.
and Mary Magdalene were they not likewise so chose^, yet they themselves knew
it not until they were lightened of the holy Ghost, and drawn unto Christ by
our heavenly Father, neither knows any man of an others election, but every
man may know his own through his faith and will that he has to fulfill the
law of God. Of this sensible congregation Good and bad are of the sensible
Church.
of Christ was Judas, yea and all the other which after forsook Christ,
neither wist the Apostles but that Judas had been of the elect, sanctified, and
invisible congregation of Christ, as well as Peter or John: so that our
judgment recounteth all faithful and chosen, that seem to be, but Christ
knows them that are his, and them that shall forsake him.

Now is there an opinion risen among certain, which affirm ye children may
not be baptized until they come unto a perfect age, and that because they
have no faith: but verily me thinks that they are far from the meekness
of Christ, and his spirit, which when children were brought unto him,
received them lovingly, and embraced them in his arms. Mat. 9. and when his
Disciples blamed the Math. (...).
bringers, he called them unto him, saying: suffer children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven. Luke 18. And Luke.
(...).
albeit they have no faith, but are only of that invisible congregation, that
is, Infante^ may be ^^ptised because they be partakers of the promise although
they as yet have no faith.
with out spot or wrinkel: yet as I have said they have a promise as well as
the children of the Hebrews, by the which they are of the visible
congregation, which thing only is testified in their baptism. So it appears
that these men are ignorant what baptism is. For our baptism does not
testify that we are of that pure congregation, which was chosen and sanctified
in Christ before the world began, which have their names written in the book
of life, of the which it is not possible that one should perish, for then
were it a false testimony: seeing many which are baptized, fall afterward
into perilous heresies, and utter desperation which brings them unto death
everlasting. And as for faith if they have none when they are baptized, let
them pray unto God to give it them afterward: for the lack of faith hurts
not the sacrament, but the sacrament may be as well ministered unto a miscreant
as to a faithful, if he say that he has faith, or have any promise of God,
but this matter will I pass over: for I trust the English (unto who^ I write
this) have no such opinions.

Now will I proceed with the second The second thing to be considered in
Baptism.
point of this sacrament, which is the signification. The signification of
baptism is described of Paul in the. 6. of ye Romans, that as we are
plunged bodily into the wate^r. Even Roma. 6.
so we are dead and buried with Christ from sin: and as we are lifted again
out of the water, even so are we risen with Christ from our sins, that we
might hereafter walk in a new conversation of life. So that these two
things, that is to be plunged Dipping in the water, and liftyng up again of
intantes, what it signifies.
in the water, and lift up again, do signify and represent the whole pith
and effect of baptism, that is the mortification of our old Adam, and the
rising up of our new man. What is y^ old Adam? verily eue^ that by natural
inheritance is planted thorough Adams fall in us, as to be unfaithful,
angry, envious, covetous, slothful, proud, and ungodly, these and such
other uses wherewith our nature is venemed, ought we withal diligence to
cut of, and mortify, that we may daily be more pacient, liberal, and
merciful according to that our baptism does signify. In so much that a The
whole course of man's life is a continual Baptism.
Christen man's life is nothing else save a continual baptism, which is begone
when are dipped in the water, and is put in continual ure and exercise, as
long as the infection of sin remains in our bodies, which is never utterly
vanquished until the hour of death, and there is the great Golias slain with
his own sweard, that is death, which is the power of sin, and the gate of
everlasting life opened unto us, and thus is Paul to be understand. Galat. 3.
where he says. All ye that are baptized into Galat. 3.
Christ, have put Christ on you, that is, you have promised to dye with
Christ as touching your sins and worldly desires passed, and to become new
me^, or creatures or members of Christ, this have we all promised unto the
congregation, and it is represented in our Baptism. But alas there are but few
which in deed fulfill that they promise or rather that the Sacrament promises
for them. And for this cause it is called of Paul the fountain of the new
birth and regeneration. Tit. iij. because it signifies that we will in deed
renounce and utterly Tit. 3. Baptism is the fountain of our new birth.
forsake our old life and purge our members from the works of iniquity
thorough ye virtue of ye holy ghost, which as the water or fire does cleanse the
body, Even so does it purify the heart from all uncleanness: yea it is a common
phrase in Scripture to call the holy ghost water and fire, because these two
elements express so lively his purging operation.

Now have we expounded the signification The signification of Baptism, that is
to say, banishyng the old man and puttyng on the new acquired only by faith.
of Baptism which signification we may obtain only by faith, for if thou be
baptized a thousand times with water and have no faith it avails thee no more
toward God, the it does a Goose when she ducketh her self under the water.
Therefore if thou will obtain the profit of Baptism thou must have faith,
that is, thou must be surely persuaded that thou art newly borne again not by
water only, but by water and the holy ghost, John. iij. and thou art* become
ye John. 3.
child of God and that thy sins are not imputed to thee, but forgiven through
ye blood and passion of Christ, according unto the promise of God. This faith
have neither ye devils, neither yet the The wicked distrustyng in Gods promises
despair.
wicked. For the wicked ca^ not believe ye remission of their sins, but fall
unto utter desperation and make God a liar as much as in the^ is. For they
believe not the testimony which he gave his son, and this is that testimony,
that all which believe on him have everlasting life John. v. And the devils
John. 5.
can not believe it, for they have no promise made unto them. Thus Christ's
blood is the strength of our Baptism.
through Christ's blood, whereof our Baptism has his full strength and vigor,
are we regenerate and made at one with the father. For by our first natural
birth, we are the children of wrath. Ephesians. ij. and the enemies of God. Roma.
vj. Roma. 5.


Finally baptism is an ordinance institute of God (and no practice of man's
imagination) put in use in Christ's time, and after his resurrection commanded
to be ministered unto all that believe, whether they were Jews or Gentiles. For
Christ Matthew the last.
says to his Apostles, Go ye and teach all nations baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son Math. 28.
and of the holy Ghost. Wherefore although it seem never so exterior a thing,
yet ought it to be had in great Causes why the Sacrament of Baptism should be
had in great reverence.
price and much reverence because it was commanded of God to be done. Beside
that it is an outward sign or witness unto the congregation of the invisible
promise given before by grace unto every private man, and by it does the
congregation receive him openly to be counted one of the^ which was first
received by faith, or through the grace of the promise: it puts us also in
remembrance that we (aduertising the kyndnesse of God and our promise in
Baptism) may learn to dye and mortify our rebellyng members, otherwise
gives it no grace, nether has it any secret virtue as we have sufficiently
proved, and therefore is he sore to blame that so unadvisedly condemns these
infa^tes iudgyng his brother which is in Gods hand, yea and peradventure
baptized in Christ's blood. For Gods election is unknown to man. Now will I
endeavor my self to overthrow and utterly put out the second error which
has long reigned and seduced many: and that is of them which so strongly
stick unto the weak ceremonies. Concerning the ceremonies of Baptism, yea
and all other, we must behave our selves wisely as charity teaches us,
seeking the profit of many, that they may be saved. We must consider Sundry
sorts of me^ which we have conversation withal diversely affected.
that we have our conversation with men in this world of the which the most
part know not God. Some are young, some weak, some perverse, and some
stiffenecked and obdurate unto the young ceremonies, which although they be not
noisome unto the faith, nor contrary to the word of God, yet will it be hard to
find such. They are good and expedient Ceremonies of some sorts are as guides
unto the knowledge of God.
(as milk) to lead the young tenderly into the more perfect knowledge of God.
The second sort are the weak unto whom in all things it behooves us to have
respect and bear their infirmities by charity: for their sake Acts. xv. did
Paul circumcise Timothe, yea and for their sake he Acts. 15.
had lever to captive his liberty and never eat flesh nor drink wine the^ to
offend one of them. The third kind of men are perfect I mean not so perfect
that they are clean without sin having no remnauntes of old Ada^ assailyng
them for such are there none, but only Christ: but I call the^ The perfection
of man.
perfect which have perfect knowledge in the use of things which know, that
what soever enters into the belly deff^eth not the man, which know Math. 15.
that all such things be pure unto the^ that are pure Tit. i. which know Tit.
1.
that if we eat we are nothing the better, or if we eat not we are nothing
the worse. 1. Cor. 8. these are 1. Cor. 8.
free between God and their conscience, and may use all things: howbeit they
are Weak consciences either by breaking of any ancient custom, or neglecting
ceremonies not to be offended. 1. Cor. 8.
yet bound as concerning their neighbor which is weak and has not the
knowledge, yea bound under the pain of sin to abstain from wou^dyng of
their conscience, for he sins against God that wounds an other man's
conscience. 1. Cor. 8. The fourth kind are self willed and obstinate which
put confidence in such indifferent things. For I think them not needful
unto our salvation. Then The obstinate which put trust in things not needful
to salvation must be resisted.
ought we to resist in the face, and not to yield an inche unto them, as Paul
gives us example, which would not for their pleasure circumcise Titus but
utterly resisted their obdurate ignorance. If thou make this division, thou
shall know how to behave thy self toward all men, but now it is meet that
we show thee which are the ceremonies of Baptism.

The ceremonies of Baptism are easly expressed if thou know what the
substance of it is, and how the Apostles ministered it: and where may we have
that better expressed then Acts. viij. where Philip baptized the Eunuch,
Acts. 8.
chamberlain to the Queen of Ca^dace, this Eunuch did knowledge that Jesus
was the son of GOD which is the sign of our faith, and desired Baptism and
Phillip at the Philip the Apostle used not so many outward ceremonies in
Baptism as papists do.
next water they came to, washed him in the name of the father and of the
son, and of the holy ghost. There will no man deny but that that Baptism was
as full, and as good as ours, and yet was there neither font nor holy water,
candle, cream, oil, salt, godfather, or godmothers, or any other, popatrie.
Wherefore we may conclude that all these things are but ceremonies that is to
say exterior things which make Baptism neither the better nor worse of a
myte, thus say I not to have these ceremonies that want judgment disanulled,
which are not noisome to our faith, for fear of offending the weak, but only
that thou may know how to use them, as indifferent and to put no confidence
in them. For then should they hurt and unquiet our conscience, if through
negligence, or otherwise any thing were undone, and so should they be an
occasion to pluck us from Christ, which were institute for a mean to bring
us unto him. Therefore the Seniours and ministers of Ministers must be
circumspect in the uses and abuses of ceremonies.
the congregations ought to instruct their flocks to take these things
indifferent, which neither save nor damn, whether they be done or undone. And
if they perceive the people cleave to sore to them, then ought they to seek
out a time convenient, and to abrogate or alter those ceremonies, or else they
can not escape the wrath of God. For they that seek health in such ceremonies
are fallen from grace and tread under their ^^te the blood of Christ, unto
their condemnation. But their blood shall be required at your hands, which
better should have instructed them. And as concerning the abrogation or
alteration of ceremonies, we have a ^i 33.
godly ensample of the Sabbath. The Sabbath was instituted and commanded of
God to be kept of the children Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
of Israel. Notwithstanding because it was a sign or a ceremony, and did
signify unto them that it was God which sanctified them with his spirit, and
not themselves with their holy works. And because also that all ceremonies and
shadows ceased when Exodus 31.
Christ came. So that they might be done or left undone indifferently. Our
Sabbath abrogated for fear of superstition
forefathers, which were in the beginning of the church, did abrogate this
Sabbath to the intent that me^ might have an ensample of Christian liberty, and
that they might know that neither the keepyng of the Saboth, nor of any other
day, is necessary according to Paul. Ye observe days, Gallat. 4.
times, and months, I am afraid of you that I have labored in vain
toward you. Howbeit, because it was necessary that a day should be reserved,
in the which the people might come together to hear the word of God, they
ordained in the stead of ye Sabbath which was Saturday, the next day following
which is Sunday. And although they might have kept Sabbath kept on the Sunday.
the Saturday with the Jews as a thing indifferent: yet did they much better
to ouerset the day, to be a perpetual memory that we are free and not bound
to any day, but that we may do all lawful works to the pleasure of God and
profit of our neighbor. We are in manner as supersticious in the So^s they
were in the Saturday, ye^ we are much madder. For the Jews have y^ word of God
for their Saterdaye, sith it is the seventh day, and they were commanded to
keep the seventh day solemn. And we have not the word of God for us but
rather against us, for we keep not the seventh day as ye Jews do. But the
first which is not commanded by Gods law: but Paul byddeth that no man judge
us as concerning holy day meats, and such other exteryour things, yea and
Coll. 2.
in no wise will he that we observe them, countyng them more holy then other
days. For they were institute that the people should come together to hear
Gods word, receive the sacraments, and give God thanks. That done, they may
return unto their houses and do their business as well as any other day. He
that thinks that a man sins which works on the holy day, if he be weak
or ignorant, ought better to be instruct, and so to leave his hold. But if he
be obstinate and persevere in his sentence, he is not of God, but of the devil,
for he makes sin in such as God leaves free. According to this ensample,
would I that our ceremonies were altered, because (as I have said) the people
seek health in them. And what vilany can they do more to Christ's blood?

And as concerning Godfathers and Godmothers, they promise for their
Godchildren that they shall mortify the root of sin which springs in the
bodies, and subdue their lusts under the law of God. They promise also that
they will instruct and bring up their Godchildren in the faith of Christ:
which office pertayneth unto their parents, for they are commanded of God to
teach their children. So that the parents should Exodus 13. Deuteronomy. 4. and. 5.
be either alone, or at the least ye chiefest Godfather. But now a days the
fathers may not be suffered to know any thing themselves. How should they the^
instruct their children? They keep the scripture and word of God from you, and
bear you in hand that it is heresy. Alas how long will you lack
understanding? perceive you not yet that they would keep you in darcknes
because you should not espy their privy practice and slightly conueyaunce?
Are you so mad that this blessed word which made the evil good, will make the
good evil? think you that this wholesome medicine which heals all
infirmities, is now changed into such a nature that it will poison you? Are ye
so simple and childishe to surmise that this godly doctrine which discloseth
all hypocrisy, and confounds all heresies, should make you to err and fall
into heresies? I pray God give you eyes to see, ears to hear, and open your
hearts that you may perceive what his pleasure is. For surely ignorauncie shall
not excuse you (as Ezechiell Ezech. 3. and. 30.
speaking in the person of God) says unto ye curates. Thou son of man, I
have made thee an ouersear unto ye house of Israel, thou shall hear the word
of my mouth, and shall show it them from me. If I say unto the wicked thou
shall surely die, and thou show him not, nor exhort him to turn from his wicked
way that he may live: then he shall dye in his wickedness, but I will require
his blood at thy hand. Yea, and if the righteous turn from his righteousness
and do iniquity: he shall die although thou show it him not, he shall die in
his sin, but I will require his blood at thy hand. Take heed you curates unto
your charge, and let no man excuse himself thorough ignorance.

FINIS.
Antithesis, wherein are compared together Christ's acts and the Popes,
gathered by John Frith and annexed unto the Revelation of Antichrist, which he
translated. 1529.
Antithesis.
WE have annexed (Christen Reader) unto the end of the Revelation, a little
treatise after the manner of an Epitome and short rehearsal of all things
that examined more diligently in the aforesaid book, wherein their false and
cloked hypocrisy is abundantly opened, by the compairing of Christ's Math. 7.
acts and theirs together, for Christ's rule can not be deceauable, which
says that we should know the^ by their works, for Paul says 1* Cor. 11.
that such false Apostles are wicked workers which be transfigured into
Christ's Apostles. And no marvel for Satan him self, is some time
transfigured into an angel of light, therefore it is no great thing, if that
his ministers do take upon them a similitude, as though they were the ministers
of justice, whose end shall be according to their works. Christen men should
mark such and fly away from the^ for such serve not Christ but their own
bellyes. And by sweet preachynges, and flattering words deceive the hearts of
the innoce^tes. And even as Iannes and Iambres 2. Timb. 3. Exodus 8.
withstode Moses, even so these resist the truth, men they are of corrupt
minds, and lewed as concerning the faith, but they shall prevail no longer,
for their madness shall be uttered unto all me^ as theirs was. Thus the people
be blinded falling into unbelief. And are deceived thorough the sleghty
conueyaunce of Antichrist and his adherents. Saint John said, that there John.
4.
were many Antichrists in his time no wonder if now be mo, howbeit by their
works they shall be known and also by their words, for they shall contrary
Christ both in life and learning, whom they profess to follow. Now let us
consider Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Suffraganes, Archdeacons, Deacons,
Officials, Persons, Abbotes, with Deans, and Friars, Sumners, Pardoners, and
these Papal Notaries, take heed to Monks, Chanons, Ankers, and He remites,
Nuns, and Sisters, and mark how they follow Christ. We will chiefly touch the
head which is the Pope, although it may be verified through all his members.

First.
Math. 8.
CHrist was poor, saying. The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nestes, but the son of man has not whereon to lay his head.

The Pope and his adherents are rich, for the Pope says Rome is mine, Sicilia
is mine, Corsica is mine. etc. And his adherentes have also, fruitful
possessions, this every man knows.

2. Christ was meek and low, and John. 6.
forsook this worldly glory, and fled alone unto the mountains, when John. 6.
the people would have made him a king. Saying my kingdom is not of John. 17.
this world.

The Pope, is full high and proud, saying, I am a Lord of both the realms,
earthly and heavenly, and the Emperor is my subject: This witnesses his law.
Di. 96. ca. Si imperator.

3 Christ full lowly and meekely washed John. 13.
his disciples feet.

The Pope says, the Emperors and kings, shall knele and kiss my feet, and
is not ashamed to express it in the law. ca. Cu^ olim. de priuil. ele.

4. Christ came not to be served but to serve, taking upon him the similitude
Luke. 22. Phil. 2.
of a servant, humbling himself and made himself of no reputation to serve
us.

The Pope will be served, and says it were a shame if he should so humble
himself. Did. 86. ca. Quando necessitas.

5. Christ went on his feet with his disciples both in wette and dry, heat and
cold, to teach the people, as it is evident through the Gospels.

The Popes and Bishops will keep their feet full clean with shoes of gold and
silver. Since with precious stones, and will not preach them selves, but say it
is sufficient, to cause other to preach. cap. Inter ceteram de offic. Iuor.
After this manner might the Turk be Pope also.

6. Christ would not suffer that doves, Math. 21.
sheep, and oxen for the offering, should be sold in the temple of God, but
drove out the buyers and sellers with whipes.

The Pope and Bishops, suffer chapmen in the Church that minister the
Sacraments for money, daily unto the common people. And they give great pardon
unto it, that they may be partakers of the wynnyng, to maynteine their cradles
and other necessaryes with all, this may you see daily.

7. Christ says, ye have it for nothing Math. 10.
therefore shall you give it for nothing.

The Pope has Judas mind, for you get nothing of him without money, for he
sells both prayer and preaching.

8. Christ sat at meat among his Luke. 22.
Disciples full lowly and poorly. Not requiryng the highest seat.

The Pope sits full high in a curious throne and will be served gloriously
with long kneelyng and me^ to kerue his morssels, with iagged coats blasphemyng
God with oaths, and many other vices as we may see daily.

9. Christ was in hills with weeping Math. 14. and. 15.
and praying and walked in desert, feedyng many thousands, both with meat and
preaching.

The Pope sits in his Castles and towers with minstrelsie and laughter. And
the hungry poor shall sit at the gate, he will not serve them him self for
shame he thinks it were.

10. Christ lay and slept in a boat on Math. 8.
the hard bordes and had to his chamberlaynes but fishers, crying to him upon
the Sea in the tempest when they were a feared to perish.

The Pope sleeps full soft and easily, and no man may awake him until he have
slept enough, for his chamberlaynes shall be ready with Marshals and vshers, to
keep his hall and chamber from noise. And the portar at the gate to keep out
the poor. Their Lord they will not awake.

11. Christ fasted and sought the fruit on the tree when he was hungry, and
Math. 21.
found none thereon.

The Pope has great provision at Cities and Towns to get him of the best that
may be found, well dressed and dayntely to make digestion, with spicery,
sawces, and siropes, colored out of kind.

12. Christ lay in a stable, with few clothes, betwixt an ox and an Ass for
Luke. 2.
the place was narrow.

The Pope, in rich chambers, with quiltes, curtains, carpettes and quish^ons
spread all about with sweet smelles and painted walls.

13. Christ chose to him poor men, and commanded them to be simple as doves.
Math. 11.


The Pope choseth subtle me^ and crafty, full of pride or else they are not
meet for him.

14. Christ rode simply on an Ass, Math. 21.
and had twelve that followed him a foot all about.

The Pope on a mule or a white palfray much higher then his master did. And
has many mo then twelve following him on horseback with swoordes and bucklers,
as it were to battle.

15. Christ bade his Disciples to go Mark. 16.
into all the world and to preach the Gospel to every creature.

The Pope and his Bishops forbid it in the pain of disobedience and
excommunication, save only such as they will assign.

16. Christ was naked, beaten, scourged, John. 19.
and false witness brought against him.

The Pope and his adherentes are well clothed with precious garments, and have
change for each day, and false witness they have enough, not against them, but
to testify with them what soever they will have against the innocents.

17. Christ came to seek the poor and comfort them, he was not chargefull
unto them, but was mild, and had pity on them.

The Pope and Bishops, somon and cite them be they never so poor, not
regarding their adversity. But curse if they come not. So that they go away
soryer, and sicker in soul, and in purse then they were before.

18. Christ commanded that we should not swear at all, neither by Math. 5.
heaven, neither by the temple. etc. But that our words should be, yea, yea,
nay, nay.

The Pope says, if any man will receive any office under us, he shall be sworn
before, yea, and give a great sum of money. Ca. Signifi. de elect.

19. Christ had a crown of thorn thrust upon his head, so that ye blood
John. 19.
ran down upon his amiable countenance, and sharp nails through his
precious hands.

The Pope must wear three crowns Ca. Constant. did. ^^vi.
of gold, set with rich precious stones, he lacks no Diademes, his hands
and fingers with owches and ringes are royally dight, he passes poor Christ
far.

20. Christ took the cross of painful affliction upon himself, and
commanded his disciples to follow him, saying, Math. 10.
he that takes not his cross, and follow me, is not meet for me.

The Pope and his Bishops take the cross of pride, and have it borne before
them, well gilt and amelde, to have a worship of this world, as for other
cross know they none.

21. Christ prayed his father to forgive Luke. 23.
them that trespassed him, yea, and for them that put him to death.

Our Bishops, pray the king to be avenged on them that resist their minds,
with forgeuenes they have no acquaintance.

22. Christ bad his disciples to preach Math. 10.
the Gospel.

The Pope and his Bishops will have men to preach fables, and thereto grant
letter and seall, and many days of pardon.

23. Christ commanded his disciples John. 19.
to know his law, and bad the Jews to search the Scriptures. And Exodus 16.
Moses exhorted ye Israelites to teach the law of God to their young
children. And that they should have it bound as a sign in their hands, that
it might ever be before their eyes: And caused them to write it on the posts
and doors of their houses.

The Pope and his Bishops say, that it is not meet for us to know it, they
make it heresy and treason to ye king to know Christ or his laws, they have
dug cisternes of their own traditions, and have stopped up the pure
fountaynes of Israel. Oh Lord, (in whom is all our trust) come down from the
heavens, why do thou tarry so long, seeing thine adversary thus preuayling
against thee?

24. Christ approved his law and Heb. 9.
confirmed it with his own death.

The Pope and B^shoppes us full busy how they may destroy it, and magnify
more their own law then Christ's, to maintain their fat bellyes.

25. Christ would men visited prisoners, to comfort and deliver them. Math. 25.


The Pope with his adherentes, discomfort the poor and the true, and put them
in prison for the truth.

26. Christ whom they call their example, did never prison nor persecute any.

The Pope and his champyons, persecute, punish, prison, and put to death, them
that are disobedient to their voluptuous pleasures. Ye see how strayghte they
follow Christ's steps.

27. Christ commanded his disciples that if any man trespassed against Math.
18.
them, they should go and reprove him privily, if he would not obey and be
reconcyled, then should they take with them one witness or twain, if he would
not then hear them, that they should tell it to the whole congregation. And if
he would still continue in his stubbernes, that they should avoid his company.

The Pope and Bishops will cast straight into prison, there to remain in
yrons to make them revoke the truth, and grant to their wills, and if he be
strong and will not forsake the truth, they will condemn him without
audience, for fear of losing of their temporal winning. And offering to their
wombes, and taking away of their temporaltyes, wherewith the church is venomed.

28. Christ charged Peter thrice, to John. 21.
keep well and nourishe his sheep.

The Pope charge much more to keep well his money. As for the sheep he
shereth and punishes with infinite exactions.

29. Christ healing the sick and doing Math. 8. Mark. 1. Luke. 5.
many miracles, did lightly, ever command that they should tell no man who
did heal them.

The Pope and Bishops, give great gifts to minstrelles and messengers, to
leude liars and flatterers to cry their name about, that they may have
worship in this world.

30. Christ had no secular courts to Math. 5.
plead ye matters of his disciples, for they would not resist evil.

The Pope and Bishops, have many with men of law to oppress ye poor
against mercy, forgive they will not, but ever be avenged.

31. Christ in cities and towns hunted Math. 8. and 17.
the feendes out of men that they dwelled in, with the words of his mouth.

The Pope and Bishops, hunt the wild Dear, the For, and the Hare, in their
closed parkes, with great cries, and horns blowinge, with H^undes and ratches
running.

32. God was called the holy father John. 22.
of Jesus Christ his son.

The Pope is called most holy father of Satha^s children, and takes that name
on him with Lucifers pride: his disciples say ye he is god on earth, and we are
taught by Christ's law to have but one God.

33. Christ sat in the mids of the Luke. 2.
Doctors, asking, and hearing them.

The Pope and Bishops sit in thrones with glorious myters, iudgeing and
condemning by their own made laws. A little matter, long in pleating, which
might be soon determined by the law of God, if they would use it, but then
were their winning the less, and their law without profit.

34 Christ taught that a man should forsake his wife for no cause but for
Math. 5.
aduoutry.

The Pope and Bishops will make deuorces for money, as often as they list,
and so they pille the poor and make themselves rich, nothing regardyng to
break the law of God.

35. Christ sent the holy ghost in fervent love, to teach all the truth unto
Acts. 2.
them which were chosen of God.

The Pope and Bishops send commandments all about to curse and ask
auengeaunce on them that resist their tyranny, And absoile the^ again clean
for money: all their doctrines have golden tails, for money is ever the end,
give them money, and you have fulfilled all their laws.

36. Christ fulfilled and kept the old Math. 3.
law and the new, and all righteousness.

The Pope and Bishops keep their own traditions and laws, but the law of
God is clean out of their minds.

37. Christ said, that men should John. 12.
know his disciples by their charity, because they should love one another as
he has loved them.

The Pope causes his to be known, by their shaven crowns, by gathering up of
tithes, mass pence, and offeringes, by the gylden trentalles, and salaryes to
sing, by Peter pence gathering, and shriuing for monye, by penny wedding, and
holy water sprinkling, and many mo marks has he given them, As for charity,
they know it not at all.

38. Christ bad them that he healed John. 9.
to go and sin no more.

The Pope and Bishops have feigned penance, and command men to fast bread and
water, to go barefoote, without a shurt, and to offer to certain idols money
or cattle, some Masses must be song for them because their confessors should
have some profit, Some must go about the church, and Churchyard, with a taper
burning in his hand. And ever some be punished by the purse, though they offend
not.

39. Christ sent to preach seue^ty and Luke. 10.
and two Disciples, which promised freely heaven to them that would believe in
the name of Christ.

The Pope and Bishops send about four sects of beggars to give pardon under
their master Antichrist. And to sell heaven to whom so ever they list, the
Apostles knew no such things.

40. Christ was buried in a garden John. 19.
in a poor monument without any funeral pomp.

The Pope and Bishops are buried in tombs well gilt with many a torch and
great solemnity, with angels gloriously portered that bear their souls to
heaven. Notwithstanding it is to be feared that they go to supper with the
devil.

41. Christ says if thou will be perfect Math. 19.
go and sell all thy goods and give it unto the poor for then shall thou have
treasure in heaven.

The pope says if thou will be perfect give me thy money and I will give thee
a pardon that shall absolve thee clean a poena and culpa I will for thy money
give thee, the kaye of heaven gates.

42. Christ said unto his Apostles the Luke. 22.
Kings and Princes of the Gentiles have rule and power over them, but you
shall not so have.

The Pope says, all Emperors, Kings and Lords be my subjects, This is
daily read in his Bulls, where in he commands the nobility, like as a master
does his servant.

43. Christ says, he that among you Math. 23. Mark. 9.
will be greatest, let him be all your servants.

The Pope says, The Emperor must swear an oath unto me as unto his Lord, that
he will be my subject and eralte and worship me with honor. Ca. Tibi Domino.
Di. 63.

44. Christ says that we worship ^ath. 17.
him in vain with men's doctrines and traditions.

The Pope says my traditions in the spiritual law, shall be kept as duly, as
if God had commanded it him self, or S. Peter had preached it him self. Ca.
Si omnes. Did. 19.

45. Christ says I am the way and John. 14.
the truth follow me in my learning. And rule you by ye Scripture for that shall
be your judge.

The Pope says, ye shall in all things follow the Church of Rome (by that
means he him self and his Cardinals) Did. xi. Cap. quis ne sciat. And as for
the Scripture, it stands in my power and authority, for I may make of it
what soever I will. Did. xix. Cap. Si romanorum.

46. Christ says he that believes and Mark. 11.
is baptized, he shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned.

The Pope says he that gives much money for my pardon shall be absoyled a
poena and a culpa. And the^ must he needs be saved. And he that teaches
otherwise is an heretic, this testifies his bulls and pardons.

47. Christ promises forgeuenes of Math. 4.
sin. And the kingdom of heaven unto them that repent and will amend their
lives.

The Pope says, that no man can be saved except he be first shreuen of his
Priests and Friars, for they bring in money. Cap. omnes.

48. Christ says you shall love your Math. 5.
enemies, and shall do good unto them that hate you.

The Pope says, they that be enemies, to me and my Cardinals, be cursed with
the great excommunication, and ca^ not be absoyled without much money, this is
evident enough.

49. Christ commanded his Disciples Math. 17.
not to resist evil, but if a man strike them on ye one cheke, that they
should offer him the other also.

The Pope says we may avenge and drive away force with force. D^ sen. excom.
cap. dilecto.

50. Christ (says God the father) is Math. 11.
my dear son, him shall you hear, for his yoke is sweet and his burden
light.

The Pope says you shall hear me, and my commandment shall be kept and
received of every man. Did. 93. cap. Si cui^s. And if my commandment and
burden were so heavy that it ca^ not well be sustained and borne, yet shall ye
obey me. Did. 19. cap. In memoriam.

51. Christ said unto the. ij. brethren, Luke. 12.
who has set me to be your judge in temporal goods. As though he should say.
It pertains not to me, but unto worldly judges.

The Pope says I am judge in all manner of causes for they bring money unto me.
9. q. 3. Conquestus.

52. Christ says give the Emperor Math. 23.
such as pertayneth unto him as tribute and custom, for I have paid Math. 17.
toll for me and Peter.

The Pope says I care not for this, But I excommunicate all them that ask any
toll or tribute of me and my shauelynges, for I have made them all free. Cap.
Nouit. de senten. excom. Et ca. Si quis. de cons. did. i.

53. Christ says. Peter put up thy Math. 26.
sword into the sheath, for he that strikes with sword shall perish with the
sword.

The Pope says, you Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Lords, take swords,
spears, halberdes, clubbes and gunnes, and help me to slay the^, that will
not obey my tyranny. This must an Emperor do or else he must be perjured. After
this manner has Julius the Pope slain. xvi. thousand men in one day, was not
that well pastored? Did not he well nourish the sheep which Christ did commit
unto his tuition?

54. Christ said. Drink you all of this cup, for this is the blood of
Math. 26.
my promise.

The Pope says, I will not grant this, for my priests alone shall drink of
it (because it may cry auengeau^ce on them alone) the other shall not drink
of it in the pain of heresy.

55. Christ says: Ye are my friends John. 15.
if you do all things that I my self command you.

The Pope says, you shall do as I bid you, for I have power and authority to
make laws. And after them shall you live. 25. q. j. ca. Sunt quidam.

56. Christ says that chastity is not Math. 19.
given unto every man, they that have it given, let them take it giving thanks
to God. And let the other use the remedy which God has prepared, for it is
better to mary then to burn.

The Pope says, all monks, Friars, 1. Cor. 7.
and Nuns, shall vow and swear chastity, be it given them or not, my
Priests also shall not be wedded, but as for to keep whores, and rauishe
other men's daughters and wives, shall be dispensed withal. I will see no such
things, for my Bishops have yearly great money by it, like as baudes be wont
to have.

57. Christ says, all meats that man Math. 15. Roma. 14. Collos. 2. Tit. 1.
takes with thanks staineth not the soul, for all things are pure to them
that are pure.

The Pope says, he that eats eggs, butter, or flesh in these days that I
have commanded to be fasted, does not only stayne his soul with sin, but
also is to be denounced an heretic. Did. 4. ca. Statuimus. This agrees with
Christ even as the light does with the darcknes. And yet have we been thus
blinded long, that we could never perceive this Antichrist till now in the last
days.

58. Christ said unto his Disciples, Math. 16. Math. 18. John. 15.
that you bind in earth shall be bound in heaven, and that you lose in earth
shall be losed in heaven.

The Pope chalengeth greater authority for he will lose souls out of
Purgatory, and command the angels to fetch them out and all for money,
without money you get nothing.

59. Christ says when you have done Luke. 17.
all things that I have commanded you, yet say that you are unprofitable
servants.

The Pope says do those things that I commau^d thee, and take a sure
conscience unto thee that thou art a just and a religious man, and that thou
have deserved heaven. And as for I myself, If I do wrong in every thing, (...)
Oh abomination.
bring many thousands with me into damnation, yet shall no man rebuke me, but
call me the most holiest father. Did. 40. ca. Si Papa.

60. Christ teaches us to fulfill the Math. 2^. Osea. (...) Math. 9.
works of mercy to the poor, ever commendyng mercy above offerings and
sacrifice.

The Pope teaches us to give our money for pardons, masses, diriges, to images
and Churches, so that we may offer unto their bellyes. And he that says it is
better to give our charity to the poor (as Christ says) is counted half an
heretic, because he goes about to mar the Popes market.

61. Christ suffered death for our Roma. 4. John. 11.
sins and arose for our justification, or else we all should have perished.

The Pope says if thou bye my pardon, or else be buried in a gray Friars coat
thou must needs be saved, so that Christ has suffered in vain, since a Friars
coat will save a man.

62. Christ only is our mediator 1. John. 2.
which makes unite betwixt his father and us, howbeit the prayer of a just
James. 5.
man is very good and profitable.

The Pope says. The greatest power and salvation next to Christ is mine. Did.
60. cap. Si Papa. I marvel then why he is so curious to cause us to worship
the Saints y^ are a sleep. And not rather him self, since he chalengeth a
greater power then ever they did while they lived.

63. Christ says, who soever break Math. 5.
one of my lest commandments, shall be called the lest (that is to say none)
in the kingdom of heaven.

The Pope says, what pertains his law unto me. I am subject to no laws. 25.
q. 1. cap. Omnia. therefore does the Pope but seldom right. And is always
against right yea and against his own laws, as often as men do bring him
money, for that loves he above all things.

64. Christ's law is fulfilled through Roma. 13.
charity.

The Popes law is fulfilled by money, if thou have no money to give them, thou
shall carye a faggot, though thou offend not, money them and they see thee not,
do what thou will.

65. Christ is the head of the Church Ephe. 1. Collos. 1. 1. Cor. 10.
as the Apostle does testify. And also the stone whereon the Church is
builded. And this Church is the congregation of the faithful and the very body
of Christ.

The Pope says, I am the head of the Church. Did. 19. cap. Enim vero. And the
seat of Rome is the stone whereon the Church is builded. Did. 19. Ita Dominus.
Can any thing be more contrary unto the honor and glory of God, then thus to
dispoyle him of his kingdom, which he so dearly has bought shedyng his
precious blood for it?

66. Christ's law which is the holy 2. Pet. 2. 2. Timo. 3.
Scripture came by the inspiryng of the holy ghost which did infuse it
aboundauntly into the hearts of the Apostles, and of the same spirit has it
his enduraunce and interpretation.

The Pope says, I am Lord of the Scripture to allow and disalow it, for of me
does it take his full authority. ca* Si omnes. And for a token of this, is the
Scripture of Christ, laid under his feet when he is at Mass.

67. Christ's Apostle says, that a Tit. 1.
Bishop ought to be so well learned, that he with the Scripture, be able to
overcome all them that be against the faith.

The Pope and Bishops will dispute in Scripture with no man, but cast them
first in prison, and proper engynes they have inverted to wring their fingers
so sore, that the blood shall braste out at their fingers ends, they pyne
them, and scourge the^ with infinite other torments payning the^, to forsake
the truth. And after make them swear on a book that they shall tell no man of
it, thus cruelly do they entreat them against justice. And if they can not
subdue them to their wills, then do they commit them unto ye seculare power
to be burned.

68. Christ's accusation, and cause John. 19.
why he was condemned unto death, was written over his head in Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin, that all men might know the cause, this was an argument that they
used justice (although they condemned him unjustly) sith men might see the
offense and judgment joined together.

The Pope and Bishops condemn men, and commit them unto the seculare
power, that they should execute the sentence. But this is a mischeuous
abomination, that they will not suffer the seculare power, to know the cause
why they put men to death, worshipful, dis divines, Master Doctor. O you
gentle nobility, ponder this matter indifferently. Beware how you do
execution, except you know the cause why. Think you the blood shall not be
required on you, if for an others pleasure you destroy the work of God. They
will say unto you, as the Jews said unto Pilate concerning Christ: If he were
not an evil doer we would not have delivered him unto you. Trust not their
words, for (no doubt) they are liars, know the cause your selves, and hear
the matter unfeignedly. Think you they would not let you know the cause and
judgment, if they did justice and not tyranny? Be therefore no longer ^oyes
to the^, which ought to be your servants, God has given you his spirit,
grace and understanding, hide not the talent that God has given you, but do
your diligence to see justice executed, secluding all tyranny, for that is your
office appointed you of God.

69. Christ says, blessed are ye when Luke. 6.
men hate you, curse you, and excommunicate you for the righteousness, that is
to say, you nothing giltye nor worthy such affliction.

The Pope and Bishops say that their curse is sore to be feared, yea and
that it makes men as black as a coal in the sight of God, though they have
not offended. In so much that they must needs be damned except they absoile
them again: howbeit Christ says, that they are blessed: wherefore Christ is
false, or else they are most vain liars.

70. Christ said, when thou make Luke. (...).
a dinner or feast, call not thy friends, kinsmen, and neighbors that are
rich, but the poor, lame and blind, which are not able to recompense thee,
then shall thou be happy, for it shall be rewarded thee in the resurrection of
the just.

The Pope and Bishops will call none such, for they think it great shame,
but they call men of great authority and riches, which will receive them with
an other feast, they had lever have their bellies well stuffed in this world,
then to tarry for the promise of Christ. They think it long a coming.

71. Christ says, either make ye tree Math. 5. Luke. 6.
good and his fruit good also, or else make the tree naught and his fruit
naught also: meaning, that the tree first should be good, and then bring
forth good fruit, the fruit makes not the tree good, but the tree makes the
fruit good, although we can not know that the tree is good, but by his fruit
(for we can judge nothing but by his outward operation) yet God sees the
quicknes in the root, which in the time that God has appointed him, shall
bring forth his fruit. And approves ye tree to be good, although he seem
dead unto us. The tree is faith, which is the mother of all good works, which
ever works by charity when he sees occasion.

The Pope and Bishops say, that the fruit makes the tree good, clean
contrary to all Scripture and reason. And thus turn they the trees and the
roots upward, while they affirm that faith springs and is made good of
works. And not the contrary, eue^ as a man would say, the fruit brings
forth and makes good the tree. And not the contrary. O what madness is is? They
would make men believe if they should long continue, that ye Moon is made of
grene chese.

72. Christ says, I am the door of the fold, he that enters not in by the
door, but by some other way, is a thief and a murderer, and regards not
the sheep.

The Pope, yea and all the clergy (for the most part) enter not in by Christ,
but they run in and are not called nor sent of Christ, One enters by a bag
of money, wherewyth he buyeth a fat benefice. An other enters by serving
great men, and corying favor. An other, because he is a great man borne, must
be made a Cardinal, or else a Bpshop. Some have voysons of Abbayes and other
places, to speak a good word for them to the king or other great men. Some
enter through their curious singing, and minyon daunsing, few or none for
virtue and learning.

73. Christ says, I am a good shepherd, A good shephead gives his life for
his sheep.

The Pope and Bishops say also, that they are good shepherds, how be it,
they pille and shere the sheep so nigh, that they leave not one lock of wolle
on their backs. And in all points may be likened unto the shepheardes that
Zacharias prophesied of: which says, I shall raise up a shepherd in the
earth, which shall not visit the things that are forsaken, and shall not seek
that which is gone astray, neither yet heal the diseased, nor nourishe and
maintain that which stands, but such a shepherd that shall norishe himself
and not the sheep, and cries out of him, saying. O thou shepherd and idol,
think you that this shepherd will give his life for the sheep?

74. Christ says, desire you not to be called master, for you have but one
Math. 23.
master, which is Christ, and all you are brothers.

The Pope will be called most holy, his Cardinals, most reverend, his
Bishops reverend, his Abbottes and Priors most, and other glorious titles
have they, that pass master, far. And except thou call them by those names
and titles, thou shall run far into their indignation, let Christ say what
he will.

75. Christ commanded his Disciples Math. 23.
that they should call no man father on the earth, showing them that they had
but one father, which is in heaven.

The Pope must be called most holy father, if thou give him not that name he
will excommunicate you out of his sinagoge, reason not with him, you may show
him the scripture, but it avails not, for he will wrest it and wring it into
a thousand fashions. And will never leave it until he have brought it unto his
own purpose.

76. Christ's faithful servant Stephen, Act. 7.
said, that God almighty dwells not in temples y^ are made with man's hands,
according unto the prophets saying. Heaven is my seat, Esaias. 66. 2. King. 7.
and the earth is my footestole. What house will you build for me, says the
Lord? which is the place of my rest? Did not my hands make all these things?

The Pope and his adhere^tes say, that he dwells in this place and that
place, the Friars say we have him, you must bye him of us, the Monks say, he
is with us, be good to our monastery, and you shall be sure to have him. And so
run the sely souls from Herod to Pilate. But they find not Christ, for he
dwells in no place but in the heart of a faithful man, which is the very
temple of God. 1. Cor. 3.


77. Christ's Apostle Paul says, We ought not to think that God is Acts. 17.
like gold, silver, kar^ed stones, or any such thing as man imagines.

The Pope and his adherentes say that he is like a stock and a stone, and
causes men to make images of him, though God commanded contrary saying. Thou
shall make no graven image, neither any manner of similitude Exodus 20.
of those things which are in heaven above or on the earth beneath. Neither
of those things which are in the water, or under the earth, neither shall
thou honor or worship them. Good Christen beware of these Idolles as Saint
John councelleth thee, truly I think it be one of the John. 5.
greatest causes of this exce^ation which God has sent into the world for
sin.

78. Christ said unto Peter, thou art Simon the son of Iona, thou shall John.
1.
be called Cephas which if it be enterpreted signifies a stone as S. John
says in his Gospel.

The Pope says that Cephas signifies Did. xxij. ca. sacrosancta.
the head, and of that gathers he to be head of all the Bishops, here does he
plainly contrary to Gospel which expounds Cephas to be a stone, what
impudency is this? I think he would say also that an Ass were a man if he
thought to get any advantage through it.

There are infinite other things wherein he contrarieth Christ in so much
that if it be diligently examined, I think there is no word that Christ spoke,
but the other has taught or made a law against it. Howbeit for to avoid
tediousnes, we shall leave them unto your own judgment, for they are soon
searched out and espied. Judge Christian reader all these things with a simple
eye, be not parcially addict to the one nor to the other. But Judge them by the
Scripture. And knowledge that to be the truth which Gods word does allow,
auoydyng all other doctrine for it springs of Satan, be not ashamed to
confess poor Christ (and to take him for thy head) before these ravenous
Wolves, for then shall he confess thee again before Math. 10.
his father and the aungelles in heaven. Then shall thou be inheritour with
Jesus Christ, And the faithful son of thy father which is in heaven, to
whom be all glory eternally.

Amen. Here ends the Antithesis between Christ and the Pope.
A book made by John Frith prisoner in the Tower of London, aunsweryng unto M.
Mores letter which he wrote against the first little treatise that John Frith
made concerning the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, unto which book
are added in the end the articles of his examination before the Bishops of
London, Winchester and Lyncolne, in Paul's Church at London, for which John
Frith was condemned and after burned in Smithfield without Newgate the fourth
day of July. Anno. 1533.
The Preface of this book.
GRace and increase of knowledge from God the father through our Lord Jesus
Christ, be with the Christen reader, and with all them that love the Lord
unfeignedly. Amen.

I chanced being in these parties, to be in company with a Christen brother
which for his comme^dable conversation, and sober behavior, might better be a
Bishop then many that wear miters if the rule of S. Paul were regarded in
their election. 1. Timo. 3. Tit. 1.
This brother after much communication, desired to know my mind as touching the
Sacrament of the body and blood of our savior Christ. Which thing I opened
unto him according to the gift that God had given me. First I proved unto him
that it was The order that John Frith keeps in showing his mind in the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.
no article of our faith necessary to be believed under pain of damnation. Then
I declared, that Christ had a natural body, even as mine is (saving sin) and
that it could no more be in two places at once the^ mine ca^. Thirdly I showed
him that it was not necessary, that the words should so be understand as they
sound. But that it might be a phrase of Scripture, as there are innumerable.
After that I showed him certain phrases and manner of speakynges. And that it
was well used in our English tongue and finally I recited after what manner they
might receive it according to Christ's institution, not fearyng the froward
alteration that the Priests use contrary to the first form and institution.

When I had sufficiently published The occasion that moved John Frith to write
on the Sacrament.
my mind, he desired me to entitle the su^me of my words, and write them for
him, because they seemed ouerlong to be well retained in memory. And albeit I
was loath to take the matter in hand, yet to fulfill his instant intercession, I
took upon me to touch this terrible tragedy, and wrote a treatise, which
beside my paynfull imprisonment, is like to purchase me most cruel death,
which I am ready and glad to receive with the spirit and inward man (although
the flesh be frail) when soever it shall please God to lay it upon me.
Notwithstanding to say the truth I wrote it not to the intent that it should
have been published. For then I would have touched the matter more earnestly,
and have written, as well of the spiritual eating and drinking which is of
necessity, as I did of the carnal which is not so necessary. For the
treatise that I made was not expedient for all men, albeit it were sufficient
for them whom I took in hand to instruct. For they knew the spiritual and
necessary eating The spiritual eating of the Sacrament is by faith.
and drinkyng of his body and blood which is not received with the teth and
bellye, but with the ears and faith, and only neded instruction in the
outward eating, which thing I therefore only declared. But now it is common
abroad and in many men's mouths, in so much that M. More which of late has
busied him self to meddle in all such matters (of what zeal I will not define)
has sore labored to confute it, but some me^ think that he is ashamed of his
part and for that cause does so diligently suppress the work which he
printed. For I my self saw the work in Print in my Lord of Winchesters house,
upon S. Stephens day last past. But neither I neither all the fre^des I could
make, might attain any copy, but only one written copy which as it seemed
was drawn out in great have: notwithstanding I can not well judge what the
cause should be, that his book is kept so secret: But this I am right sure of,
that he never touched the foundation that my treatise was builded upon. And
therefore since my foundation stands so sure and invincible (for else I think
verily he would sore have labored to have undermined it) I will thereupon
build a little more, and also declare that his ordinance is to slender to
break it down, although it were set upon a worse foundation.

The foundation of that little treatise was, that it is no article of our faith
necessary to be believed under pain of damnation, that the Sacrament should be
the natural body of Christ: which thing is proved, on this manner.
First we must all acknowledge The Sacrament to be the natural body of Christ
is no article of our faith, necessary to be believed upon pain of damnation.
that it is no article of our faith which can save us, nor which we are bound
to believe under the pain of eternal damnation. For if I should believe that his
very natural body both flesh and blood were naturally in the bread and wine,
that should not save me, seeing many believe that, and receive it to their
damnation, for it is not his presence in the bread that can save me, but his
presence in my heart through faith in his blood, which has washed out my sins
and pacified yt fathers wrath toward me. And again if I do not believe his
bodily presence in the bread and wine, that shall not damn me, but the absence
out of my heart thorough unbelief. Now if they would here object that Objection.
though it be truth that the abse^ce out of the bread could not damn us: yet
are we bound to believe it, because of gods word which (who believes not, as
much as in him lies) makes God a liar. And therefore of an obstinate mind not
to believe his word, may be an occasion of damnation.

To this we may answer, that we Solution.
believe Gods word, and knowledge that it is true: but in this we dissent,
whether it be true in the sense that we take it in, or in the sense that ye
take it in. And we say again, that though ye have (as it appears unto you)
the evident words of Christ, and therefore consiste in the bark of the
letter: yet are we compelled by conferring of the scriptures together within
the letter, to search out the mind of our Savior which spoke the words. And
we say thirdly, that we do it not of an obstinate mind: For he that defends
a cause obstinately Obstinate defendyng of any cause is worthy of reprehention.
(whether it be true or false) is ever to be reprehended. But we do it to
satisfy our co^scie^ces, which are compelled by other places of Scripture,
reasons, and Doctors so to judge of it. And even so ought you to judge of your
party, and to defend your sentence, not of obstinacy, but by ye reason The
foundation of John Frithes first treatise upon the Sacrament.
of Scriptures, which cause you so to take it. And so ought nether party to
despise other, for each seeks the glory of God, and the true understanding of
the Scripture.

This was the foundation of my first treatise that he has left vnshake^, which
is a great argument y^ it is very true: For else his pregnant wit could not have
passed it so clean over, but would have assailed it with some sophistical
cauillation, which by his painted poetry he might so have coulered, that at
the lest he might make ye ignorant some appearance of truth, as he has done
against the residue of my first treatise, which nevertheless is true, and
shall so be proved.

And first, that it is none article of our faith necessary to be believed under
pain of damnation, may thus be further confirmed. The same It is no article
of our faith to believe it to be the natural body of Christ.
faith shall save us which saved the old fathers before Christ's incarnation,
But they were not bound under pain of damnation to believe this point:
therefore it shall follow that we are not bound thereto under the pain of
damnation. The first part of mine argument is proved by S. Agustine ad
Durdamu^. And I dare boldly say almost in an C. places. For I think there be
no proposition which he does more often inculcate the^ this, y^ the same faith
saved us which saved our fathers. The second part is manifest, The same faith
saves us that saved our fathers
that it needs no probation. For how could they believe ye thing which was
never said nor done, and without the word they could have no faith, upon the
truth of these two parties must the conclusion needs follow. Notwithstanding,
they all did eat Christ's body and drank his blood spiritually, although
they ^ad him not present to their teeth. And by ye spiritual eating (which is
the faith in his body and blood) were saved as well as we are. For as soon as
our forefather Adam had transgressed Adam.
Gods precept, and was fallen under condemnation, our most merciful father of
his gracious favor gave him the promise of health and comfort, whereby as many
as believed it, were saved from the thrauldome of their transgression: the word
and promise was this: I shall put enmity between thee and the woman, between
thy seed and her seed, that seed shall Gene. 3.
tread thee on the head, and thou shall tread it on the hele. In this promise
they had knowledge that Christ should become the seed or son of a woman,
and that he should destroy the devil with all his power, and deliver his
faithful from their sins. And where he said that the devil should tread
it on the hele, they understood right well that the devil should find the
means by his wyles and wicked ministers to put Christ to death. And they knew
that God was true, and would fulfill his promise unto them, and heartily longed
after this seed, and so did both eat his body and drink his blood,
knowledging How our fathers did eat the body of christ and drunk his blood.
with infinite thanks, that Christ should for their sins take y^ perfect
nature of ma^hode upon him, and also suffer the death. This promise was given
to Adam, and saved as many as did believe and were tha^k full to God for his
kyndnes, and after it was established unto our father Abraham by the word of
God, which said, In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed. And
with him God made a covenant that he would be his God, and do him good. And
Abraham Abraham. Gene. 12.
again promised to keep his precepts and walk in his ways. Then God gave
him the sacrament of circumcision, and called that his covenant, Circumcision
was the Sacrament of Gods couenasit made with Abraham.
which thing notwithstanding was not the very covenant in deed, although it
were so called. But was only a sign, token, ^acrament, or memoryall of the
covenant that was between God and him, which might expound our matter, if men
had eyes to see. After that, God promised him a son when his wife was past
child bearing, and he also very old. Nevertheless, he doubted not of Gods
word. But surely believed that he which promised it, was able to perform it.
And that was recounted unto him for righteousness. Abraham by faith did eat and
drink Christ's body and blood.
This Abraham did both eat his body and drink his blood (through faith)
believing verily that Christ should take our nature, and spring out of his seed
(as touching his flesh) and also that he should suffer death to redeem us.
John. 8.
And as Christ testifies, he heartily desired to see the day of Christ. And he
saw it and reioysed, he saw it in faith and had the day of Christ, that is to
say all those things that should chance him, plainly reuelated unto him,
albeit he were dead many hundred years before it were actually fulfilled and
reuelated unto ye world. And by that faith was he saved, and yet never did eat
his flesh with his teeth, nor never believed that bread should be his body
and wine his blood. And therefore since he was also saved without that faith, and
ye same faith shall save us which saved him, I think that we shall also be
saved if The spiritual eating and drinkyng of Christ shall save us.
we eat him spiritually (as he did) although we never believe that the bread
is his body. Furthermore, that merciful Moses which brought the children of
Israel out of Egypt into the wilderness, obtained of God by prayers, both Manna
from heaven to feed his people, and also water out of the stone to refreshe
and comfort the^. This Manna and water, were even Manna was to the Israelites
the same that the Sacrament is to us now.
the same thing unto them, that the bread and wine is to us. For Saint Austen
says: Quicunque in manna Christum intellexerunt, eundem quem nos cibum
spiritualem manducauerunt. August. de vtilitate poenicentiae.
Quicunque autem de ma^na solam saturitatemque sinerunt manducabant and mortui
sunt. Sic etiam eunde^ potu^: petra enim erat christus. That is to say, as many
as in that manna understood Christ, did eat that same spiritual meat that
we do, but as many as fought only to fill their bellies of that manna (the
fathers of the unfaithful) did eat and are dead. And likewise y^ same drink,
for the stone was Christ.

Here may you gather of S. Austen that the Manna was unto them, as ye bread is
to us, and likewise, that the water was to them, as the wine is to us, which
anon shall appear more plainly. Aug. super Joan. tract. 26.
S. Austen says further, manducauit and Moses manna, ma^ducauit and Aaron,
manducauit and Phinees, manducauerunt ibi multi qui Deo placueru^t and mortui
non sunt. Quare? quia visibilem cibum spiritualiter intellexerunt,
spiritualiter esurierunt, spiritualiter gustauerunt, vt spiritualiter
satiarentur. Omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducauerunt, and omnes eu^dem
potum spiritualem biberunt, spiritualem vtique eandem: nam corporalem alteram
(quia illi manna, nos aliud) spiritualem vero eandem quam nos. Vt omnes eundem
potum spiritualem biberunt aliud illi, aliud nos: sed specie visibili quod
tamen hoc idem significaret virtute spirituali. Quomodo eundem potum bibebant
(inquit Apostolus) A goodly saying of S. Augustine.
de spirituali sequenti petra: petra autem erat Christus. That is to say, Moses
also did eat Manna and Aaron and Phinees did eat of it, and many other did
there eat of it, which pleased God and are not dead. Wherefore? Because they
understood the visible meat spiritually. They were spiritually an hungered,
they tasted it spiritually, that they might spiritually be replenished. They
did all eat ye same spiritual meat, and all drank the spiritual, drink.
Even the same spiritual meat albeit an other bodily meat, for they did eat
Manna, and we eat an other thing, but they did eat the same spiritual, which
we do. And they all did drink the same spiritual drink. They dra^ke one
thing and we an other: but that was in the outward appearance, which
nevertheless did signify the same thing spiritually. How drank they the same
drink? They (says the Apostle) drank of ye spiritual stone following them,
and that stone was Christ. And thereunto Beda added these words. Beda suter.
1. Cor. 10.
Videte autem fide manente signa variata. That is to say. Behold that the
signs are altered, and yet the faith abides one.

Of these places you may plainly perceive not only that it is no article
necessary to be believed under pain of damnation, seeing the old fathers never
believed it. And yet did eat Christ in faith both before they had the Manna,
and more expressly through the Manna with no less fruit when the Manna was
ceased. To eat the Sacrament by faith spiritually is to eat the body of
Christ. etc.
And albeit the Manna was to them as the Sacrament is to us, and they eat even
the same spiritual meat that we do, yet were they never so mad as to believe
that the Manna was changed into Christ's own natural body. But understood it
spiritually that as the outward man did eat the material Manna which
comforted the body, so did the inward man thorough faith, eat the body of
Christ beleuyng that as that Manna came down from heaven and comforted their
bodies, so should their Savior Christ which was promised them of God ye
father, come down from heaven and strength their souls in everlasting life,
redeming them from their sin by his death and resurrection. There is no cause
why we should account the Sacrament to be Christ's natural body, for that were
to gross an imagination.
And likewise do we eat Christ in faith, both before we come to the Sacrament,
and more expressly through ye Sacrament, and with no less fruit after we
have received the sacrament, and need no more to make it his natural body
then the manna was, but might much better understand it spiritually: that as
the outward man does eat the material bread which comfort the body, so
does the inward man through faith eat y^ body of Christ, beleuyng that as
the the bread is broken, so was Christ's body broken on the cross for our
sins, which comfort our souls unto life everlasting. And as ye faith did
save them without beleuyng that the manna was altered into his body, even so
does this faith save us although we believe not that the substance of bread is
turned into his natural body. For the same faith shall save us which saved
them. We are not bound^ to believe upon pain of da^natio^ more then our fathers
believed.
And we are bound to believe no more under pain of damnation, then they were
bound to believe. They believed in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and
earth, and all that is in them. They did believe that Christ was the son of
God. They did believe that he should take our nature of a vyrgin. Gene. 1.
They believed that he should suffer the death for our deliverance, Psalm. 1.
Esaias. 7. Act. 3.
which thing was signified in all the sacrifices, and besides that testified in
every Prophet, for there was verily not one Prophet but he spoke of that point.
They believed yt his soul should not be left in hell, Acts. 2. Psalm. 16.
but that he should arise from death and reign everlasting with his father.
And to be short, there is no point in our Creed, but y^ they believed it, as
well as we do, and those articles are only necessary unto salvation, For them
am I bound to believe, and am damned without excuse, if I believe them not.

But the other points contained in scripture, although they be undoubted
verities, yet may I be saved without them. As be it in case y^ I never heard of
them, or when I hear of them, I can not understand them, nor comprehe^d them,
or that I fear them and understand them, and yet by the reason of an other
text misconstrue them, as the Bohemes do the We must believe the articles of
our faith upon pain of damnation, but in the other, there is no peril.
words of Christ in the 6. chapter of John. All these I say may be done
without any ieoperdie of damnation. In every text is but only one verity for
which it was spoken and yet some textes there be which of Catholic Doctors
are expounded in vj. or. vij. sundry fashions. Therefore we believe these
articles of our Creed: in the other is no peril, so that we have a probable
reason to dissent from them. But now to return to our purpose, if we will
examine the authorities of S. Austen and Beda before alleged, we shall espy
that beside the probation of this foresaid proposition, they open the mystery
of all our matter to them that have eyes to see. For S. Austen says that we
and the old fathers do differ as touching ye bodily meat for they did eat
Manna, and we bread, but albeit it varyed in ye outward appearaunce, yet
nevertheless spiritually it did signify one thing. For both the Manna and
bread do signify Christ. And so both they and we do eat one spiritual meat,
that is to say we both eat the thing which signifies and represents unto us
the very one spiritual meat of our souls which is Christ. And Beda does
plainly call both the Ma^na and the bread signs, saying behold that the signs
are altered and yet ye faith abides one. Now if they be signs, then they do
signify, and are not the very thing it self which they do signify, for ye
sign of a thing differs from the thing it self which it does signify and
represent. As the alepole is not the ale it self which it does signify or
represent. Here thou will obiecte against me that if this faith be sufficient
what needs the institution of a Sacrament? I answer that Sacraments are
instituted for three causes? The first is assigned of S. Austen which says on
this manner. Aug. contra Faustum Lib. 19. cap. 11.
In nullum autem nomen religionis, seu verum, seu falsum, coagulari homines
possunt, nisi signaculorum seu Sacramentorum visibilium consortio colligantur,
quorum Sacramentorum vis inenarrabiliter valet plurimum. Et ideo contempta
sacrilegos facit. Impie quippe contemnitur sine qua perfici no^ potest pietas.
That is to say: Men can not be joined into any kind of religion, whether it be
true or false except they be knit in fellowship by some visible tokens or
Sacraments, the power of which Sacraments is of such efficacy, that can not
be expressed. There be three causes why ye Sacraments were instituted.
And therefore it makes them that despise it to be abhorred, for it is wickedness
to despise that thing without which godlynes can not be brought to pass. Thus
it appears that necessity is y^ first cause. The first is necessity.
For there can no congregation be severed out of the multitude of men but they
must needs have a sign, toke^, Sacrament, or common badge, by the which they
may know each other. And there is no difference between a sign or a badge and
a Sacrament, but that the Sacrament signifies an holy thing, and a sign or a
badge does signify a wordly thing as S. Austen says, August. ad Marcellinu^.
signs when they are referred to holy things are called Sacraments.

The second cause of the institution of Sacraments.
The second cause of their institution is, that they may be a mean to bring us
unto faith and to imprint it the deeper in us, for it does customably the more
move a man to believe, when he perceives the thing expressed to diverse senses
at once, as by example, if I promise a man to mete him at a day appointed, he
will somewhat trust my word: Notwithstanding, he trusts not so much unto it,
as if I did both promise him with my word and also clap hands with him or hold
up my finger for he cou^teth that this promise is strong and more faithful
then is the bare word, because it moves more senses. For the word does but
only certify the thing unto a man by the sense of hearing, but when with my
promise immediately after I hold up my finger, then do I not only certify him
by the sense of hearing: But also by his sight, he perceives that that fact
confirms my word. And in the clapyng of hands he perceives both by his
sight and feelyng (beside the word) that I will fulfill my promise. And
likewise it is in this Sacrament, Christ promised them, that he would give his
body to be slain for their sins. And for to establish the faith of his
promise in them, he did institute the Sacrament which he called his body, to
the intent that ye very name it self might put them in remembrance what was
meant by it, he brake the bread before them signifying unto them outwardly, even
the same thing, that he by his words had before protested and eue^ as his
words had informed them by their hearing, that he intended so to do, so the
breaking of that bread informed their eye sight that he would fulfill his
promise. Then he did distribute it among them to imprint the matter more
deeply in them, signifying thereby that even as that bread was divided among
them, so should his body and fruit of his passion be distributed unto as many
as believed his words. How diligently Christ set forth ye Sacrament of his body
and blood that we might by that outward sign assure our faith, that his very
true body was crucified for our sins.
Finally he caused the^ to eat it, that nothing should be lackyng to confirm
that necessary point of faith in the^, signifiyng thereby that as verily as they
felt that bread within them, so sure should they be of his body thorough
faith. And that even as that bread does nourishe the body, so does faith in his
body breaking, nourish the soul unto everlasting life. This did our merciful
Savior (which knows our frailty and weakness) to establish and strength
their faith in his body breaking and blood sheding, which is our shoteanker and
last refuge without which we should all perish.

The third cause of the institution of Sacraments.
The third cause of the institution and profit that comes of it, is this. They
that have received these blessed tydinges and word of health, do love to
publishe this felicity unto other men. And to give thanks before the face of
the congregation unto their bou^teous benefactour, and as much as in them is,
to draw all people to the praising of God with the^, which thing, though it be
partly done by the preaching of Gods word and fruitful exhortations, yet does
that visible token and Sacrament (if a man understand what is meant thereby)
more effectuously work in them both faith and thankesgeuing, the^ does the
bare word: The sacrament is profitable to none but to such as understand the
doctrine thereof.
but if a man wot not what it means, and seeks health in the sacrament and
outward sign, the^ may he well be likened unto a fond fellow, which when he is
very dry, and an honest man show him an alepole and tell him that there is
good ale enough, would go and suck the alepole, trusting to get drink out of
it, and so to quench his thyrste. Now a wise man will tell him that he plays
the fool, for the alepole does but signify that there is good ale in the
house where ye alepole stands, and will tell him that he must go near the
house, and there he shall find the drink, and not stand sucking the alepole
in vain, An example of the Alepole.
for it shall not ease him, but rather make him more dry, for the alepole does
signify good ale: yet the alepole it self is no good ale, neither is there any
good ale in the alepole. And likewise it is in all sacraments. For if we
understand not what they mean, and seek health in the outward sign: then we
suck the alepole and labor in vain. But if we do understand y^ meaning of
them, then shall we seek what they signify, and go to the significations,
and there shall we find undoubted health. As to our purpose in this sacrament
whereof we speak, we must note what it signifies, and there shall we find our
redemption. It signifies that Christ's body was broken upon the cross to
redeem us The true signification of the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ.
from the thraldom of the devil, and that his blood was shed for us, to
wash away our sins. Therefore we must run thither if we will be eased. For
if we think to have our sins forgeuen for eating of the Sacrament, or for
seeing the Sacrament once a day, or for praying unto it: the^ surely we suck
the alepole. And by this you may perceive what profit comes of those
sacraments, which either have no significations put unto them, or else when
their significations are lost and forgotten. For then no doubt they are not
commended of God, but are rather abominable, for when we know not what they
mean, then seek we health in the outward deed, and so are injurious unto
Christ and his blood. As by example, the Sacrifices of the Jews, The
sacrifices of the Jews as long as they were rightly used, were well accepted.
were well allowed and accepted of God as long as they used them aright, and
understood by the^ y^ death of Christ, the sheding of his blood, and that holy
oblation offered on the cross once for ever. But when they begun to forget
this signification, and sought their health and righteousness in the bodily
work, and in the sacrifice it self: then were they abominable in the sight
of God, and then he cried out of them both by the Prophet David and Esaias: And
likewise it is with our Sacraments, let us therefore seek up the
significations, and go to the very thing which the sacrament is set to present
unto us. And there shall we find such fruitful food as shall never fail us,
but comfort our souls into life everlasting.

Now will I in order answer to M. Mores book, and as I find occasion given
me, I shall endeavor my self to supply that thing which lacked in the first
treatise, and I trust I shall show such light, that all men whose eyes the
Prince of this world has not blinded, shall perceive the truth of the
scriptures and glory of Christ. And where as in my first treatise, the truth
was set forth with all simplicity, and nothing armed against the assault of
sophisters: that have I somewhat redressed in this book, and have brought
bones filte for their teeth, which if they be to busy, may chance to choke
them.

Thus begins the Preface of M. Mores book.
More.
IN my most hearty wise I recommende me unto you, and send you by this bringer
the writing again which I received from you. Whereof I have been offered a
cople of copies mo, in the mean while, as late as ye wot well it was.

Dear brethren, consider these Frith.
words, and prepare you to the cross that Christ shall lay upon you, as ye
have often been counsaylled. For even as when the Wolf howleth, ye sheep 1.
Pet. 2. Luke. 22.
had need to gather themselves to their shepherd, to be delivered from the
assault of the bloody beast, likewise had you need to slye unto the shepherd
of your souls Christ Jesus, and to sell your coats, and buy his spiritual
Ephesians. 6.
sword (which is the word) of God) to defend and deliver you in this present
necessity: for now is the time that Christ told us of, Math. x. that he was
come (by his word to set Math. 10.
variaunce between the son and his father, between the daughter and her
mother, between the daughter in law and her mother in law, and that Mich 5.
in a man's own householde shall be his enemies. But be not dismayde, nor
think it no wonder, for Christ those twelve, and one of them was ye John. 6.
Devil and betrayed his master. And we that are his disciples may look for
Math. 10.
no better than he had himself: for the scholar is not above his master.

Saint Paul protests ye he was in peril among false brethren, and surely 3.
Cor. 11.
I suppose that we are in no less ieopardye. For if it be so that his
mastership received one copye and had a cople of copyes more offered in the
mean while, then may ye be sure that there are many false brethren Ioh. Frith
met with false brethren.
which pretend to have knowledge, and in deed are but pykethankes, providing
for their bellye: prepare ye therefore clokes, for the weather waxes cloudy,
and rain is like to follow. I mean not false excuses and forswearing of your
selves: but that ye look substantially upon Gods word, that you may be able to
answer their subtle objections. And rather choose manfully to dye for Christ
and his word, than cowardlye to deny him, for this vain and transitory life,
considering that they have no further power but over this corruptible body,
which if they put it not to death, must yet at ye length perish of it self.
But I trust the Lord shall not suffer you to 2. Cor. 10.
be tempted above that you may bear, but according to ye sprite that he shall
pour upon you, shall he also send An exhortation to stand manfully by the
profession of Gods word.
you the scourge, and make him that has received more of the sprite to suffer
more, and him that receives less thereof, to suffer according to his Talent.
I thought it necessary first to admonish you of this matter, and now I will
recite more of M. Mores book.

Whereby men may see how gredely More.
these new named brethren writeit out, and secretly spread it abroad.

The name is of great antiquity, although you list to ieste. For they Frith.
were called brethren ere our Bishops were called Lords, and had ye name given
them by Christ, saying, Math. Brethren, is an ancient name in the scripture.
xxiij. all ye are brethren. And Luke y^ xxij. Confirm they brethren. And the
name was continued by the Apostles, and is a name that nourishes love and
amity. And very glad I am to hear of their gredy affection in writing out and
spreading abroad the word of Amos. 8.
God, for by that I do perceive the prophecy of Amos to have place, which
says: In the person of God I will send hunger and thyrste into the earth, not
hunger for meat, nor thurst for drink: But for to here the word of God. Now
begins the kingdom of heaven to suffer violence: Now run the poor
Publicanes Math. 11. Luke. 18.
which knowledge them selves sinners, to the word of God puttyng, both goods
and body in ieoperdy for the soul health. And though our Bishops do call it
heresy, and all them heretics that hunges after it, yet do we know that it
is the Gospel of the living God, for the health and salvation of all that
believe. And as for the Roma. 1.
name does nothing offe^de us, though they call it heresy a thousand times.
For S. Paul, testifies that the Phariseis and Priests which were counted the
Acts. 24.
very Church in his time did so call it, and therefore it foreceth not though
they, ruling in their rowmes, use the same names.

Which young man I here say has More.
lately made diverse other things, that yet run in hoker moker so close among
the brethren that there comes no copies abroad.

I answer, that surely I can not Frith.
spynne, and I think no man more hates to be idle then I do. Wherefore in such
things as I am able to do, I shall be dilligent as long as God lends me my
life. And if ye think I be to busy you may rid me the sooner, for even as the
sheep is in the butchers Ioh. Frith feared not death.
hands ready bound and looks but even for the grace of the butcher when he
shall shed his blood: Even so am I bound at the Bishops pleasures, ever
lookyng for the day of my death. In so much, that plain word was sent me,
that the Chauncelour of London said, it should cost me the best blood in my
body, which I would gladly were shed to morrow, if so be, it might open the
kings graces eyes.

And verily I marvel that any thing can run in hoker moker or be hyd from
you. For since you might have such store of copyes, concerning the thing which
I most desired to have been kept secret, how should you then lack a copye of
those things which I most would have published? And hereof ye may be sure, I
care not Frith wishes all his works to be seen.
though you and all the Bishops with in England look on all that ever I wrote,
but rather would be glad that ye so did. For if there be any sparkle of grace
in your breasts, I trust it should be an occasion somewhat to kyndle it, that
you may consider and know your selves, which is the first point of wisdom.

And would God for his mercy More.
(says M. More) that since there can nothing refrain their study, from
devising and compassyng of evil and ungracious writing, that they would and
could keep it so secretly, that never man should see it, but such as are so
far corrupted, as never would be cured of their ca^ker.

It is not possible for him that has his eyes and sees his brother which
Frith.
lacks sight in ieoperdie of perishing at a perilous pit, but that he must
come to him and guide him, till he be He that sees his brother in peril of
ieoperdy, must warn him thereof.
past that ieoperdye, and at the lest wise, if he can not come to him, yet will
he call and cry unto him to cause him chose the better way, except his heart
be cankered with the contagion of such hatered that he can rejoice in his
neighbors destruction. And eue^ so is it not possible for us which have
received the knowledge of gods word, but that we must cry and call to other,
that they leave the perilous paths of their own foolish fantasies. And do
that only to the Lord, that he commands Deuteronomy. 12.
them, neither addyng any thing nor diminishyng. And therefore until we see
some means found, by the which a reasonable reformation may be had on the
one partio, and sufficient Note here the earnest zeal of Frith.
instruction for the poor commo^s I insure you, I neither will nor can cease
to speak, for the word of God boyleth in my body, like a fervent fire, and
will needs have an issue and breaks out, when occasion is given.

But this has been offered you, is offered, and shall be offered: Grant that
the word of God, I mean ye text of Scripture, may go abroad in our English
tongue, as other nations have it in their tounges, and my brother An offer made
to the Clergy by Io. Frith.
William Tyndall, and I have done, and will promise you to write no more. If
you will not grant this condition, then will we be doing while we have breath,
and show in few words that the Scripture does in many: and so at the lest save
some.

But a lack this will not be, for as S. Paul says, the contagion of More.
heresy creeps on, like a canker. For as the canker, corrupts the body
further and further and turns the whole parties into the same deadly sickness,
so does these heresies creep forth among good simple souls, till at the last
it be almost past remedy.

This is a very true saying and makes Frith.
well against his own purpose, for in deed this contagion began to spring
even in S. Paul's time. In so much that the Galathians were in a manner wholly
seduced from his doctrine. And he said to the Thessalonians the mystery of
iniquity eue^ now 2. These. 2.
begins to work. And S. John testifies that there were all ready many 1.
John. 4.
Antichrists risen in his days. And also Paul prophesied what should follow
after his time. Acts. 20. Acts. 20.
saying: take ye heed to your selves and to all the flock, over which the
holy ghost has put you overseers, to feed the congregation of God which he
purchased with his own blood. The prop^esie of S. Paul ^the latter times.
For I know this well, that after my departing shall enter in grievous Wolves
among you, which shall not spare the flock. And even of your selves shall
arise men, speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after the^ and therefore
watch. etc. This canker then began to spread in the congregation, and did full
sore noy the body, in so much that within. iiij. C. year, there were very many
sects scattered in every cost. Notwithstanding there were faithful fathers
that diligently subdued them with the sword of Gods word. Siluester.
But surely since Siluester received such possessions, has the canker so creept
in ye Church, that it has almost left never a sound member. And as
Cistercensis writes in the 8. book, that day that he received revenues was a
voice heard in ye air, crying over the court which said, this day is venime
shed into ye church of God. when corruption entered into ye Church.
Before that time there was no Bishop gredy to take a cure. For it was no
honor and profit as it is now, but only a careful charge Bishoprics were
not gredely sought in ye primitive Church, for then it was a charge and not a
Lordship.
which was like to cost him his life at one time or other. And therefore no man
would take it, but he that bare such a love and zeal to God and his flock,
that he could be content to shed his blood for them. But after that it was made
so honorable and profitable, they that were worst both in learning and living,
most labored for it. For they that were virtuous would not entangle them selves
with the vain pride of this world, and wear three crowns of gold, Math. 27.
Mark. 15. John. 19.
where Christ did wear one of thorn. And in conclusion it came so far, that
who soever would give most money for it or best could flatter the Prince (which
he knew well all good men to abhor) had the pre-eminence and got the best
Byshoprike, and then in stead of Gods word, they published their own
commandments, and made laws to have all under them, and made me^ believe they
could not err what soever they did or said, and even as in the rowmes and
stead of Moses, Aaron, Eliazer, Iosue, Calib, and other faith full folk, came
Herod, Annas, Cayphas, Pylate and Judas, which put Christ to death. A great
alteration in the church, sithen the time of Christ and his Apostles.
So now in the stead of Christ, Peter, Paul, James and John and the faithful
folowers of Christ, we have ye Pope, Cardinals, Archbyshops, Bishops, and
proud Prelates with their Proctour, the malicious ministers of their masters
the devil, which notwithstanding transform them selves into a lykenes, 1.
Cor. 11.
as though they were the ministers of righteousness whose end shall be according
to their works. A little flock is left that are not corrupted.
So that the body is cankered long agone, and now are left but certain small
members, which God of his puissaunt power has reserved uncorrupted and
because they see that they can not be cankered as their own flesh is, for pure
anger they burn them, lest if they continued there might seem some deformity
in their own cankered carkase, by the comparyng of these whole members to
their scabed body.

More.
Teaches in a few leaves shortly all the poison that Wickleff, Oecolampadius,
Huskyn, Tyndall and Zwynglius have taught in all their books before.
Concerning the blessed Sacrament of the altar: not only affirmyng it to very
bread still (as Luther does) but also (as these other beasts do) says it is
nothing else. And after, the same Sir Thomas More says. These dregs has he
dronken of Wickleffe, Oecolampadius, Tyndall, and Zwinglius, and so has he all
that he argues here beside, which iiij. what manner folk they be, is metely
well perceived and known, and God has in part, with his open vengeance
declared.

Frith.
Luther is not the prick that I run at, but the scripture of God. I do neither
affirm nor deny any thing, because Luther so says: but because the Scripture
of God does so conclude and determine. I take not Luther for such an author
that I think he can not err, but I think verily that he both may err and
does err in certain points, although not in such as concern salvation and
damnation, for in these (blessed be God) all these whom ye call heretics do
agree right well. And likewise I do not allow this thing because Wickleffe,
Oecolampadius, Tyndall and Zwinglius so say, but be cause I see them in that
place more purely expou^de the Scripture, and that the process of the text
does more favor their sentence.

And where you say that I affirm it to be bread still as Luther does, the same
I say again, not because Luther so says, but because I ca^ prove my words
true by scripture, reason, nature, and doctors. Paul calls it bread saying:
the bread which we 1. Cor. 10.
break, is it not the fellowship of the body of Christ? For we though we Paul
calls the Sacrament bread.
be many, are yet one body and one bread, as many as are partakers of one
bread. And again he says: as often as ye eat of this bread, or 1. Cor. 11.
drink of this cup, you shall show the Lords death until he come. Also
Luke calls it bread in the Acts saying: they continued in the fellowship
Acts. 2.
of the Apostles and in breaking of bread, and in prayer. Also Christ called
the cup, the fruit of the vine saying: I shall not from hence forth drink
of the fruit of the vine, until Luke. 22.
I drink that new in the kingdom of my father. Furthermore, nature does teach
you that both y^ bread and Nature says there is bread in the Sacrament.
wine continue in their nature. For the bread mouleth if it be kept long, yea
and worms breed in it. And the poor mouse will run away with it, and
desire no other meat to her dinner, which are evident enough that there
remains bread. Also the wine if it were reserved would wax sower, The wine
will wax sour if it be kept long.
as they confess them selves, and therefore they housell the lay people but
with one kind only, because the wine can not continue nor be reserved, to
have ready at hand when need were. And surely as if there remained no bread, it
could not mould nor wax full of worms. Eue^ so if there remained no wine, it
could not wax sower, and therefore it is but false doctrine, that our prelates
so long have published. Finally that there remains bread might be proved by
The Doctors prove that bread remains in the Sacrament.
the authority of many doctors, which call it bread and wine, as Christ and
his Apostles did. And though some sophisters would wrast their sayings and
expound them after their fantasy, yet shall I allege them one doctor (which
was also Pope of Rome) that makes so plain with us, that they shall be
compelled with shame to hold their tongues. For Pope Gelasius writes on this
manner. Certe sacramenta Gelasius a Pope. Contra Eutych. and Nestorium.
quae sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christi divine res sunt and propterea per
illa, participes facti sumus diuinae naturae, and tame^ no^ desinit esse
substantia vel panis and vini, sed permanent in suae proprietate naturae. Et
certe imago and similitudo corporis and sanguinis Christi in action
misteriorum celebrantur. That is to say: Surely the sacraments of the body and
blood of Christ, are a godly thing, and therefore through them are we made
partakers of the godly nature. And yet does it not cease to be This is the
saying of Gelasius a Pope.
the substance, or nature of bread and wine, but they continue in the property
of their own nature, and surely the image and similitude of the body and blood
of Christ are celebrated in the act of the mysteries. This I am sure was the
old doctrine which they can not avoid. And therefore with the Scripture,
nature, and fathers, I will conclude that there remains the substance and
nature of bread and wine.

And where ye say that we affirm it to be nothing else, I dare say that ye
untruly report on us all. And here after I will show you what it is more then
bread. And where ye say that it is meetely well known what manner of folk they
be, and that God has in part with his open vengeance declared.

I answer that master Wickliffe Wickleffe.
was noted while he was living, to be a man not only of most famous doctrine,
but also of a very sincere life and conversation. Wickleffe buried xv. year,
and then brent.
Nevertheless to declare your malicious minds and vengeable hearts (as men
say) xv. year after he was buried, you took him up and burnt him, which fact
declared your furye, although he felt no fire: Math. 10.
but blessed be God which has given such tyrants no further power, but over
this corruptible body. Malach. 2.
For the soul ye can not bind nor burn, but God may bless where you curse,
and curse where you bless.

Oecolampadius.
And as for Oecolampadius, who^ you also call Huskyn, his most adversaries have
ever commended his conversation, and godly life, which when God had appointed
his time, gave place unto nature (as every man must) and dyed of a canker.

Tyndall.
And Tyndall I trust lives, well content with such a poor Apostles life, as
God gave his son Christ, and his faithful ministers in this world, which is
not sure of so many mites, as ye be yearly of pounds, although I am sure that
for his learning and judgment in Scripture, he were more worthy to be
promoted, then all the Bishops in England. I received a letter from him, which
was written since Christmas, wherein among other matters he writes thus. I
call God to record against the day we shall appear before our Lord Jesus to
give a reckoning of our doings, that I never altered one Tyndall declares his
innocence.
syllable of Gods word, against my conscience, nor would do this day, if all
that is in earth, whether it be honor, pleasure, or riches, might be given me.
Moreover, I take God to record to my conscience, that I desire of God to my
self in this world, no more then that without which I can not keep his laws.
etc. Judge Christian reader whether these words be not spoken of a faithful,
clear innocent heart. And as for his behavior is such, that I am sure no man
ca^ reprove him of any sin, howbeit no man is innocent before God which
beholds the heart.

Zwinglius
Finally Zwinglius was a man of such learning and gravity (beside eloquence)
that I think, no man in Christendom might have compared with him,
notwithstanding he was slain in battle in defending his City Zwinglius
slain in a just and righteous cause.
and common wealth, against the assault of wicked enemies, which cause was
most righteous. And if his mastership mean, that that was the vengeance of
God, and declared him to be an evil person because he was slain: I may say
nay, and show evident examples of the contrary, for sometime God gives the
victory against them that have most righteous cause, as it is evident in the
book of Judges, Iudic. 20.
where all the children of Israel were gathered together, to punish ye
shameful sodomitrie of the Tribe of Benjamin, which were in number but 25.
thousand. And the Israelites were 400. thousand fighting men, which came into
Silo, and asked of God who should be their Captain against Benjamin. Here note
that the children of Israel fought at Gods commandment and in a righteous
cause, and yet were twice overthrown.
And they being but 25. thousand slew of the other Israelites 12. thousand in
one day. Then fled the children of Israel unto the Lord in Silo, and made
great lamentation before him even until night: and asked him counsel saying:
shall we go any more to fight against the tribe of Benjamin our brethren or
not? God said unto them yes, go up and sight against them. The^ went they the
next day and fought against them, and there were slain again of the
Israelites 18. thousand men. Then came they back again unto the house of God,
and sat down and wept before the Lord, and fasted that day until even, and
asked him again, whether they should any more fight against their brethren or
not. God said unto them yes, to morrow I will deliver them into your hands.
And the next day was ye tribe of Benjamin utterly destroyed, saving 600. men
which hid the^ selves in the wilderness. Here it is evident that the children of
Israel lost the victory twice, and yet notwithstanding had a just cause, and
fought at Gods commandment. Besides that, Judas Machabeus was slain in a
righteous cause, as it is manifest in the first book of the Machabees. 1.
Macha. 3
And therefore it can be no evident argument of the vengeance of God, that he
was slain in battle in a righteous cause, and therefore me thinks that this
man is too malaparte, so bluntly to enter into Gods judgment, and give
sentence in that matter before he be called to counsel. Thus have I
sufficiently touched his Preface, for those points ye he afterward touched
more largely, have I willingly passed, because I shall touch the^ earnestly
hereafter. Now let us see what heproueth.

It is a great wonder to see upon how light and slight occasions M. More.
he is fallen unto these abominable heresies. For he denies not nor ca^ not
say nay, but that our Savior said him self, my flesh is verily meat and my
blood is verily drink he denies not also that Christ him self at his last
Supper, taking the bread into his blessed hands, after that he had blessed it
said unto his disciples? Take you this and eat it, this is my body, that
shall be given for you. And likewise gave the^ the chalice after his blessyng and
consecracion, and said unto them, this is the chalice of my blood of the new
testament, which shall be shed out for many, do ye this in remembrance of me.

It is a great wonder to see how Frith.
ignorant their proctour is, in the plain textes of scripture. For if he had
any Judgment at all he might well perceive y^ when Christ spoke these words, my
flesh is verily meat and my blood is verily drink, he spoke nothing of ye
sacrament. For it was not institute until his last supper. And these words
were spoken to ye Jews long before, and meant them not of ye carnal eating or
drynking of his body or blood, but of the spiritual eating, which is done by
faith and not with tothe, or bellye. Whereof S. Austyn Christ spoke of no
carnal eating of him, but of a spiritual catyng by says.
says upon his gospel of John why preparest thou other tothe or bellye?
believe and thou have eaten him. So ye Christ's words must here be understood
spiritually. And that he calls his flesh very meat because that as meat by
the eating of it and disgetting it in our body does strengthen these
corruptible me^bres, so likewise does Christ's flesh by the believing that it
takes our sin upon it self and suffered the death to deliver us and
strengthen our immortal soul. And likewise as drink when it is dronken, does
comfort and quicken our frail nature. So likewise does Christ's blood by the
drinkyng of it into the bowelles of our soul that it is by the believing and
remembering that it is shed for our sins, comfort and quicken our soul unto
everlasting life. And this is the eating and drinking ye he speaks of in that
place. And that The Papists do falsely allege this text.
it is so you may perceive by the text following which says, he that eats my
body and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him, which is not possible
to be understand of the sacrament. For it is false to say that he ye eats the
sacrament of his body and drinks the sacrament of his blood, dwells in
Christ and Christ in him For some man receives it unto his condemnation, And
thus does Saint Austen expound it saying, Hoc est enim Aug. in Ioha^. tract. 26
Christum manducare, in illo manner and illum manentem in se habere. This is
the very eating of Christ to dwell in him and to have him dwelling in us So ye
who so ever dwells in Christ To believe in Christ is to dwell in Christ.
(ye is to say believes y^ he is sent of God to save us from our sins) does
verily eat and drink his body and blood although he never received the
sacrament. This is ye spiritual eating necessary for all y^ shall be saved for
there is no man that comes to God without this eating of Christ, that is the
believing in him. And so I deny not but that Christ speaks these words but
surely he meant it spiritually, as Saint Austen declares, and as the place
plainly proves.

And as touching ye other words ye Math. 26.
Christ spoke unto his disciples at the last Supper I deny not but y^ he said
so, but y^ he so fleshly meant as ye falsely feign, I utterly deny. For I say ye
his words were then also sprite and life, and were spiritually to be
understood, and ye he called it his body. For a certain John. 6. John. 15.
property, even as he cauled him self a very vine, and his disciples dery vine
branches, and as he cauled himself John. 10.
a door: not ye he was so in deed, but for certain properties in the
similytudes, as a man for some property says of his neighhours horse, this
horse is mine up and down, meaning that it is in every thing so like. And
like as Jacob builded an altar Gene. 35. Gene. 32.
and cauled it the house of God, and as Jacob called ye place where he wrastled
with the angel, the face of God, and as the pascall lamb was cauled the
passing by of the Lord. And as a broken potsherd was cauled Jerusalem, Jeremy.
19
not for that they were so in deed but for certain similitudes in the
properties, and that the very name itself might put men in remembrance what is
meant by the thing, as I sufficiently declared in my first treatise.

He must needs confess, that they that believe that it is the very More.
body and his very blood in deed, have the plain words of our savior him
self upon their side, for the ground and foundation of their faith.

That is very true and so have they ye very words of god, which say that a
Frith.
broken potsherd is Jerusalem, and that Christ is a stone, and that Christ is
a vine and a door. And yet if they should believe or think that he were in deed
any of these things, they were spiritual and nevertheless deceived. For
though he so said, yet I say his words were spiritually to be understood.
And where you say that I fly from the faith of plain and open scriptures, and
for the allegory destroy the true sense of the letter. I answer that some
textes of Scripture are only to be understand after the letter: as when Paul
says, Christ Roma. 4.
died for our sins and arose again for our justification. And some textes
are only to be understand spiritually or in the way of allegory: As when Paul
says, Christ was the stone, and when Christ says him self, I am a 1. Cor.
10. John. 15. John. 10.
very vine I am the door, and some must be understand both literally, and
spiritually: As when God said, out of Egypt cauled I my son, which although
it were literally fulfilled in the children of Israel when he brought Osea. 17.
them out of Egypt with great power and wonders yet was it also meant and
verified in Christ himself, his very spiritual son, which was cauled out of
Egypt after ye death of Herod. And again it is very spiritually fulfilled
Math. 2.
in us which through Christ's blood are delivered from the Egypt of sin, and
from the power of Pharao y^ The Scripture speaks diversely and has diverse
senses.
devil. And I say that this text of scripture: This is my body, is only
spiritually to be understand, and not literally. And ye does S. Austen also
confirm which writes unto Adamantus. and says, These sentenses of scripture,
Christ was the stone, the blood is the soul, and this is my body. are
figuratiuelie to be understand (that is to say spiritually or by the way of
an allegory) and thus have I Saint. Augustine wholly on my side, which thing
shall yet hear after more plainly appear.

Now his example of his bridegromes M. More.
ring I very well allow, for I take the blessed sacrament to beleft with us for
a very token and a memorial of Christ in deed. but I say that the hole
substance of the same token and memorial is his own blessed body. And so I
say More is a mocker and trifler.
that Christ has left us a better token then this man would have us take it
for, and therein he fares like a man to who^ a bridgrome had delivered a goodly
gold ryng with a rich rubie therein, to deliver his bride for a toke^. And
the^ he would like a false shrewe, keep away that gold ring, and give the
bride instead thereof, a proper ring of a rishe, and tell her that the
bridgrome would send her no better. Or else like one that when the bridgrome had
given such a ryng of gold to his bride for a token, will tell her plain, and
make her believe that the ring were but coper or brass, to minishe the
bridgromes thank.

I am right glad ye ye admit mine example, and grant that the sacrament Frith.
is left to be a very token and a memorial of Christ in deed. But where you
say, that the whole substance of the same token and memorial is his own
blessed body, that is sooner said then proved. For S. Austen shows the
contrary, as it is partly before touched, and here after shall be declared more
plainelye. and where you say that we fare like a false shrew that would keep
the gold ring from ye bride, and give her a ring of a rishe, or tell her that
her gold ring were copper or brass, to minish the bridegromes thank. I
answer that we In answer to Mores triflyng.
deny not but that the ring is most fine gold, and is set with as rich Rubyes
as can be gotten. For that ryng (I mean the Sacrament) is not only a most
perfect token and a memorial of the bridgromes benefits and unfeigned favor
on his party but it is also on the other party Eucharistia: Eucharistia
that is to say, a thanks geuyng, for the gracious gifts which she
undoubtedly knowledgeth her self to have received. For as verily as that bread
is broken among them, so verily was Christ's body broken for their sins. And
as verily as they receive that bread into their bellye thorough eating it, so
verily do they receive the fruit of his death into their souls by beleuyng in
him. And therefore they The right cause why we should come to the Table of our
Lord.
assemble to that Supper, not for the valor of the bread, wine or meat that
is there eaten, but for the intent to give him thanks commonly among the^ all,
for his inestimable goodness. But to proceed unto our purpose, if a man would
come unto the bryde, and tell her that this goodly gold ryng were her own
bridgrome, both flesh blood and bones (as you do) the^ I think if she have any
wit, she More has here a cheke mate.
might answer him, that he mocked and the more he said it, the less she
might believe him, and say that if that were her own bridgrome, what should she
then need any remembrance of him or why should he give it her for a
remembrance? For a remembrance presupposes the thing to be absent, and
therefore if this be a remembrance of him, then can he not here be present.

I marvel me therefore much, that M. More.
he is not afearde, to affirm that these words of Christ, of his body and of
his blood, must needs be understand by way of a similitude or an allegorye as
the words be of the vine and the door. Now this he wottes well, that
though some words spoken by the mouth of Christ be to be understand only by
way of a similitude or an allegory, yet follows it not thereupon, that every
like word of Christ in orher places was no other but an allegory, for such was
the shift and cauillation that the wicked Arrians used which took from
Christ's person his omnipotent Godhead.

I grant that the Arrians erred, for as M. More says, though in some Frith.
place a word be taken figuratively, it follows not therefore in every other
place, it should likewise be taken. But one question must I ask his mastershyp
how does he know that there is any word or text in Scripture that must be
taken figuratively? that is by the way of a similitude or as he calls it a
necessary allegory? I think (though some men may assign other good causes and
evidences) that the first knowledge is by other textes of Scripture. For if
other textes be conferred Why certain places of ye Scripture must be
understand spiritually.
unto it, and will not stand with the litterall sense, the^ I think it must
needs be taken spiritually or figuratively as there are infinite textes in
Scripture. Now when I see that S. Thomas which felt christ his wounds and put
his finger in his side, called him his Lord and God, and that no text in
scripture repugneth unto the same, but that they may well stand together me
thinks it were folly to affirm that this word, God, in that text should be
taken figuratively or by way of an allegory: But now in our matter the process
of Scripture will not stand with the litterall sense, as shall hereafter
appear. And therefore necessity compels us to expound it figuratively, as
does also S. Austen and other holy Doctors, as hereafter shall plainly appear.

If every man that can find out a new fond fantasy upon a text M. More
of holy Scripture, may have his own mind taken and his own exposition
believed against the expositions of the old cunning Doctors and Saints, the^
may you surely see that no article of the christen faith, ca^ stand and eudure
long. And then he alleges S. Hierome which says, that if the exposition of
other interpretours, and the consent of the common Catholic Church, were of
no more strength, but that every man might be believed that could bring some
textes of Scripture, for him expounded as it pleased him self, then could I
(says this holy man) bring a new sect also, and say by Scripture, that no man
were a true Christian man nor a member of the Church, that keeps ij. coats.
And in good faith (says M. More) if that way were allowed, I were able my self
to find out xv. new sects in one fore noone.

S. Peter says, that the Scripture is not expounded after the appetite of
Frith.
any private person, but eue^ as it was given, by the spirit of God and not by
man's will. So must it be declared by the same spirit. And therefore I No man
is to be believed that brings his own judgment only upon any sentence of
Scripture.
will not that any man shall be believed, by bringyng his own mind and fantasy.
But if he will be believed, let him bring either an other plain text, which
shall expound the first, or else at the lest he must bring such a sentence, as
will stand with the process of the Scripture. Why was S. Hierome allowed
against the determination of the counsel of Malta, since he was alone, and they
a great multitude? but only because he brought evident scripture, which at
the time of their sentence, none of them remembered: and yet when it was
brought, they could not avoid it. And likewise except I bring evident
scripture which they all shall expound as I do, I desire not to be believed. And
where M. More says, that in good faith he were able to find out xv. new sects
in one fore noone, he may thank God that he has such a pregnaunt wit: But
yet I trust he More is here pretely ^ypped.
should not find one (if there were any peril of damnation therein) but that we
would with a plain text confute it, which he should not be able to avoid.

And over this the very circumstaunces M. More.
of the places in the gospel in which our Savior speaks of that Sacrament,
may well make open the difference of his speech in this matter and of all those
other, and that as he spoke all those but in an allegorye, so spoke he this
plainly, meaning that he spoke of his very body and his very blood, beside all
allegoryes. For when our Lord said, he was a very vine, and when he said he was
the door, there was none that heard him, that any thing marueiled thereof. And
why? For because they perceived well, that he meant not that he was a material
vine in deed, nor a door neither: But when he said that his flesh was very
meat, and his blood very drink, and that they should not be saved, but if
they did eat his flesh and drink his blood, then were they all in such a
wonder there of, that they could not abide. And wherefore, but because they
perceived well by his words and his manner of circumstaunces, that Christ
spoke of his very flesh and his very blood in deed.

It is openly known and confessed Frith. John. 6.
among all learned men that in the 6. chapter of Ioh. Christ spoke not one
word concerning the sacrament of his body and blood (which at that time was
not yet institute) but all that he there spoke was of the spiritual eating and
drinking of his body, and blood, into our souls, which is the faith in his
body and blood, as I have touched before. And the circumstances of this place
do in deed prove that they were fleshly minded, and understood not the
spiritual words of our savior Christ, and therefore wo^dered and murmured
Insomuch that Christ said unto the^, does this offend you? what will you say
then when ye shall see the son of man ascending thither where he was before?
Then (adds S. Austen) you shall Note here the saying of S. Austen.
know that he meant not to give his flesh to eat with your teth: for he shall
ascend hole. And Christ adds, it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh
profits nothing, the word that I speak, are spirit and life: that is to
say, says S. Austen, are spiritually to be understand. And where Christ says,
that the flesh profits nothing (meaning of his own flesh, as S. Austen
says) he means that it How the flesh of Christ profits nothing and how it
does profit.
profits not, as they understood him ye is to say, it profits not, if it
were eaten. But it does much profit to be slain, that thorough it and the
sheding of his blood, the wrath of God our father is pacified, and our sins
forgeuen. And where his mastership says, that the people perceived well what he
meant, and therefore he wondered so sore and could not abide, because they
perceived well by his words and manner of circumstances what his meaning was.
I will say as I did before, that the understood him not. Now here he will say
unto me, if it be Frith uses not words without alledgyng authorities.
but your nay and my yea, the^ I would think to be believed as soon as you,
and surely ye were but reason. Not withstanding (thanks be to God) I am able
to bring in auctorite to Judge between us both, whose judgment I trust his
mastership will admit. This auctor is S. Austen which says. Discipuli enim
eius qui eum sequebantur Augustinus in sermon ad infantes
expauerunt and exhorruerunt sermonem non intelligentes. That is to say, his
his disciples which followed him were astonished, and abhored his words and
understood them not. And because your mastership shall not think that he
ouershot him felfe, and spoke he wist not what, we shall allege him saying the
same words in an other place. Cum diceret. Nisi quis manducauerit carnem. etc.
illi (non intelligentes) Augu. 54.
dixerunt ad inuicem, Durus est hic sermo, quis potest eum audire? That is,
when Christ said, except a man eat my flesh and drink my blood, he shall The
Jews understood Christ carnally and not spiritually as he meant.
have no life in him, they (because they understood him not) said to each other,
this is an hard saying, who can hear him? Thus I trust you will give place
(although not to me) yet at the least unto S. Austen, and receive the truth
which is so plainly proved. And where his mastership allegeth this text for
the sacrament, that except they did eat his flesh and drink his blood the
could not be saved, M. More fallen into the error of pope In nocent.
it seems that he is fallen into the error of Pope innocent, which likewise
understanding this text upon the sacrament (as M. More does) caused young
children and infantes to receive the sacrament, as though they had all been
damned which died and had not received it. And of this carnal mind were many
mo Bushoppes a great while (as are now the bohemes) whom he after disprayseth,
and yet expounds the text as they do, but afterward they looked more
spiritually upon the matter and confessed their ignorance (as I trust M. More
will) but now will I show you S. Austens mind upon this text which shall
help for the exposition of all this matter. S. Austen in the third book De
Doctrina Christiana the 16. Aug. Lib. 3. de doctrina Christiana.
chapter teaching how we shall know the tropes, figures, allegories and
phrases, of the scripture says. Si autem flagitium aut facinus iubere
videntur, figuratiua locutio est. Nisi ma^ducaueritis (inquit) carne^ filij
hominis et biberitis eius sanguinem, not habebitis uitam in vobis. Facinus vel
flagitium videtur iubere: Figura est ergo precipie^s passionis dominicae esse
commicandum, et suauiter atque vtiliter in memoria recondendum quod pro nobis
caro eius crucifixa and vul nerata sit. That is to say, when soever the
scripture or Christ, seems to command any foul or wicked thing, then must
that text be taken figuratively (that as it is a phrase, allegory and manner
of speaking, and must be understand spiritually and not after the letter)
Except (says Christ) ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his
blood ye shall have no life in you. He seems (says S. Austen) to Here S.
Augustine shows plainly that Christ's words were a figurative spech
commau^de a foul and a wicked thing. It is therefore a figure, commanding us
to be partakers of his passion, and sweetlye and profitablye to print in our
mind that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. This truth (thanks be
to God) does S. Austen declare unto us, which thing beside the opening of this
text against M. Mores mind, does plainly show what he thought in the words
of christ's supper. For since he called it a foul and a wicked thing, to eat
his flesh, then may you soon perceive, that he thought it was as foul and as
wicked a thing to eat his body, seeing his body is flesh and then consequently
it shall follow, y^ either this word eat (where Christ said take this and
eat it) must be taken spiritually, or else that this saying of Christ, this is
my body, must be figuratively spoken, but this word eat is taken after the
letter (for they did in deed eat the bred) therefore it must needs follow,
that this sentence (this is my body) must be figuratively spoken Or else is S.
Austen not to be approved in this place, which thing our Bishops I think, will
not say nay.

Besides that S. Austen says: Quando loquebatur dominus noster Jesus
Augustinus in sermon ad infantes
Christus de corpore suo, nisi (inquit) quis manducauerit carnem meam and
^iberit sanguinem meum, non habebit in sevitam. Caro enim mea vere est cibus,
and sanguis meus vere est potus, intellectus spiritualis credentem saluum
facit, quia litera occidit spiritus est qui viuificat. That is to say: When our
Lord Jesus Christ spoke of his body, except (quod he) a man eat my flesh and
drink my blood, he shall have no life in him self, for my flesh is very meat,
and my blood is very drink. The spiritual understanding saves him that
believes, for the letter kills, but the spirit quickneth. Here may you
plainly perceive, that this text must only be taken spiritually. For he
says, that to take it after the letter, it kylleth and profits nothing at
all, and therefore I wonder that we have been led so long in this gross error.

This saying does y^ famous clarke Origin confirm, saying. Agnosce quod
figurae sunt quae in voluminibus Domini Origi. in leus ho. 7.
scriptae sunt: and ideo tanquam spirituales and non tanquam carnales,
examinate and intelligite quae dicuntur. Si enim secu^dum literam sequaris hoc
ipsum quod dictum est, Nisi manducaueritis carnem. etc. occidit haec litera.
That is to say. Mark ye they are figures which are written in the Scripture of
God, and therefore examine them as spiritual men and not as carnal, and
understand those things that are spoken. For if thou follow after the letter,
Christ's words are spiritual and not carnal.
this thing that is spoken: except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and
drink his blood, you can have no life in you, this letter kylleth. Alas dear
brethren, why should any man be offended with this doctrine, since it is
approved so plainly, by such ancient and holy fathers?

Again S. Austen says: Qui manducat Augusti. sermo. eirca sacra feria Pascha.
carnem meam and bibit meum sanguinem in me manet and ego in illo. Hoc est ergo
manducare illam escam and illum bibere potum, in Christo manner and illum
manentem in se habere, ac per hoc quino^ manet in Christo and in quo non manet
Christus proculdubio non manducat eius carnem nec bibit sanguinem, etiam si
tantaerei sacramentum ad iudicium sibi ma^ducet and bibit. That is to say. He
that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, abides in me, and I in him. This
The eating and drinkyng of Christ, what it is.
is therefore the eating of that meat, and drinkyng of that blood, to abide in
Christ, and have him abiding in us. And therefore he that abides not in
Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without doubt he eats not his flesh,
nor drinks not his blood, although he eat and drink the sacrament of so
great a thing unto his damnation. And even y^ same words has Bid upon the
Corinthians. 1. Cor. 10. This one place, is sufficient Idem Beda super. 1. Cor.
10.
for to prove my purpose though he said not one word more. For here he does
plainly determine, that he which abides not in Christ, that is to say, he ye
is wicked or unfaithful, does not eat his flesh nor drink his The wicked
eat not the flesh of Christ.
blood, although he eat and drink the Sacrament of so great a thing. And so
must it needs follow, that the Sacrament is not the very natural body of
Christ. For then the unfaithful should eat his flesh, seeing he eats the
sacrament of his body. But that does S. Austen deny: wherefore it must needs
follow, that it is but only a token of a remembrance, and a sign of his body
breakyng, and a representation of his passion, that we might keep his fact in
memory, and Roma. 5.
give him thanks for his tender love and kindenes, which when we were his
enemies took upon him to suffer most vile death, to reconcile us unto his
father, and make us his friends. This saying has S. Austen in an other place
also, where he writes on this manner: Qui non in me manet, and in quo ego non
maneo, non se August. de ciuitat. dei. li. 21. ca. 25.
dicat aut existimet manducare corpus meum, aut bibere sanguine^ meum. Non it
aque manent in Christo, qui non sunt eius membra: non sunt autem membra
Christi, qui se faciunt me^bra meretricis. That is to say: He that abides not
in me, and in whom I abide not, let him not say or think that he eats my
body or drinks my blood: They abide not in Christ which are not his members.
And they are not his members which make them selves the members of an harlot.
And these are also the very words of Bid. Here it is plain proved again by
the authority of S. Austen and Bid, that the Beda super 1. Cor. 6.
wicked and unfaithful (which are not the members of Christ) do not eat his
body nor drink his blood, The sacrament is a figure, token, and a memorial of
the breaking of Christ's body and sheding of his blood.
and yet they do eat the sacrament as well as the other. Wherefore you must
needs grant, that the Sacrament is not ye natural body of Christ but a
figure, toke^, or memorial thereof. Now good Christen people count not this new
learning which is firmed by such old Doctors and faithful fathers.

Now were this enough for a Christen man that loved no contention. But because
there are so many sophisters in y^ world which care not what they say, so they
hold not their peace. I must needs set some bulwark by this holy Doctor to
help to defend him, for else they will shortly ouerrunne him (as they do me)
and make him an heretic too. Therefore I will allege his master S. Ambrose.
Saint Ambrose says: Non iste panis Ambros. de sacra. Lib. 5 cap. 4.
est qui vadit in corpus, sed ille panis vitae aeternae qui animae nostrae
substantiam fulscit. That is: It is not this bread that goes into the body,
but that bread of everlasting life which vpboldeth the substance of our soul.
Furthermore the great clerk Prosper confirms the same saying. Qui discordat
a Christo nec carnem Christi Prosp. in libro sententiaru^. sent. 339.
manducat, nec sanguinem bibit, etiamsi tamtae rei sacramentum ad iudicium suae
praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter accipiat. That is: He that discordeth
from Christ, does neither eat his flesh nor drink his blood, although he
receive indifferently every day the sacrament of so great a thing unto the
condemnation of his presumption. And these are also the very words of Bid
upon the xj. Chapter of the Idem Beda super. 1. Cor. 11.
first Epistle to the Corinthians.

Now you may see, that it is not S. Austens mind only, but also the saying of
many more. And therefore I trust you will be good unto him. And if ye condemn
not these holy fathers, then am I wrongfully punished. But if you condemn
the^, then must poor Frith be content to bear the burden with them.

The mind and exposition of the old Doctors upon the words of Christ's
maundey.
More.
ANd where M. More says, that if Christ had not meant after the plain literal
sece, that both the hearers at that time, and the expositours since, and all
Christian people beside this xv. c. year would not have taken only the
litterall sense being so strange and marvelous that it might seem impossible,
and decline from the letter for allegories in all such other things being (as
he says) and as in deed they be, so many far in number mo.

As touching ye hearers they were Frith.
deceived and understood him not (I mean as many as took his words fleshly
as you do.) And they had their answer of Christ (when they murmured) that his
words were spirit and life: that is (as S. Austen says) spiritually to be
understand and not fleshly, as is before declared. And as for the expositours.
I think he has not one of the old fathers for him, but certain new fellows:
as Dominie. S. Thomas, Decam, and such other More has no old author to
maintain his quareling Papistry.
which have made the Pope a God. And as I have showed. S. Austen makes full
for us, and so do all the old fathers, as Occola^padius has well declared in
his book, Quid veteres senserint de Sacrame^to eucharistiae. And some of their
sayings I shall allege anon. And where you say that all Christen people have
so believed this 1500. years, that is very false. For there is no doubt, but
that the people thought as holy S. Austen and other faithful fathers taught
them. Which as I said, make with us. Notwithstanding in deed, since our
Prelates have been made Lords and have set up their laws and decrees contrary
to the prerogative of all Princes, and like most sutle traitors, have made all
me^ believe that they may make laws and bind men's consciences, to obey them:
and that their laws are Gods laws blindyng ye peoples eyes with The Papists
have corrupted the Scriptures and advanced them selves above Kings and rulers.
two or three textes wrongfully wrested, to advance their pride, where they
ought to obey Kings and Princes, and be subject to their laws, as Christ and
his Apostles were eue^ unto ye death. Since that time I say they have made men
believe what they list and made articles of the faith at their pleasure. One
article must be ye they be the Church, and can not err: And this is the
ground of all their doctrine. But the truth of this article is now
sufficiently known. For if Queen Katherine be king Henry's wife, then they do
err, and if she be not, then they have erred, to speak no more cruelly: It is
now become an article of our faith ye the Pope of Articles of our faith made by
the Pope.
Rome must be y^ head of ye Church and the Vicare of Christ: and that by Gods
law. It is an article of our faith that what soever he byndeth in earth, is
bound in heaven, in so much that if he curse wrongfully, yet ye must be
feared, and infinite such other which are not in our Creed, but blessed be God
that has given some light into our Princes heart. For he has lately put forth
a book called the glass of truth, which proves many of these articles very
foolish fantasies and that even by their own Doctors, and so I trust you
shall be proved in this point of the Sacrament for though it To believe the
articles contained in our creed is sufficient for our salvation.
be an article of our faith it is no article of our Creed in ye xij. articles
where of are sufficient for our salvation. And therefore we may think that you
lie without all ieoperdye of damnation.

Nevertheless seeing his mastership says that all make for him, and I say
clean contrary, that all the old fathers make against him, or at the lest
wise not with him, It were necessary that one of us should prove his purpose.
But indeed in this point he would look to have the vauntage of me. For he
thinks that men will sooner Frith allegeth authorities to prove his doctrine
true.
believe him which is a great man then me which am but a poor man, and that
therefore I had more need to prove my part true, then he to prove his. Well I
am content and therefore give ear (dear reader) and Judge between us.

First I will begin with Tertulian, Tertul. lib. 2. contra Marcione^.
because he is of most antiquity. Tertulian speaking of Christ, says: Nec
panem reprobauit quo ipsum corpus suum representat. That is to say. Christ him
self did not reprove or discommend bread whereby he does represent his very
body. For the understanding of this place, you must know that there was an
heretic called Marcion, which did reprove creatures, and said that all manner
of creatures were evil. This thing does Tertulian improve by the Sacrament and
says: Christ did not reprove or disco^mend bread whereby he does represent his
body: as though he should say, if Christ had counted the bread evil, then
would he not have left it for a Sacrament to represent his body, meaning that
it is a sacrament, sign, token and memorial of his body, and not the body it
self. And that this is his mind, does plainly appear in his fourth book,
where he says: Tertul. lib. 4. contra Marcione^.
Christus acceptum panem and distributu^ discipulis, corpus suum illud fecit:
hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei figura autem non
fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. Caeterum vacuares quod est phantasma,
figuram capere non posset. That is to say: Christ taking bread and distributing
unto his disciples made it his body, saying: this is my body, that is to say, a
figure of This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body.
my body, but this bread could not have been a figure of it, except Christ
had had a true body. For a vain thing or a fantasy can take no figure. For
the understanding of this place, you must mark that this heretic Marcion,
against whom this author writes, did hold opinion that Christ had no natural
body, but only a fantastical body, and this opinion does this Doctor improve
by the sacrament of ye altar, saying: the sacrament is a figure of his body:
ergo, Christ had a true body, and not a pha^tasticall body: For a vain thing
or fantasy ca^ take no figure, Lo, here does this old father which was long
before S. Austen: or S. Hierome, expound these words of Christ This is my
body: that is to say, a figure of my body therefore you are to blame to call it
new learning. Now because they shall not of temerarious presumption reiecte
this old father, I shall establishe his words by S. Auste^ which commends
Christ's merue. lous patience for suffering so long ye traitor Judas, as though
he had been a good man, and yet was not ignorant of his wicked thoughts.
Adhibuit (inquit) ad conuiuium in quo corporis August. in prafa. Psalm. 3.
and sanguinis sui figuram discipulis commendauit ac tradidit. That is to say
he admitted him (says S. Auste^) unto the maundye wherein he did be take and
deliver unto the disciples ye figure of his body and blood, Here does this holy
father S. Austen call it a figure of his body. And I am sure Christ delivered
to his desciples the figure of his body.
there is no man so childishe, but that he knows that the figure of a thing
is not the thing it self. As by example the figure of Christ is not Christ him
self, the figure of S. Peter is not S. Peter him self. And yet we do
nevertheless commonly call those figures by the name of the thing that they do
represent. As I may say when I see ye figure of S. Peter, this is S. Peter to
whom Christ delivered ye keys of the kingdom of heaven. And yet he were a
fool that would think that figure to be S. Peter him self: for it is only a
represe^tatio^ of him. Besides that S. Austen says, Non hoc corpus quod
videtis estis manducaturi, nec bibituri August. super Psalm. 98.
illum sanguinem quem effusuri sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentu^ aliquod
vobis commendaui, spiritualiter intellectum viuificat vos. That is to say, you
shall not eat this body that you see, nor drink that blood which they that
crucify me shall shed out. I have given a certain sacrament unto you if it be
spiritually understand it quickens you: What things can be more plainly
spoken?

Furthermore S. Austen says. Sepe S. Austen ad Bonifaciu^, Epist. 23.
it a loquimu^ vt pascha appropinqua^te crastinam vel perendinam Domini
passionem dicamus: cum ille ante tam multos annos passus sit, nec omnino nisi
semel illa passio facta sit. Nempe ipso die dominico dicimus body Dominus
resurrexit, cum ex quo surrexit tot anni transierunt. Quare nemo tam ineptus
est, vt nos it a loquentes arguat esse mentitos, quia istos dies secundum
illorum quibus haec gest a sunt similitudinem nuncupamus: vt dicatur ipse dies
qui non sit ipse, sed reuolutione temporum similis eius: and dicatur illo die
fieri propter Sacramenti celebrationem, quod no^ illo die, sed iam olim factu^
est. Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in scipso? and tamen in Sacramento no^
solum per annuas pascha solennitates, sed omni die pro populis immolatur: nec
vtique mentitur qui interrogatus, responderit eu^ immolari. Si enim Sacramenta
qua^dam similitudine^ earu^ reru^ quaru^ sunt Sacramenta non haberent, omnino
Sacrame^ta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine pleru^que etiam ipsaru^ reru^
nomina accipiunt. Sicut ergo secundu^ quendam modu^ Sacra mentu^ corporis
Christi corpus Christi est, and Sacramentum sanguinis Christi sanguis Christi
est. It a Sacramentum fidei sides est. Nihilest autem aliud credere, q fidem
habere, ac per hoc eum respo^detur paruulus credere, qui fidei no^ dum habet
effectum respondetur fidem habere propter fidei Sacramentum, et conuertere se
ad Deum propter conuersionis Sacramentum. Quia and ipsa responsio pertinet ad
celebrationem Sacramenti. Sicut de ipso Baptismo apostolus consepulti (inquit)
su mus Christo per Baptismum in mortem. Non ait sepulturam significamus, sed
prorsus ait, consepulti sumus. Sacramentu^ ergo tantae rei non nisi eiusdem rei
vocabulo nuncupauit. That is to say: We often use to say, when Caster draws
nigh, that to morrow or the next day is the Lords passion, and yet it is many
years since he suffered, and that passion was never done but once. And upon
that Sunday we say, this day the Lord did rise again, and yet it is many
years since he rose. Now is there no man so foolish to reprove us as liars
for so saying, because we name these days after the similitude of those in
which these things were done so that it is called the same day, which is not
the very same, but by the revolution of time, like it. And it is named to be
done the same day through the celebration of the Sacrament (through keepyng the
memorial of the thing once done) which is not done that day, but was The
sacrament is the memorial of Christ's death.
done long agone. Was not Christ once crucified in his own person? and yet in
a mysterye (which is the remembrance of his very passion) he is crucified for
the people not only every feast of Easter, but every day: neither does he lie
which (when he is asked) answers that he is crucified: for if the
Sacraments, had not certain similitudes of those things whereof they are
Sacraments, then should they be no Sacraments at all. And for this similitude
for the most part they take the names of the very things, and therefore as
after a certain manner the Sacrament of The sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, after a manner, is Christ's body and blood.
Christ's body is Christ's body, and the Sacrament of Christ's blood is
Christ's blood, so the Sacrament of faith is faith. For it is no other thing to
believe then to have faith, and therefore when a man answers that the infant
believes which has not the effect of faith, he au^swereth that it has faith
for the Sacrament of faith: And that it turns it self to God, for the
Sacrament of conuertion. For the answer it self pertains unto the
ministryng of the Sacrament. As the Apostle writes of Baptism: we are buried
(says he) with Christ through Baptism unto death. He says not we signify
burying, but utterly says we are buried. He called therefore the Sacrament of
so great a thing even with the name of yt very thing it self. etc. If a man
would avoid contention and look soberly on those words of S. Austen, he
shall soon perceive the mystery of this matter. For even as the next good
Friday shall be called the Good Friday next is called the day that Christ
suffered his passion, and yet it is not so, for that good Friday is past long
s^^hens.
day of Christ's passion: and yet he shall not suffer death again upon that
day for he dyed but once and is now immortal: even so is the Sacrament called
Christ's body. And as that day is not the very day that he dyed on, but only a
remembrance thereof: so the Sacrament is not his very natural body, but only
a remembrance of his body breakyng, and blood sheddyng. And likewise, as the
next Easter day shall be called the day of his resurrection, not that it is the
very same day that Christ did rise in, but a remembrance of the same: even so
the Sacrament is called his body: not that it is his body in deed, but only a
remembrance of the same. And furthermore, eue^ as the Priest does offer him,
that is to say crucify him at Mass, eue^ so is the Sacrament his body. But
the Mass does but only represent his Frith writes of the Mass according to
the common opinion that was at that time.
passion. And so does the Sacrament represent his body. And yet though the
Mass does but represent his crucifying, we may truly say he is crucified, even
so though the Sacrament do but signify or represent his body, yet may we truly
say that it is his body. Why so? verily (says he) for the Sacraments have a
certain similitude of those things whereof they are Sacraments. And for this
similitude for the most part, they take the names of the very things. Blessed
be God which has so clearly discussed this matter by this faithful father.
Notwithstanding he does yet express it more plainly saying: after a certain
manner, the Sacrament of Christ's body is Christ's body. Behold dear After a
certain manner the Sacrament of Christ's body is Christ's body.
brethren he says after a certain manner the Sacrament is Christ's body. And
by that you may soon know that he never meant that it should be his very
natural body in deed, but only a token and memorial to keep in memory the
death of his body, and so to norishe our faith. Besides that his similitude
which he after alleges of Baptism, does wholly expound this matter, for
(says he) ye Apostle says not we signify burying: but he says, we are
buried (and yet in deed the Baptism does but signify it.) And thereupon S.
Austen adds, that he called the Sacrament of so great a thing even with the
name of the very thing it self. And likewise it is in our Sacrament. Finally
to be short I will pass over many places which I have gathered out of his holy
father, and will touch but this one more. S. Austen says. Non enim Dominus
dubitauit dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum August. contra Adama^ tum. cap. 12
daret signum corporis sui. Et in eodem capite exponit. Sic est enim sanguis
anima, quomodo petra erat Christus, nec tamen petra (ait) significabat
Christum, sed ait petra erat Christus. That is to say. The Lord doubted not to
say, this is my body, when he gave a sign of his Christ gave to his Disciples
the sign of his body.
body. And after in the same chapter he expounds it. For truly so the blood
is soul, as Christ was ye stone. And yet the Apostle says not, the stone did
signify Christ, but he says the stone was Christ.

Here. S. Austen says plainly that Christ called the sign of his body, his
body, and in this chapter does compare these three textes of scripture, this is
my body, the blood is the soul, and Christ was the stone: and declares them
to be one phrase and to be expounded after one fasshion. Now is there no man so
mad, as to say, that Christ was a natural stone (except he be a natural
fool) whose judgment we need not greatly to regard therefore we may well
conclude that the sacrament is not his natural body, but is cauled his body,
for a similitude that it has wherein it signifies and represents his body.
And that the sacrament of so great a thing is called even with the name of the
very thing it self, as S. Austen said immediately before.

This were proof enough to conclude that all ye old fathers did hold the
same opinion, for who would once surmise (seeing we have S. Austen so plain for
us which is the chiefest among them all) who would once sur mise I say, that he
dissented in this great mattter from the other faithful fathers, or they from
him? nevertheless I dare not let him stand post alone, lest ye despise him.
And therefore I will show you ye mind of certain other also: and first of his
master S. Ambrose.

S. Ambrose wrighting upon the Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians Ambrosi:
super illud mortem domini annu^^ia.
in the xi. chapter says. Quia enim morte Domini liberati sumus huius rei
memoris in edendo and potando, carnem and sanguinem que pro nobis oblata sunt
significamus. That is to say, because we be delivered by the death of the Lord
being mindful of this thing, meaning of the sacrament, we signyfie ^he flesh
and blood which were offered for us. Here does S. Ambrose say enough if me^
were not sophisters, but would be content with reason. For he says that in
eating and drinking the sacrament of Christ's body, we signify or represent
the flesh and blood of our Savior Jesus. Not withstanding because you are so
slippery, we shall bind you a little better by this man's words.

S. Ambrose says. Sed forte dices speciem sanguinis non video. Sed habet
Ambrosi. de sacra. Lib. 4 Cap. 4.
similitudinis Sicut enim mortis similitudinem sumpsisti, ita etiam
similitudinem preciosi sanguinis bibis. That is to say But peradventure thou will say. I seen appearaunce of blood, but it has a similitude. For even as
thou have taken the similitude of death, even so thou drinkest the similitude
of the precious blood. Here may you see by ye conferring of these two
sacraments, What. S. Ambrose judged of it For he says even as thou have taken
a similitude of his death in the sacrament of baptism, so do thou drink a
similitude of his precious blood in the sacrament of the altar. And yet as S.
Austen said before, the Apostle says not we signify burning, but says, we
are buried. And likewise here Christ said not this signifies my body, but this
is my body, calling the sacrament, sign, token and memorial of so great a
thing, even with ye name of the very thing it self, thus does S. Ambrose choke
our sophisters. Nevertheless I will allege one place more out of S. Ambrose,
where he Ambrosi. Libro. 4. de Sacramen. Cap. 5.
says. Dicit sacerdos, fac nobis inquit hanc oblatione^ scripta^ rationabile^,
quod est figura corporis Domini nostri Jesus Christi. That is, ye Priest says
make us this oblation acceptable. etc. For it is a figure of the body of our
Lord The Sacrament is a figure of Christ's body.
Jesus Christ. Here he cauleth it plainly a figure of Christ's body, which thing
you can not avoid. Therefore give praise unto God and let his truth sprede
which is so plainly testified, by these holy fathers. Now let us see what S.
Hierome says.

S. Hierome writing upon Ecclesiaste, says on this manner: Caro Domini Hieroni.
super eccle. Cap. 3.
verus cibus est, and sanguis eius verus potus est, hoc solum habemus in
praesenti saeculo bonu^, si vescamur carne eius cruoreque potemur, non solum in
mysterio, sed ^tiam in scripturarum lectione, verus enim cibus and potus, qui
ex verbo dei sumitur scientia scripturarum est. That is to say. The flesh of
the Lord is very meat, and his blood is very drink. This is only the
pleasure or profit that we have in this world, that we may eat his flesh
and drink his blood, not only in a mysterye, but also in the readyng of
Scriptures. For the very meat and drink, which is taken out of Gods word, is
the knowledge of Scriptures. Here may ye see Saint Hieromes mind in few
words. For first he says, that we eat his flesh and drink his blood in a
mysterye, which is the sacrament of his remembrance and memorial We eat the
very flesh of Christ and drink his blood in a mystery.
of his passion. And after he adds that we eat his flesh and drink his
blood in the reading and knowledge of Scriptures, and calls that very meat
and very drink. And yet I am sure ye are not so gross, as to think that the
letters which you read are turned into natural flesh and blood. And likewise
it is not necessary that the bread should be turned into his body, no more
then ye letters in scripture are turned into his flesh. And nevertheless
through ^ayth we may as well eat his body in receiving of the sacrament, as
eat his flesh in reading of the letters of the Scripture. Besides that S.
Hierome calls the understanding of the Scripture very meat and very drink:
which you must needs understand in a mystery The under standing of the
Scripture is very meat and very drink
and spiritual sense, for it is neither material meat nor drink that is
received with the mouth and teeth, but it is spiritual meat and drink, and
is so called for a similitude and property: because that as meat and drink
comfort the body and outward man, so does the readyng and knowledge of
Scripture comfort the soul and inward man. And likewise it is of Christ's
body, which is called very meat and very drink, which you must needs
understand in a mysterye or spiritual sense (as S. Hierome called it) Christ's
body is no material meat or drink.
for his body is no material meat nor drink that is received with the mouth
or teeth, but it is spiritual meat and drink, and so called for a similitude
and property, because that as meat and drink comfort the body, so does
the faith in his body breaking and bloudsheding, refreshe the soul unto life
everlasting. We use it customably in our daily speech to say, when a child
sets all his mind and delight on sport and play: It is meat and drink to
this child to play. And also we say by a man that loves well hawking and
hunting: it is meat and drink to this man to hawke and hunt. Where no man
doubts, but it is a figurative speech. And therefore I wonder that they are
so blind in this one point, of Christ's body: and can not also take the words
figuratively, as these old Doctors did. Again S. Hierome says. Postq
mysticum pascha fuerat impletum and agni carnes cum Apostolis comederat,
assumit panem qui comfortat cor hominis, and ad verum paschae Hieronimus super.
Math. 26.
transgreditur sacramentum, vt quomodo in praefiguratione eius Melchisedech
summi Dei sacerdos, vinum and panem offerens fecerat, ipse quoque viritatem
corporis and sanguinis repraesentaret. That is to say. After the mystical
Easter Lamb fulfilled, and that Christ had eaten the Lambs flesh with the
Apostles, he took bread which comfort the heart of man, and passes to the
true sacrament of the Easter La^be: that as Melchisedech brought forth bread
and wine figuryng him, so might he likewise represent the truth of his body and
blood. Here does S. Hierome speak after the manner that Tertullian did before:
that Christ with bread and wine did represent the truth of his body. For except
Where there is no true body there can beno figure of the same.
he had had a true body, he could not leave a figure of it, nor represent it
unto us. For a vain thing or pha^tasie can have no figure, nor can not be
represented: as by example, how should a man make a figure of his dream or
represent it unto our memory? But Christ has left us a figure and
representation of his body in bread and wine: therefore it follows that he
had a true body. And that this was S. Hieromes mind it does manifestly
appear by ye words of Beda, which does more copiously set out this saying of
Hierome. For Beda super. Luke. 22.
he writes on this manner: Finitis paschae veteris solennijs quae in
commemorationem antique de Aegypto liberationis agebantur, transit ad nouum
quod in suae redemptionis memoriam Ecclesia frequentare desiderat, vt videlicet
pro carne agni vel sanguine, suae carnis sanguinisque sacramentum in panis ac
vini figura substituens, ipsum se esse monstraret cui inrauit Dominus and non
poenitebit eum: Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech.
Frangit aute^ipse panem quem porrigit, vt ostendat corporis sui fractionem no^
sine sua sponte futuram. etc. Et paulo post. Similiter and calicem postquam
coenauit dedit eis. Quia ergo panis carnem confirmat, vinum vero sanguinem
operatur in carne, hic ad corpus Christi mystice, illud refertur ad sanguinem.
That is to say. After the solemnity of the old Easter Lamb was finished
(which was observed in the remembrance of the old deliverance out of Egypt)
he goes unto the new which the Church gladly observes in the remembrance of
his redemption, that he in the stead of the flesh and blood of the Lamb,
might institute and ordain the Sacrament of his flesh and blood in the figure
of bread and wine, and so declare him self to be the same unto whom the Lord
swear and will not repent, thou art a perpetual Priest after the order of
Melchisedech. And he him self brake the bread which he gave, to show that
the breakyng of his body should not be done without his own will. etc. And a
little after. And likewise he gave them the cup after he had supped. And
because bread does Bread and wi^^e is mistically referred to the body and blood
of Christ.
confirm or strength the flesh, and wine works blood in the flesh,
therefore is the bread mystically referred unto the body of Christ, and the
wine referred unto his blood.

Here may you note, first that as the Lamb was a remembrance of their
deliverance out of Egypt (and yet the Lamb delivered them not) so is the
Sacrament a remembrance of our redemption (and yet the Sacrament redeemed us
not). Besides that he says, that Christ in the stead of the flesh and blood
of the Lamb, did institute the Sacrament of his flesh and blood in figure of
bread and wine. Mark well, he says not that in the stead of Lambs flesh and
blood he did institute his own flesh and blood, but says that he did
institute the Sacrament of his flesh and blood. What thing is a Sacrament:
verily A Sacrament what it is?
it is the sign of an holy thing, and there is no difference between a sign
and a Sacrament, but that the sign is referred unto a worldly thing, and a
Sacrament unto a spiritual or holy thing: as S. Austen says: Signa Ad
Marcellum
(cum ad res dininas pertine^t) sacramenta appellantur: That is to say: Signs
when they pertain unto godly things are called sacraments. Therefore when Beda
says, that they did institute the sacrament of his flesh and blood in the
figure of bread and wine it is as much to say (by S. Austens definition) as
that he did institute the figure of his holy sleshe and blood in the figure of
bread and wine, that is to say, that bread and wine should Bread and wine
represent unto us the flesh and blood of Christ.
be the figure and sign representyng his holy flesh and blood unto us, for a
perpetual remembrance. And afterward he declares the property for which
the bread is called the body and the wine the blood: saving he speaks not so
darkely as I now do, but plainly says, that the bread is mystically referred
unto the body of Christ: because that as bread does strength the flesh, so
Christ's body which is figured by the bread does strength yt soul through
faith in his death. And so does he clearly prove my purpose.

Now let us see what Chrysostom Chrisosto. super. Math. 26.
says which shall describe us the faith of the old grecya^s and (I doubt not)
he had not lost the true faith, how so ever the world goo now a days.
Chrysostom says in this manner. Si enim mortuus Jesus non est, cuius signum
et simbolum hoc sacrificium est? vides quantu^ ei studiu^ fuerit vt semper
memoria teneamus pro nobis ipsu^ mortuu^ fuisse That is to say, for if Jesus
have not died, whose memorial and sign is yt sacrifice? Thou see what
diligence he gave that we should continuallye keep in memory that he died for
us. Here you may see that Chrysostom calls the Sacrament simbolu^ and
signu^: that is to say, a memorial and sign of Christ, and that it was
institute to keep his death in perpetual remembrance. But of one thing thou
must beware or else thou art deceived, he calls it also a sacrifice, and there
thou must wisely understand him. For Sacrifice.
if it were the sacrifice of Christ's body, the^ must Christ's body be slain
there again, which thing God forbid. And therefore thou must understand him
when he calls it a sacrifice, that he means it to be a remembrance of that
holy sacrifice where Christ's body was offered on ye cross once for all: For
he can be sacrifised no more, seeing he is immortal. Notwithstanding our
prelates will hear Christ's body a sacrifice offered on the cross once for
all.
note me of presumption, that I dare be so bold to expound his mind on this
fashion: For in deed the take him otherwise, and think that it is a very
sacrifice. And therefore I will bring one other text, where Chrysostom shall
expound him self. Chrysostom says: Nonne per singulos dies offerrimus?
Chrisosto, ad Hebre. Home. 17.
offerrimus quidem, sed ad recorda ^^onem mortis eius facient^s etc et paulo
po^t. Non aliu^ sacrificium (sicut pontifex) sed id ipsum semper facimus: magis
autem recordationem sacrificij opera mur. That is to say, do we not daily offer
or do sacrifice? yes surely, But we do it for the remembrance of his death,
for this sacrifice is an example of that we offer, not an other sacrifice as
the* Bishop (in the old law) did, but ever the same: yea rather a
remembrance of the sacrifice, first he says that they daily do sacrifice, but
it is in remembrance of christ's death, then he says that the sacrifice is
an example of that: Thyrdly he says that they offer not an other sacrifice
(that is to say an ox or a goat as the Bishops of the old law,) but ever the
same, Mark this point: for though it seem at ye first sight to make with the^
yet does it make so directlye against them, that they shall never be able to
avoid it. Chrysostom says they do not offer an other sacrifice as the
Bishops did, but ever the same. They offer other bread and wine this day then
they did yesterday: they shall say an other Mass to morrow the^ they did this
day. Now if this bread and wine, or the Mass be a sacrifice, then do they
offer an other sacrifice, as well as the Bishops of the old law. For this
sacrifice did signify ye Christ should come and shed his blood, The Sacrifice
that we offer in bread and wine is the remembrance of Christ's death.
as well as the bread, wine and Massedo represent that he has done it in deed.
And therefore if it be a sacrifice, the^ do they offer any other sacrifice,
represe^ting his passion, as well as ye Bishop of ye old law, But yt does
Chrysostom deny, and says that they offer every day the same. What same?
verily even the same that was done and sacrificed when Christ shed his blood,
In this sacrifice is Christ bound and buffeted and led from Anna to Cayphas: he
is brought to Pilate and condemned: he is scourged and crowned with thorn and
nailed on the cross and his heart opened with a spear, and so shedeth his
blood, for our redemption. Why Chrysostom, and do you the self same sacrifice
every day? yea verily. The^ why does S. Paul say Roma. 6.
that Christ is risen from death, and dies no more? if he dye no more, how do
you daily crucify him? Forsooth Paul says truth. For we do not actually
indeed, but only in a mystery And yet we say, that we do sacrifice As S.
Austen declares before ad Bonifacum.
him, and that this is his sacrifice, for the celebration of the sacrament and
memory of yt passion which we keep. And for this cause it has the name of the
thing that it does represent and signify. And therefore I expound my mind by
a rethorical correction and say, magis recordationem sacrificij, that is to
say, yea rather the remembrance of the sacrifice. Grant mercies (good
Chrysostom:) now do I perceive ye pith of this matter: even as the mass is
the very death and passion of christ so is it a sacrifice. Now it does but only
represent the very death and passion of Christ, therefore it does follow that
the Mass in very deed does but only represent a sacrifice. And yet The mass
is called a sacrifice, be cause it represents the death and passion of Christ
that was sacrificed on the Cross.
notwithstanding many times it is called a sacrifice of holy Doctors, and has
the name of ye very same thing that it does represent and signify. And even so
we may say of this sacrament, that as the Mass is the very sacrifice and
passion of Christ, so is the Sacrament his very body and sacrifice that is
offered. Now the Mass does but only represe^t and signify the passion: so
the Sacrament does but only represent and signify the body and very sacrifice
once offered for ever. Notwithstanding many times the Mass is called a
sacrifice of holy Doctors: and so the Sacrament is called the body and a
sacrifice. And has the name of the very same thing that it does represent and
signify. Chrisost super.


Furthermore Chrysostom says. Ipse quoque bibit ex eo, ne auditis verbis
illis dicerent: quid igitur sanguinem bibimus Math. (...).
and carnem comedimus? ac ideo perturbarentur. Nam and quando prius de his
verba fecit multi solummodo propter verba scandalum passi sunt. Neigitur tunc
id quoque accideret, primus ipse hoc fecit, vt tra^quillo animo ad
co^municationem misteriorum induceret. That is to say: he also drank of it,
lest when they heard his words, they should say, why do we the^ drink blood
and eat flesh? and so should be troubled. For when he spoke before of those
things many of them were offended with his words. And because that should not
now also chance, he him self drank first of it, that he might cause them to
come without fear to the partaking of those mysteries: here Chrysostom notes
ye Christ drank Christ by drinkyng of the cup, did show the mystery and that
it was no natural nor carnal blood.
of it, to draw them from the gross understanding of his words, and by his
drinkyng to testify unto them that it was not his natural blood nor his
natural flesh in deed, but only memorials and representations of his body
and blood. And therefore he called the^ mysteries: that is to say sacraments.
For in this place a Sacrament and a mystery is all one thing. Notwithstanding
sometime this word mystery is more common and large in signifying then this
word Sacrament. And I have showed you before, that a Sacrament is the sign of
an holy thing it self, that it represe^teth: albeit some time it bear the
name of the very thing it self, as the Image of S. Peter is not S. Peter him
self and yet it bears his name.

Chrysostom says. Caro non prodest quicq: hoc est secundum spiritum verba
Super Ioh. cap. 6. Ho^. 46.
mea audienda sunt. Qui secundum carnem audit, nihil lucratur, nihil vtilitatis
accipit. Et paulo post. Quid est aute^ carnalit er intelligere? simpliciter
vtres dicuntur, neque aliud quippiam excogitare. Misteria omnia interioribus
oculis consid^ra^da sunt, hoc est spiritualiter. That is to say. The flesh
profits nothing: that is, my words must be understand after the spirit. He
that understands them after yt flesh wynneth nothing, nor takes any profit.
And a little after What means this, to understand after the flesh or carnally?
verily to All misteryes must be considered spiritually.
take the things simply as they are spoken, and to think no other thing. All
mysteries or Sacraments must be considered with the inward eyes, that is to
say, spiritually.

And after he expounds him self on this manner. Interiores autem oculi vt
panem viderint, creaturas transuolant, and non de illo pane a pistore cocto
cogita^t: sed de eo qui dixit se pane^ vitae, qu^ per misticum pane^
significatur. That is to say. The inward eyes as soon as The plain saying of
Chrysostom.
they see the bread, they pass over the creatures, and think not of that
bread which is baken of the baker, but of him that called him self the bread
of life which is signified by the mystical or sacramental bread. Would you
have him say any more? he tells you plain, that Christ which is the very
bread of life, is signified by this sacramental bread. And that is the thing
which our Bishops so fleshly deny now a days, which thing yet you may see
the old fathers conclude with one assent. Notwithstanding yet I will allege mo
old Doctors, so that from hence forward they may be ashamed to call it new
learning.

Fulgentius says. In illis enim carnalibus ^u^pentius. (...). Lib. de (...).
(tempore legis) victimis, significatio fuit carnis Christi, quam pro peccatis
nostris, and ipse sine peccato fuerat oblaturus, and sanguinis quem erat
effusurus in remissionem peccatorum nostrorum. In ^sto autem sacrificio
gratiarum actio atque commemoratio est carnis Christi quam pronobis obtulit,
and sanguinis quem pro nobis idem Deus effudit. That is to say. In these
carnal sacrifices (in the time of the law) was a signification of the flesh of
christ which he without sin, should offer for our sins, and of the blood
which he should shed out in remission of our sins. But in this sacrifice The
Sacrament of Christ's body is a thanks Seuyng.
is a thanks geuyng and remembrance of the flesh of Christ which he offered
for us, and of the blood which the same God shed out for us. First note that he
calls it a sacrifice which notwithstanding is but a remembrance of that
sacrifice offered on the cross once for all, as it is proved before out of
Chrysostom. Then he plainly calls it a thanks geuyng, and remembrance of
Christ's flesh and blood: and so concludes with us. Nevertheless because
Sophisters would soon think to avoid this place, I will allege one other
saying of the same author, which they shall never be able to avoid.

Fulgentius says, as Haymo testifies. Hic calix nouum Testamentu^ est:
Fulgentius.
id est, hic calix quem vobis trado nouum Testamentum significat. That is to
say This cup or chalice is the new Testament: That is, this cup or chalice This
cup is the new Testament. is as much as this cup signifies the new testament.
which I deliver you does signify the new Testament. In this place he does
plainly show his mind, which can not be anoyded. For even as the cup is the
new Testament, so is the bread the body. Now the cup does but signify the new
Testament, and therefore I may conclude that the bread does but signify the
body.

Eusebius says. Quia corpus assu^ptum ablaturus erat ex ocul^s nostris
Eusebius.
and sideribus allaturus, necessarium erat vt nobis in hac die sacramentum
corporis and sanguinis consecraret, vt colleretur iugiter per misterium quod
semel offerabatur in precium. That is ta say, Because he would take away out of
our eyes the body that he took and carry it into heaven, It was necessary that
in this time he should consecrate to us the sacrament of his body and blood
that that which was once offered for the price of our redemption, might
continually be honored through the mystery.

To consecrate a thing, is to aply it Consecrat.
unto an holy use. Here you may see ye he calls it the sacrament of his body
and blood, which body is carried up in the heaven: And also he calls it a
mystery which is enough for them that will see.

Also Druthmarius, expounds these words this is my body on this Druthmarius.
manner: Hoc est corpus meum in misterio. That is to say: this is my body in a
mystery. I think you know what a mystery means, Christ is crucified every
day in a mystery: that is to say every day his death is represe^ted by the
sacraments of remembrance. The Mass is Christ's passion in a mystery: that
is to say: the Mass does represent his passion and keeps it in our memory.
The bred is Christ's body in a mystery: that is to say, it represents his
body that was broken for us, and keeps it in our remembrance.

You have heard all ready the mind of the doctors how the sacrament is
Christ's body. And now I shall show you how the sacrament is our body, which
does not a litell help to the understanding of these words which are in
controversy. The sacrament The Sacrament how it is our body.
of the altar is our body as well as it is Christ's body. And even as it is
our body, so is it Christ's. But there is no man that can say that it is our
natural body in deed, but only a figure, sign, memorial or representation
of our body. Wherefore it must also follow, that it is but only a figure,
sign, memorial or representation of Christ's body. The first part of this
argument may thus be proved S. Austen writing in a sermon says on this manner.
Corpus ergo Christi si vultis intelligere, apostolum audite dice^tem,
Augustinus in sermon ad^fantes.
Vos estis corpus Christi and me^bra. 1. Cor. 12. Si ergo estis corpus Christi
et membra, misterium vestrumque in me^sa Dominipositum est, misterium Domini
accipitis, ad id quod estis, Amen respondetis, and respondendo subscribitis.
That is to say: If you will understand the body of Christ, hear ye apostle
which says, ye are the body of Christ and members. 1 cor. 12. therefore if ye
be the body of Christ and members, your mystery is put upon the Lords table
yereceiue the mystery of the Lord, unto ye you are, you answer Amen And in
aunswering subscribe unto it. Here may you see that the sacrament is also our
body, and yet is not our natural body, but only our body in a mystery, that
is to say, a figure, sign, memorial or representation of our body, for as the
bread is made of many grains or corns, so we (though we be many) are one
bread and one body. And for this property and similitude it is cauled our body
and bears the name of the very thing which it does represent and signify.

Again S. Austen says. Quia Christus passus est pro nobis, commenda Aug. in
sermo. de sacraferia pascha.
uit nobis in isto sacramento corpus et sanguinem suum, quod etiam fecit and
nos ipsos. Nam et nos ipsius corpus facti sumus, and per misericordiam ipsius
quod accipimus nos sumus. Et postea dicit. Ia^ in nomine Christi tanquam ad
calicem Domi ni venistis, ibi vos estis in mensa and ibi vos estis in calice.

That is, because Christ has suffered for us, he has betaken unto us in this
sacrament his body and blood which he has also made even our selves. For we
also are made his body, and by his mercy we are even the same thing that we
receive. And after he says, now in yt name of Christ ye are come, as a man
would say, to the chalice of the Lord, there are ye upon the table and there
are ye in yt Here you may see that y^ Sacrament is our body.
chalice. Here you may see, that the sacrament is our body. And yet it is not
our natural body, but only in a mystery as it is before said.

Furthermore S. Austen says. Hu^c itaque cibum and potum societatem vult
intellegi corporis and membrorum suorum August. de sacra feria pascha.
quod est sancta ecclesia in praedestinatis et vocatis, et iustificatis, et
glorisicatis sanctis and fidelibus eius. Huius rei sacrame^tum alicubi
quotidie, alicubi certis inter vallis dieru^ in dominico preparatur, and de
mensa Domini sumitur, quibusda^ ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium. Res vero ipsa
cuius est omni homini ad vitam nulli ad exitium, quicu^que cius particeps
fuerit. That is to say, he will that this meat and drink should be understand
to be the fellowship of his body and members, which is the holy Church in the
predestinate, and called and justified and glorified his saints and faithful,
The sacrament of this thing is prepared in some place daily, and in some place
at certain appointed days, as on ye Sunday And it is received from S. Austen
calls it by the name of Sacrament meaning the figure, sign or token of
Christ's body^
the table of the Lord, to some unto life, and to some unto destruction, but
the thing it self whose sacrament this is, is received of all men unto life
and of no man to destruction, who so ever is partaker of it. Here does S.
Austen first say, that this sacrament is the fellowship of his body and
members which are we. And yet it is not our natural body, as is before said.
And then he says, that the Sacrament of this thing is received of some unto
life and salvation, and of some unto death and damnation, for both faithful
and unfaithful may receive the sacrament. And after he says, that the thing
it self whose sacrament it is, is received of all men unto life, and of no man
unto destruction, who so ever is partaker of it. And of this saying it must
needs follow, that only the saythfull eat Christ's body, and the unfaithful
eat not: For he is received of no man unto destruction. And of this it must
also follow that the sacrament is not Christ's body in deed, but only in a
mysterye, for if the sacrament were The w^ked and unfaithful do not receive
the body of Christ and yet they receive the Sacrament to their damnation.
his natural body, then should it follow, that y^ unfaithful should receive
his body, which is contrary to the mind of S. Austen, and against all truth.
Thus have we sufficiently proved the first part of our argument, that the
sacrament is our body, as well as it is Christ's. And now will I prove the
second part more plainly although it be enough declared all ready, to them
that have ears, that even as it is our body so is it Christ's.

First you shall understand that in the wine which is called Christ's blood,
is admixed water, which does signify the people that are redeemed The Sacrament
as it is our body so it is Christ's
with his blood: so that ye head which is Christ, is not without his body
which is the faithful people, nor the body without his head. Now if the wine
when it ^s consecrated, be turned bodily into Christ's blood, then Note well
this argument.
is it also ne^essarye that the water which is admixed be bodily turned into
the blood of the faithful people. For where as is one consecration must follow
one operation. And where as is like reason, there must follow like mystery.
But whatsoever is signified by the water as concerning the faithful people, is
taken spiritually. Therefore whatsoever is spoken of the blood in the wine,
must also needs be taken spiritually. This reason is not mine, but it is made
by one Bartram upon a 700. years Bartram.
since, when this matter was first in disputation. Whereupon at the instance of
great Charles the Emperor he made a book professing even the same thing that I
do, and proves by The Sacrament is Christ's body in a mystery.
the old Doctors and faithful fathers, that the Sacrament is Christ's body in
a mystery, that is to say, a sign, figure or memorial of his body which was
broken for us, and not his natural body. And therefore that doctrine is new
which other wise teaches, and not mine, which is not mine, but the doctrine of
Christ and of the old fathers of Christ's Church, till Antichrist began to sit
and reign in the temple of God.

Besides that Cyprian says, that the people is annexed in the Sacrament
Cyprianus ad^.
through the mixture of water. Therefore I marvel me much that As water is the
people, so wine is Christ's blood.
they are so contentious and will not see, that as the water is the people, so
the wine is Christ's blood, that is to say, in a mystery, because it
represents Christ's blood, as ye water does the people.

Furthermore Eusebius says: Du^ in sacramentis vino aqua miscetur, Christo
Eusebius.
fidelis populus incorporatur and iungitur, and quandam ei copula perfecta
charitatis vnitur. That is to say. Whiles in the Sacrament water is admixte By
yt ^ture of water, yt faithful people are in corporate with Christ.
with the wine, the faithful people is incorporate and joined with Christ, and
is made one with him, with a certain knot of perfect charity. Now where he
says, that we are joined and incorporate with Christ, what fondness were it
to contend, since we are there only in a mystery, and not naturally: to contend
I say with such pertinacitie that his natural body must be there: and not
rather that he is joined with us, as we are joined with him and both in a
mystery, by the knot of perfect charity.

The young man perceaueth well M. More.
enough that an allegory used in some place is not a cause sufficient to leave
the proper significations of Gods word in every other place and seek an
allegory, and forsake the plain common sense. For he confesses that he would
not so do save for necessity: because (as he says) that the common literal
sense is impossible. For the thing he says that is meant thereby ca^ not be
true: That is to wit, that the very body of Christ can be in the sacrament,
because the sacrament is in many diverse places at once, and was at the Maundy:
that is to wit, in the hands of Christ and every of his Apostles mouths.
And at that time it was not glorified. And then he says that Christ's body not
being glorified, could no more be in two places at once then his own can. And
yet he goes after further, and says no more it can when it is glorified too.
And that he proves by the saying of Saint Austen, whose words be, that the
body with which Christ arose, must be in one place. etc.

Hitherto has M. More reasoned reasonably: but now he begins to ^rith.
decline from the dignity of divinity into the dirtie dregs of vain
sophistrye. For where I say that I must of necessity seek an allegory
because the literal sense is impossible, and ca^ not be true, meaning that it
can not stand with the process of Scripture, but that other textes do of
necessitis constrayne me to construe it spiritually. There catches he this
word (can) and this word (impossible) More is a captious Sophister, (...)
sub^^le Poet, and (...) malicious Papist.
and would make men believe that I meant, it could not be true because reason
can not reach it, but thinks it impossible. And there he triu^pheth (before
the victory) and would know what article of our faith I could assign, in
which reason shall no^driue away the strength of my proof, and make me leave
ye literal sense wherein my proof should stand, and send me to seek an
allegorye that might stand with reason, and drive away ye faith. But now dear
brethren, since I speak not of the impossibility of reason, but of the
impossibility to stand with other textes of Scripture, ye may see yt this
royal reason is not worth a rush. The^ would he feign know the place where S.
Austen so says, which thing although it were hard for me to tell, since I have
not his books to look for it, yet I thank God my memory is not so bad, but
I ca^ show him where he shall find it. And because I think that he is more
accustomed to the Popes laws then to Saint Austens More is better acquainted
with the Popes laws them with S. Austens works.
works (since he is become the Prelates proctour and patron) I say he shall
not fail but find it in his laws de consecratione. And where as he would
wrest the words of S. Austen, which says that the body in which Christ arose,
must needs be in one place: saying that he might mean, not that his body
might not be in diverse places at once, but that it must be in one place, that
is to say, in some one place or other, he speaks (says M. More) nothing of
the sacrament, nor says not his body with which he rose must needs be in one
place, that it can by no possibility be in any more. This seems to some a
goodly gloss, and yet it shall prove but a vain evasion. For if a man would
say that the kings graces body must be in one place, and then an other would
expound ye notwithstanding his words his graces body might be in two places at
once: I think me^ might soon judge that he delighted to delay, and might
say, what need be to determine, that he must be in one place, except he
thought in deed, y^ he might be in no more but only one. And though men might
so argue on other men's words, yet of S. Austens words this must needs follow,
for he brings them in (as God would) by a contrary Antithesis saying: Corpus
in quo resurrexit in vno loco esse oportet, veritas Ad Hi^r^nimum.
autem eius vbique diffusa est. That is to say. His body wherein he rose, must
be in one place, but his truth is dispersed in all places. Where he plainly
concludes by the contrary Antithesis, Christ's body occupies one place only.
that as his truth is dispersed in all places, so must his body needs be in
one place only. As by example, if a man should say: The king his graces body
must needs be in one place, but his power is throughout his realm. Where no
man doubts, but that in saying one place, he means one place only. And
therefore though in some place, ye word must, does not signify such a
necessity as excludes all possibility, yet in this place it does so
signify, as the contrary Antithesis does evidently express.

And where ye say, that he speaks nothing of the sacrament, I would ye should
stick still to that saying. For this is plain, that he speaks of his
natural body, and therefore if he speak not of ye sacrament, then have you
concluded that the sacrament is not his natural body: the contrary whereof you
would have me^ believe. Thus have I showed evidence, both where he shall find
the words of S. Austen, and also that I have rightly alleged them.

Notwithstanding since he makes so much of his painted sheth, I shall allege
him more authority that Christ's natural body is in one place only. Which
thing proved, does utterly conclude yt the Sacrament is not his natural body,
but only a memorial and a representation of the same. And first let us see S.
Austens mind.

S. Austen writing unto Dardanus does plainly prove that the natural August.
ad Bardanu^.
body of Christ must needs be in one place only, and also yt his soul can be
but in one place at once. The occasion of his Epistle is this: Dardanus did
write unto S. Austen for the exposition of those words that Christ spoke un to
the thief saying: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: and wist not how
he should understand it, whether Christ me^t that the thief should be in
Paradise with Christ's soul, or with his body, or with his Godhead: Thereupon
S. Austen writes that as touching Christ's body, that day it was in the
sepulcher. And says What Christ meant by this word Paradise.
that it was not Paradise, although it were in a garden that he was buried. For
Christ (he says) meant of a place of joy: And that was not (says S. Austen) in
his sepulcher: And as for Christ's soul, it was that day in hell, and no man
will say, that Paradise was there. Wherefore (says S. Austen) the text must
needs be understand, that Christ spoke it of his Godhead. Now mark this
Argument of S. Austen, and ye shall see my purpose plainly proved. For seeing he
erpoundeth this text upon Christ's Godhead, because his manhood as touching the
body, was in the grave, and as touching his soul, was in hell: you may soon
perceive, that S. Austen thought that whilst his body was in ye grave, it was
not in Paradise to: and because his soul was in hell, it could not be in
paradise also. And therefore he ver^o fieth the text upon his divinity. For if
he had thought that Christ's body or soul might have been in diverse places at
once, he would not have said, that the text must needs be understand of his
divinity, but it might full well, yea and much better have been understand of
his manhood. Mark well this place which does determine the doubt of this
matter. Notwithstanding the faithful father leaves How S. Austen labors to
prove that Christ's body might not be in ino places at once then in one.
not the matter on this fashion, but also takes away such sonde imaginations
as would cause men to surmise, that Christ's body should be in more places at
once then one. For he says. Cauendum est ne it a diuinitatem astruamus
hominis, vt veritate^ auser amus corporis. Non est autem consequens vt quod in
Deo est, it a sit vbique. Nam and de nobis veracissime Scriptura dicit, quod in
illo viuimus, mouemur and sumus. Nec tame^ sicut ille, vbique sumus, sed aliter
homo ille in Deo, quonia^ and aliter Deus in illo homine, proprio quodam and
singulari modo. Vna enim persona Deus and homo est, and vtrumque est vnus
Christus Jesus, vibque per id quod Deus est, in coelo autem per id quod homo.
That is to say we must beware that we do not so affirm the divinity of the
man, that we take away the truth of his body. For it follows not that the
thing which is in God should be in every place as God is. For the Scripture
does truly testify on us, that we live, move and be in him. And yet are we not
in every place as he is. Howbeit, that man is otherwise in God, and God
otherwise in that man by a certain peculiar and singular way: For God and man
is one person, and both of them one Christ Jesus which is in every place in
that he is God, and in heaven, in that he is man. Here S. Austen If we affirm
that the body of Christ is in many places at one mstant, the^ we should take
away the truth of his body.
does say, that if we should grant Christ to be in all places as touching his
manhood, we should take away the truth of his body. For though his manhood be
in God, and God in his manhood, yet it follows not, that it should be in
every place, as God is. And after he concludes that as touching his Godhead
he is in every place, and as touching his manhood he is in heaven. What need
he to make these words and Antithesis, but because he thought verily that
though his Godhead were in every place, yet his manhood was in heaven only.

But yet this holy Doctor goes further (so that they may be ashamed Augustine.
ibide^s.
of their party) and says. Secundum hominem namque in terra erat, non in coelo
(vbi nunc est) quando dicebat, nemo ascendit in coelu^ nisi qui descendit de
coelo, filius hominis qui est in coelo. That is to say, as touching his manhod
he was in the earth and not in heaven (where he now is) when he said, no man
ascends into heaven but he ye descended from heaven, the son of man which
is in heaven. Now I trust you will be content and let the truth spread. For I am
sure it is not possible for you to avoid it for he says, that as touching
his manhood he was in the earth and not in heaven, when he spoke those words:
and so proved that he was not in mo places at once then only one place. For
else if S. Austen had thought ye he could have been in mo places at once then
one with his body, then might he not have said, that he was in earth and not in
heaven. For then a man might sone have deluded him and have said Austen
you can not tell, for he may be in every place. But they that so think after
S. Austens mind, do take away ye truth of his natural body, and make it a
very fantastical body: from the which heresy God deliver his faithful.
Besides this S. Austen does say. Christum Dominum nostrum vnigenitum DEI
^ilium equale^ patri, eundemque hominis filium, quo mayor est pater, and vbique
totum presentem esse non dubites tanquam Deum, and in eodem templ^ DEI esse
verum DE VM, and in aliena part coeli propter corpo ris modum. That is to say,
doubt not Christ as touching his Godhead is in all places.
but that Christ our Lord the only begotten son of God equal to the Father
and the same being the son of man wherein the father is greater, is hole
present in all places as touching his Godhed and dwells in the same temple of
God, as God, and in some place of heaven for the condition of his very body.
Here is it evident by S. Austens words that as touching his godhed he is in
all places, and as touching his manhood he is only in heaven, yea and not that
only, but that he being in heaven as touching the measure, nature, condition,
and qualitye of his natural body, is only in one certain place in heaven, and
not in many places at once. Thus much is proved out of S. Austen.

This truth is not only proved by S. Austens authority, but also by ye noble
clerk Fulgentius which writes on this manner. Vnus idemque homo Fulgentius.
localis ex homine, qui est Deus immensus ex patre, vnus idemque secundum
bumanam substa^tiam absens coelo cum esset in terra, and derelinquens terram,
cum ascendisset in coelum. Secundum d^^inam vero immensamque substantiam, nec
coelu^ dimittens cum de coelo descendit, nec terram deserens, cum ad coelum
ascendit: Quod ipsius Domini certissimo sermon potest cognosci, qui vt localem
ostenderet suam humanitatem, dicit Discipulis suis: Ascendo ad patrem meum and
patrem vestrum, Deum meum and Deum vestrum, De Lazaro quoque cum dixisset,
Lazarus mortuus est, adiunxit dicens, and gaudeo propter vos (vt credatis)
quonia^ non era^ ibi immensitatem vero suae di^initatis ostendens Discipulis
dicit: Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque ad consummationem s^culi. Quomodo autem
ascendit in coelum nisi quia localis and verus est homo, aut quomodo adest
fidelibus suis, nisi quia ide^ immensus and verus Deus est. That is to say. The
same one man is local (that is to say, contained in one place) as touching his
manhood, which is also God unmeasurable from the father: the same one man as
touching the substance of his manhood, was absent from heaven, when he was in
earth, and forsakyng the earth, when he ascended into heaven, but as touching
his godly and unmeasurable substance neither forsook heaven when he descended
from heaven, nor forsook the earth, when he ascended unto heaven. Which may be
known by the most sure word of the Lord which to show his humanity to be
local (that is to say, contained in one place only) did say unto his
Disciples. I asce^d unto my father and your father, my God and your God, of
Lazarus also when he said, Lazarus is dead, he said further, I am glad for
your sakes (that you may believe) for that I was not there. And again, showing
the unmeasurableness of his Godhead, Christ ascended into heaven, because he
is local and a very man.
he said unto his Disciples, behold I am with you unto the worlds end, how
did he ascend into heaven, but because he is local and a very man? Or how is
he present unto his faithful, but because he is unmeasurable and very God?
Here may you conclude by the authority of this Doctor also, that Christ's body
is only in one place at once. For he says, that Christ as touching his
manhood is local: that is to say, contained in one place only. And that he
proves by the Scripture even of Christ's own words. Now if this be true (as
my conscience does testify, how so ever other men shall Judge) then must it
needs follow that his natural body can not be in the Sacrament. And the
authority, I am sure no man can avoid, it is so plain.

Now as for his natural reasons be More.
not worthy the reasonyng. For first that the body of Christ unglorified could
no more be in ij. places at once then his own can, because he is a natural
body, as he is. I will not examine no comparison between there ij. bodies: but
if Christ would tell me that he would each of both their bodies to be in fiftene
places at once, I would believe him, and would never ask him whether he would
first glorify them or not. But I am sure glorified or unglorified, if he said
it, he is able to do it. For the matter is not impossible to God.

Truth it is, that if Christ so said and in so saying so me^t, there is no
doubt, Frith.
but he were able so to do. But that he in deed so grossly meant ye shall
never prove. And in deed if he had so meant that his own body natural should
have continued in the Sacrament which is the meat of the soul through faith,
and not of the body by eating it, and may as well be eaten through faith
although it remain in heaven, as if it were here present to our mouths: if I
say he had so meant, the^ would he never have given us such Scriptures as he did.
For I say, that this gross imagination may not stand with the process of the
Scripture which is received as it shall appear by certain textes.

1. First where our Savior says: ye flesh profits nothing. The weight The
flesh profits nothing.
of those words does compel us to understand our matter spiritually, for by
this short sentence we are no less plucked back from the carnal eating, the^
was Nichodemus that he should not once dream of the carnal regeneration, when
Christ said unto him: that what soever was of yt flesh was flesh. For this is a
plain conclusion, that when Christ said, the flesh profits nothing, he meant
it even of his The flesh of Christ profits much if it be eaten with faith.
own flesh that it could not profit (as they understood him) to be eaten with
the teeth. Albeit it does much profit to be slain for our redemption and
eaten thorough faith. Which thing we may do, although his natural flesh be not
in ye sacrament. For I may as well believe in him (though he be in heaven) as if
he were in earth and in the Sacrament, and before mine eyes. And that Christ
spoke these words of his own body, it is plain by S. Austens words writing
upon the same place: And therefore he says, August. tract. super 6. (...).
that they must be understand spiritually, and adds: if thou understand them
spiritually, they are spirit and life. And though thou understand the^
carnally, yet nevertheless they are spirit and life: But unto thee they are not
spirit and life, which understand not spiritually, those things that I have
spoken.

Also Athanasius says. Spiritus est qui viuificat, caro no^ prodest quicque
verba Athanasius 3. lib. qui dix. verb.
quae ego locutus sum, spiritus sunt and vita. Nam and hoc loco vtrumque de
seipso dicit carnem and spiritum, and spiritu^ ab eo quod est secundum carnem
distinxit, vt non solum visibile, sed etiam inuisibile quod in ipso erat
credentes discant, quod and ea quae dicit no^ sunt carnalia, sed spiritualia.
Quod enim comede^tibus suffecisset corpus, vt totius mundi alimonia fiat? Sed
ea propter meminit ascensus filij hominis in coelum vt illos a corporali
cogitatione auelleret, and posthac discant carnem dictam cibum coelestem
superne venie^tem and spiritualem alimoniam qua^ ipse det, na^ quae locutus sum
(inquit) vobis spiritus sunt and vita. That is to say, it is the spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the words which I speak unto you,
are spirit and life. For in this place also he means both of his own
flesh and his own spirit, and he divided the spirit from the flesh: that
they might know through faith not only ye visible part but also ye visible
part ye was in him, and also that the words which he spoke were not carnal,
but spiritual. For what body should have suffised to have been the meat of all
yt world? And eue^ therefore did he make mention of the Ascension of the son
of man into heaven, that he might withdraw them from the bodley imagination,
that they might hereafter learn, that the flesh was called heavenly meat
which comes from above and spiritual meat which he would give. For (says
Christ) the words that I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life. Here you
may see that Christ spoke it of his own flesh, and meant plainly that it did
nothing profit, as infidelles did understand him. For else it gives life, as
it is received of the faithful in a mystery. For as Bartram says, in l^ram.
this mystery of the body and blood, is a spiritual operation which gives The
bread and wine in the Sacrament why they are called mysteries.
life. Without the which operation those mysteries do nothing profit, for
surely (says he) they may feed the body, but the soul they can not feed.

2. Besides that the Scripture says, that, that enters in by ye mouth does
not defile a man, for as Christ says, it is cast forth into the draught. And
by the same reason it follows that it does not sanctify or make a man holy.
But the Sacrament enters in by the mouth: therefore it does follow that (of it
self) it does not sa^ctifie or make holy, and of this text should follow two
inconveniences, if the Sacrament were the natural body of Christ. First it
should follow that the body of If the Sacrament of the body of Christ, were his
natural body, the^ note what inconveniences must follow
Christ should not sanctify the faithful because it enters in by yt mouth.
And again it should follow, that the body of Christ should be cast out into the
draught, which thing is abominable. Wherefore it must needs follow, that the
Sacrament can not be his natural body.

3. Furthermore Christ would not suffer that devout woman which of love sought
him at his sepulture, to touch his natural body, because she lacked a point of
faith, and did not count him to be equal with his father. And much more it
shall follow The wicked may not nor can not eat the body of Christ.
that the wicked which have no faith nor love toward him, shall not be
suffered to eat his flesh with their teeth, and swallowe it into their
unclean bodies: for that were much more then to touch him. And yet
notwithstanding they receive and eat the Sacrament. Whereupon it should follow,
if the sacrament were his natural body, that they should in deed eat his
body: which thing may be counted a blasphemye against God. Moreover Christ
says, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in
him. Now we The wicked eat the Sacrament, but yet dwell not in Christ.
know right well that the wicked do eat the Sacrament, and yet neither dwell
in Christ, nor Christ in them. Wherefore it must follow that the Sacrament is
not the very flesh of Christ. And surely I can not excuse them of blasphemye,
which so directly contrary Christ's words.

How can you avoid these textes which Christ speaks unto his disciples
saying: yet a little while am I John. 6.
with you, and then I depart to him that sent me. And again: It is expedient
John. 6.
for you that I depart. For except that I depart, that comforter shall not
come unto you. And again he says: I forsake the world and go John. 6. Math.
26. Mark. 14. John. 12.
to my father. And to be short he says: Poor men ye shall ever have with you,
but me shall you not ever have. Now we know right well that his Godhead is in
all places, and that as touching his Godhead he forsook not the world, when
he ascended unto his father. Wherefore it must needs follow that he forsook it
as touching his flesh and manhood. And thereto agrees the expositions of S.
Austen and Fulgentius before alleged, yea and al other old faithful fathers.
Now if he have forsaken the world as touching the presence of his natural
flesh and manhood (as all Doctors define) then meant he not that his natural
flesh should be present in the Sacrament, to be eaten with our teeth: And
therefore though Christ so tell you, yet must you take him as he means, or
else you be begyled. For if ye think that God both may and will fulfill and
verifye all things according to the letter as he speaks them, I may call you
an obedient man, as S. Bernard does his Monk Adam. And may say (as he does)
that if that be the right way, so simply to receive all thing, we may put out
the text of Scripture which warns us to be wise as Serpents. For the text
following is sufficient, which bids us to be simple as Doves.

Why does your mastership grant a necessary allegorye, when Paul says, Christ
is a stone, or when Christ says that he is a door? The scripture says he is
both twain, and sith God so says, he is able so to make it. And therefore by
your reason we shall need none allegorye in all scripture, and then he that is
most simple and foolish, may be counted most faithful. And so shall we need
no faithful fathers to expound the text, but it shall be most merit, to
believe the letter. This I deny not, but that God could have done it if he had
so intended, when he spoke the words: But now ye scripture standing as it
does, I think he can not do it. As by example: I think that God by the blood
of his son Christ might have saved all men, both faithful and unfaithful,
if he had so intended, and that it had so pleased him. But now the Scriptures
God may do all thing but yet so as he cannot deny his truth, neither restore
virginity. etc. John. 3.
standing as they do, I say he can not do it, and that it is impossible for
him. For then he might make his son a liar which says: He that believes not
is damned. And again: He that believes not shall not see life, but the wrath
of God abides upon him. And even as it is impossible to stand with the
process of Scripture, (wherein God has declared his will) that the unfaithful
should be saved although God might have done it at the first if he had so
would. Likewise it is impossible, the Scriptures standing as they do, that the
natural body of Christ should be present to our The natural body of Christ
is not present to our teeth in the Sacrament.
teeth in the Sacrament. And as for our faith, it needs not to have him
present in the bread. For I may as well eat him and drink him through faith,
that is to say, believe in him, as though he were as present in the Sacrament,
as he was hanging on the Cross.

1. And because you say, that my natural reasons be not worth the reasoning. I
will allege you some more, to see what you can say to them. First Arguments to
prove that Christ's natural body is not in the Sacrament of his body and blood.
every sacrament is the sign of an holy thing: but the sacrament of the altar
is a sacrament (as all faithful me^ confess) ergo it must follow that the
sacrament of the altar is the sign of an holy thing. Now if it be the sign of
an holy thing, then it is not the holy thing it self which it does signify
and represent. Why should we then fear, to call that bread a figure, that is
to say, a sacrament of that holy body of our Lord and Savior.

2. Besides that I would know of what necessity or profit his flesh must be
present in the sacrament. For the presence of his flesh can no more profit
us, then does the remembrance of his body, but this remembrance may as well be
done by the sacrament, as though his body were present. And therefore ^ith God
and nature make naught in vain, it follows consequently, yt his natural
flesh is not there, but only a memorial thereof.

3. Furthermore the end and final cause of a thing is ever better then those
things which are provided for the end (as the house is better then the lyme,
stone, and timber, which are provided for the house) but the end and final
cause of the sacrament is the remembrance of Christ's body: and thereupon it
must follow that if the sacrament be his natural body, that the remembrance
of Christ's body should be better then his body it self. Which thing is to be
abhorred of all faithful men.

4. It were fondnes to feign that the soul did otherwise eat then do the
Angels in heaven, and their meat is only the Joy and delectation that they
have of God and of his glory, and even so does the soul which is here upon the
earth eat through faith the body of Christ which is in heaven. For it deliteth
and rejoices whiles The joyful eating of Christ, is ^y faith.
it understands through faith, that Christ has taken our sins upon him,
and pacified the fathers wrath. Neither it is necessary that for that or for
this cause, that his flesh should be present. For a man may as well love and
rejoice in the thing, which is from him and not present, as though it were
present by him of that manner.

5. Moreover the bread is Christ's body, even as ye breaking of ye bread is the
death of his body. Now the breaking of bread at the maundy is not the very
death of Christ's body, but only a representatio^ o^ the same (al be it the
mind through faith does spirituallye behold his very death) and even likewise
that natural bread is not the very body of our Lord, but only a sacrament,
sign, memorial, or representation of this same, albeit through the monision
thereof ye mind through faith, does spiritually behold the very body: And
surely thereof if a man be faithful, the sprite of God works in his heart very
sweetly at his communion.

6. Finally, it was not lawful to eat or drink the blood not only of man
but also of a brute beast, and the Apostels them selves moved by ye rule of
Charity, did institute y^ me^ should abstain from blood, somewhat sau^ ring
the infirmity of y^ Jews. Now The Apostles did orde^e that we should abstain
from blood, meaning all natural blood.
if the Apostels had taught (as ye do) that in the sacrament his very flesh
and blood is eaten and drunk with the teeth and mouth of faithful and
unfaithful, what could have been a greater occasion to have excluded the Jews
from Christ's faith even at once? Think you that Apostles would not have been
to scrupulous to have dronke^ his very blood? seeing it was so plain against
Moses law if they had understand him so grossly as ye do? Peter had a cloth
sent Acts. 10.
down from heaven, in which were all manner of beasts forbidden by ye law,
and was commanded to slay and eat them. And he answered, God The wine in the
Sacrament is no natural blood.
forbid for I never eat any unclean thing, meaning thereby that he never eat
any thing forbidden by the law. Whereof it must needs follow that either he
never recei^ed the sacrament (which is plain false) or else that he more
spiritually understood the words of Christ's maundie, then ye falslye feign.
For it was plainly forbidden by the law, to eat or drink any manner of blood.
And I know Objection.
but one reason that they have which they count insoluble: how ^e it by Gods
grace we shall sone avoid it. There reason is this, Paul says, he that
eats and drinks this sacrament unworthily, shall be gilty of the body and
blood of the Lord. Now say they, how should they be gilty of the Lords body and
blood which receive it unworthily? except it were the very body and blood of
the Lord?

This argument I say, is very weak and slender. For I can show Solution.
many examples by the which it may be dissolved for he that despises the
kings seal or letters offends against his own person, and yet the letter
or seal is not his own person. He that violently plucketh down his graces
arms or breaks his broad seal with a furious mind or violence, commits
treason against his own person. And yet his arms To pull down violently the
kings arms is treason against his own person, and yet the arms are not the
kings person.
and broad seal are not his own person. He that clippeth the kings coin
commits treason against ye kings person and the common wealth, and yet the
money is neither his graces person nor the common wealth. And therefore your
argument is but weak and slender For even as a man does offend against the
princes person by dispising his arms, seal or letters, So does a man offend
against Christ's body and blood, by abusing the sacrament of his body and
blood, although he be not there present, as ye kings person is not present in
his arms, seal or letters.

Besides that S. Paul says that every man which prays or prophecieth with
covered head shameth his head and his head is Christ: shall we therefore Imagine
that Christ is naturallye in every man's head? as your argument concludes For
soth that were a pretty fantasy. Finally S. Austen To be negligent in the
hearing of the word of God is a great offense
says y^ he does no less sin which negligently hears ye word of God then
does the other which unworthily receives ye sacrament of Christ's body and
blood. Now if this be true, then is your reason not worth a rishe For Christ's
natural body is not in ye word which is preached, as all men know. And yet he
sins no less that negligently hears it, then does he, that unworthily
receives the sacrament. And thus you see their insoluble argument easily
dissolved.

But now must this young man consider again that him self confesses, M. More.
that the cause for which him self says that Christ in so saying did so
mean, is because that if he should have meant so, it was impossible to God to
bring his meaning about: that is to say, that Christ's body might be in two
places at once. And therefore but if he prove that thing impossible for God to
do, else he confesses that God not only said it but also me^t it in deed. And
yet over this, if Christ had never said it, yet doubtted I nothing, ^ut he is
able to do it, or else were there s^m what that he could not do: And then were
God not almighty.

Here M. More would mire me with his sophestrie, and with wiles would Frith.
win his spores. For as he before did discant on these words, can and
impossible, and would have made men believe that I meant it could not be, because
it could not be by reason and that I meant impossible because reason could not
reach it. So now he disputes with like manner of sophistication co^cluding
that I confess that it is impossible and can not be, because that if God
should have meant it was impossible for God to bring his meaning about. Dear
brethren M. More is a quarelyng brabler.
this babelyng is sufficiently discused all ready. For I meant not that it was
impossible For God to bring it about If he had so meant, but I meant that it is
impossible to stand with the process of the scripture which we have received.
And I say more over, that though it was possible for God to have done it (if
it had pleased him) yet now the scripture thus standing, it is impossible for
him to do it for then he must make his son a liar. And I say, that if he had
so meant as the letter stands, that he would the^ have given us other
scripture, and would not have said that he must depart to him that sent him,
with other textes as are before rehearsed.

And where M. More says that if there were sumwhat y^ he could not do, than
were God not almighty. I say it is a shame for our prelates that they have
gotten such an ignorant procture to defend them. And I am M. More an ignorant
proctor, for the Clergy.
sure that they them selves could have said much better: for else how should
they instruct other and lead them in the right way? if they them selves were
so rude and unlearned, should they not know what this means ye God is
almighty which is a piece of the first article of our Creed, then how should
there ship have have any sure flight? More thinks that God is cauled
almighty, because he can do all things. And then indeed^ it should follow that
he were not almightye for all things he can not do, he can God is almighty,
and yet cannot do all things.
not save the unfaithful, he can not restore virginity once violate, says S.
Thomas. and also (as I remember) S. Hierome writing of virginity unto Paul
and Eustochium: he can not sin says Dunce: he can not deny him self says
S. Paul. 2. Timo. 2.
Now if this man's leraning were alow^d the^ might not God be almightye, because
there is somewhat yt he can not do: but they that are acustomed with
scripture, do know that he is called almightye, not because he can do all
things: but because there God is said to be almighty because there is no
supenour power above him, and he can do all that he will.
is no superior power above him, but that he may do all that he will: and all
that his pleasure is to do that may he bring to pass, and no power is able to
resist him, but he has no pleasure nor will to make his son a liar nor to
make his scripture false, and in deed he may not do it. And yet
notwithstanding he abides almighty, for he may do all that he will.

Then M. More touching the reason M. More.
of repugnaunce says, that many things may seem repugnaunt both to him and me
which things God sees how to make them stand together well enough, and adds
such blind reasons of repugnau^ce as induce many men into a great error: some
ascribyng all thing unto destiny without any power of ma^s frewill at all, and
some giving all to man's own will, and no foresight at all to the providence of
God, and all because the poor blind reason of man can not see so far, as to
perceive how Gods prescience and man's frewill can stand together, but seem
clearly to be repugnaunt.

As for his digression of man's freewill Frith.
I will not greatly wrestle with him. But this one thing I may say, that if the
son of God deliver us, then are we very free. And where the John 8. 2. Cor. 3.
spirit of God is, there is freedom: I mean not freedom to do what you
will, but freedom from sin, that we may be the servants of righteousness.
But if we have not the Roma. 6.
spirit of Christ, then will I say with S. Austen, that our freewill is
wretched, and ca^ do naught but sin. And Aug. de spiritu and litera.
as touching such textes of repungnancy, if they be so diffuse that man's
reason, (which is the light of his understanding) can not attain to set them
together, then were you best to make them none articles of our faith. For I
think as many as are necessary unto our salvation, are contained The articles
in our Creed are as many as are necessary for our salvation.
in the Creed which I think every man believes. I beseech you lay no bigger
burden upon us then those faithful fathers did which thought that sufficient.
And then I am sure, we should have fewer heretics. For I never heard of
heretic that ever held against any article of our creed, but all that ye
defame, by this name, are only put to death, because they say that we are not
bound to believe every point that the laws and tyranny of the clergy allow
and maintain. Which thing how true it is (blessed be God) is meetely well
known already. For else had I and many more been dead ere this day.

I wot well that many good folk M. More.
have used in this matter many fruitful examples, as of one face beholden in
diverse glasses, and in every piece of one glass broken into twenty: and of
one word coming whole to an hundredth ears at once: and the sight of one
little eye present and beholding an whole great country at once, with a
thousand such maruells more, such as those that see them daily done (and
therefore marvel not at them) shall yet never be able, no not this young man
him self, to give such a reason by what mean they may be done, but that he
may have such repugnancy laid against it, that he shall be feign in conclusion
(for the chief and most evident reason) to say, that the cause of all those
things is because God that has so caused them to be done, is almighty of him
self, and may do what him list.

As touching the examples that M. More does here allege, I may soon Frith.
make answer. For they that are like our matter, make clean against him,
and the other can not make for him. The glass I grant is a good example, for
even as the glass does represent the very face of man so does this Sacrament
represent the very body and blood of Christ. And like as every piece of the
glass does represe^t The glass that represents the face, is not the face.
that one face, so does every piece of that Sacrament represent that one body
of Christ. But every man knows right well that though ye glass represent my
face, yet the substance of the glass is not my very face, neither is my very
face in the glass. And even so though the Sacrament do represent the body of
Christ, yet the substance The body of Christ is no more in the Sacrament then
my face is in the glass
of the Sacrament is not his very body, no more then the glass is my face,
neither is his very body in ye Sacrament, no more then my very face is in the
glass and thus this example makes well for us. And for that one word coming
whole to an hundredth ears, I say that word is but a sound and a quality and
not a substance, and therefore it is nothing to our purpose, and can not be
likened to Christ's body which is a substance. And as concerning the sight of
the little eye, I say that though the eye discry and see an whole country, yet
is not that whole country in the eye: but as the country is known by ye
sight of eye (though the country be not in it), so is the death of Christ and
his body breakyng and blood shedyng Christ's death and body breakyng, is
known by the Sacrament and yet it is not the natural body of Christ.
known by the Sacrament, though his natural body be not in it. And thus his
examples make nothing with him, but rather much against him. And where he
says that the young man him self can give him no reason, by what mean they
may be done: I may say unto his mastershyp, that when I was seven year younger
then I am this day, I would have been ashamed if I could not have given an
evident reason at the Austens in Oxford before ye whole University. And albeit
I now vouchsafe, not to spend labor and paper about Aristotle's doctrine, yet
have I so much touched his examples, that he may be werye of them.

Also I can not see why it should be more repugnaunt that one body M. More.
may be by the power of God in two places at once, then that two bodies may be
together in one place at once. And that point I think this young man denies
not.

The being of our body in two places at once is against nature, and Scripture
Frith.
ca^ not allow it. But that two bodies should be in one place seems more
reasonable. For I have good experience that though my body ca^ not be in two
places at once (both in the Tower and where I would have it Frith speaks
mer^ly.
beside) yet blessed be God in this one place, I am not without company. But if
M. More mean that in one proper and several place, may be two bodies at once,
that I will deny, till he have laysure to prove it. And yet at the length I am
sure, his prove shall not be worth a poodyng prick. For I am sure it must be,
Ratione porositatis vt in igne and ferro: nam penetrationem dimensionum nunq
probabit. And then he is as near as he was before.

Now his last reason with which M. More.
he proves it impossible for the body of Christ to be in two places at once,
is this: you ca^ (says he) show no reason why he should be in many places at
once and not in all. But in all places he can not be. Wherefore we must
conclude that he can not be in many places at once. This is a marvelous
concluded argument. I am sure that every child may soon see that this
conseque^t ca^ never follow upon these two premises of this antecedent.

When I made this reason and compiled my treatise I had no regard to Frith.
the cauillations of sutle Sophisters: for I thought no Sophisters should have
meddled with that meat. But nevertheless since now I perceive that they
principally are pouryng on it, seeking some pray to set their teeth a work.
In this book I have somewhat provided for them, and have brought such hard
bones, that if they be to busy, may chance to choke the^. And yet is not the
Argument so feeble as he fayneth. For the first part (if he list to consider the
sense and mind, and be not to curious) where I say that they can show no
reason why he should be in many places and not in all, is thus to be
understand of wise men, that the very reason and cause, that he should be in
many places, must be, because y^ body is so annexed with the Godhead, that it
is in every place as the Godhead is. This I say must be the cause and reason of
his being in many places. And neither you nor no man else can justly assign any
other. Now of this mayor or first proposition thus understand, does the
conclusion follow directly. For if this should be ye cause (as they must needs
grant). And this cause proved false by Scripture: then must they needs grant
that the thing which so follows of this cause, must needs be false. And so
is my purpose proved, and they concluded. As by example, the Astronomers say:
that the natural Astronomers say that the natural course of the Sun is from
the West to the East.
course of the Sun is from the weast to the East. Now if a man should ask
them what is then the cause that we see him daily take the contrary course,
from the East to the Weast against his nature, they answer. Because the
highest sphere (whose course is from the East to the Weast) with his swift
mouyng does violently draw the inferior spheres with him. This is the cause
that they allege, and no man can assign any other. And now since I ca^ prove
this sense false by scripture. And S. Austen (for Scripture says that ye
sphere is fastened Hebr. viij. chap. And S. Austen expoundyng that text
improueth the Astronomers which affirm that it moves, since I say, this cause
is proved false by scripture, they must needs grant that the thing which
follows of this cause must needs be false. And so we may conclude against
them all, that the natural course of the Sun is not from the Weast to the
East (as the Astronomers say). But contrary from the A conclusion against the
Astronomers.
East to the West. And likewise since the cause that Christ's body should be in
many places, is assigned of learned men to be, because his body is so annexed
with the Godhead (which is in every place) that it is also in all places with
it, and no man can assign any other. And that this cause is proved false by
Scripture, for when the women Mark. 14.
sought Christ at his grave, an angel gave the answer that he was not
there. But if his body had been in every place, then the angel lied. Also
Christ said unto his Disciples Luke. 16.
of Lazarus which died at Bethania. Lazarus is dead. And I am glad John. 11.
for your sakes (that you may believe) because I was not there. Now if his body
were in every place as is the Godhead, then Christ said not truly, when he said
he was not there. Therefore since (as I said) this is the cause assigned, and yet
proved false by Scripture, Christ's body is in one place only.
they must needs grant, that the thing which follows of this cause, must
also needs be false. And so we may conclude against the^ all, ye Christ's body
is in one place only. And now you may see how my consequent follows the
premises.

For he can no further conclude, but that we can show no reason M. More.
why he should be in many places at once. What had he won by that? might he
then conclude thereupon, that he could not be in many places at once? As though
it were not possible for God to make his body in two places at once, but if we
were able to tell how, and why, and whereby, and show the reason.

How far I can conclude is showed Frith.
immediately before. For though of the bare words as ye took them, it was hard
to conclude any thing, yet have I now declared them, and so far concluded,
that you ca^ not avoid them. And where he says, that though they can show no
reason, yet I had won naught by it: I think he would be angrye if I should
so answer. But surely they are in good case, for it is enough for them to
say, thus it is, and need never to show any cause or reason What soever the
Papists say, that must stand for reason.
why they so say. For they are the Church and can not err: so that if they
teach contrary things, yet all is good enough. And when they see that no man
can make the Scriptures to agree with their doctrine, then they say, that their
doctrine is true enough, but no man can understand the Scripture. And though
the scripture seem never so repugnant both to them and to us, yet God sees
well enough (say they) how to set them together, and it is possible for God to
make it agree though they cannot tell how. But this doctrine has long enough
deceived us: For men have seen to long with your spectacles, yet now (thanks
be to God) they begin to see with their own eyes. And as touching how this
matter was possible to God, and how it is not possible, is sufficiently
declared before to all that list to look.

How beit as for me (though I be not bounden to it) I am content M. More.
yet to prove, that God may make the body of Christ to be in all places at
once. And because this young man coupleth that proposition with the other: so
will I do to. And I prove therefore that God ca^ make his body be both in many
places at once, and in all places at once, by that that he is almighty, and
therefore can do all thing.

Now is the good man in his old Frith.
dream again, and thinks that God is called almighty, because he can do
all things. And then in deed it should follow that he were not almightye.
More harpeth upon a false string.
For all things he can not do, he can not save the unfaithful, he can not
restore virginity once violated, he can not sin, he can not deny him
self. Now if this man's learning were allowed, then might not God be called
almighty, because there is some what that he can not do. But they that are
accustomed with scripture, do know that he is called almighty, not because he
can not do all things, but because there is no superior power above him, but
that he may do all that he will, and all that his pleasure is may he bring to
pass. But he has no wilpleasure nor power to make his son a liar, and to
make his Scripture false, and yet notwithstanding he abides almighty and may
do what he will. And even as it is impossible to stand with the process of the
Scriptures (wherein God has declared his will) that the unfaithful should be
saved (although at ye first God might have done it, if he had so would)
likewise it is impossible (the Scriptures standing as they do) that the
natural body of Christ should be present to our teeth in the Sacrament. And
as for our faith it needs not to have him present in the bread: For I may as
well eat him and drink him, through faith (that is to say, belief in him)
though he continue still in heaven, as though he were as present in the
Sacrament, as he was hangyng on the cross. But yet his mastership has left
one thing unproven, and that is even the pith of his purpose. For though he
had proved (as he has not) that God by his almightynes More says that God
may do all things, but he does not prove that he has so done.
might make Christ's body in many places, and in all places, and in the
Sacrament, yet he forgotte to prove that God has so done. And therefore albeit
I did grant him (as I will not) that he might so do, yet thereof it does not
follow, that he has so done in deed. For God may do many things which he
does not. And therefore his argument does not prove his purpose. Now if he do
but think that God has so done, I am well pleased and will not put him to the
pain to prove it. For anon ye shall see him so entangled in briers, that he
shall not wit where to become.

But yet this young man goes about to prove the point by scripture. M. More.
For except we grant him that point to be true, he says that else we make the
angel a liar that said, he is not here, and also that else we make as though
Christ's body in his ascension did not go up in the cloud into heaven from
earth, but only hid him self in the cloud, and plays bo peep, and tarried
beneath still. Here in the end he forgets him self so foul, that when he
was a young sophister, he would I dare say, have been full sore ashamed so to
have ouerseene him self at Oxford at a peruise. For ye wotte well that thing
which he says, and which he must therefore prove, is that the body of Christ
can not be in every place at once by no mean that God could make. And the
textes that he brings in for the proof, say no further but that he was not
in all places at once.

There are two things disputed between M. More and me: the one Frith.
is, whether God can make the body Two things disputed between More and Frith.
of Christ in many places, and in the Sacrament. And thereto his mastership
says ye: For God is almightye and may do all things. And I say nay, and
affirm that God is not called almighty because he may do all things, but
because he may do all that he will, and I say that he will not make his son a
liar, nor his scripture false, and that he can not do it and yet abides
almightye. The other thing is this, whether he have done it or not. For albeit
I did grant him that it were possible, yet is he never y^ nere, except the
other ca^ prove that he has done it in deed, or else think that God has so
done. For as I said God can do many things which he does not. And ye
controversy of this doubt is resolved by the Angel and Scripture, which (as
M. More grants him self) proves that he was not in all places at once. And
thereof it ^olloweth, that God has not done it, although it be possible. And
so is his mastership at a point. For if I should grant it never so possible,
yet if scripture prove that it be not so in deed, then is he never the near
his purpose, but much the further from it. And this is eue^ it that I said
before: that it was not possible to stand with the process of the Scripture
which we have received. And now his mastership has granted it him self,
which you may be sure he would not have done if he could otherwise avoid it.
And here you may see how sore I have ouerseene my self.

God forbid that any man should More.
be the more prone and ready to believe this young man in this great matter,
because he says in the beginning that he will bring all men to a concord and a
quietness of conscience. for he brings men to the worst kind of quietness that
may be devised when he tells us as he does, that every man in this matter,
may without perell believe which way he list, Every man may in every matter
without any counsel, sone set him self at rest, if he list to take that way
and to believe as he list him self, and care not how. But and if that way had
been sure S. Paul would never have showed that many were in peril of sickness
and death to, For lack of discerning reverently the body of our Lord in that
sacrament when they came to receive him.

When Christ should depart this world and go to his Father he gave Frith.
his desciples a commandment that John. 15.
they should love each other, saying by this shall all men know, that ye are
Christ's badge is love.
my disciples, if you love each other, as I have loved you. This rule of
charity would I not have broken, which notwithstanding is often in Ieopardie
among faithful folk, for this sacrament of unity, This thing considered, I
thought necessary, to advertise both parties to save this rule of charity,
and proved in ye first chapter of my treatise, that it was That the sacrament
is the natural body, is none article of our faith necessary to be believed upon
pain of damnation.
no article of the faith necessary to be believed under pain of damnation and
therefore that they were to blame that would be contencious for the matter. For
since it is no article of the faith, that may lawfully dissent without all
Ieoperdye: and need not to break the rule of charity, but rather to receive
the other like pore brethren. As by example, Some think that the marriage
between our most redoubted prince and Queen Katerine is lawful and may stand
with y^ laws of God: and some think that it is unlawful and ought to be
disanulled. now if we should for this matter break the rule of charity, and
every man hate his neighbor that would not think as he does, then were we
greatly to blame and in Ieoperdie of condemnation. This I say I proved in ye
first chapter against which More makes no business, and improueth it not,
whereby you may soon gather that it is very true. For else since his mastership
so labors in these other points, he would not have left y^ untouched, you
may be sure. This is the concord that I would bring them unto. And as
touching quietness of conscience, I have known many that have sore been
combred with it And among all, A certain master of art which died in Oxford
confessed upon his death bed, that he had wept lying in his bed an hundredth
nyghtes within one years space, because he could not believe it. Now if he had
known it had been no necessary article, what comfort and quietness should it
have been unto him. Furthermore every man can not so quiet him self, as M.
More Imagines. For there are many that think them selves no small fools,
which when they have received some foolish superstition, either by their own
Imagination, or by believing their gossepes gospel and old wives tales by and
by think the contrary to be deadly sin, and utterly forbidden by Christ's
Gospel. As by example, I know an house of Religion, wherein is a person that
thinks it deadly sin, to go over a Superstition.
straw if it lie a cross. And if their be on the pauement any painted picture
or any Image graven on a dead man's grave, he will not tread upon it, although
he should go a forelong about. What is this but vain superstition wherewith
the conscience is combred and corrupted? May not this be weeded out with the
word of God, showing him that it is none article of the faith so to think, and
then to tell him that it is not forbidden by the scripture, and that it is no
sin? Now albeit his conscience be so cankerd that the rust will not be rubbed
out? yet with Gods grace, some other whom he has enfecte with the same may
come again to Gods word and be cured full well, which should never have been
able to quiet themselves And likewise there are some which believe as your
superstitious hearts have informed them, and these can not quiet themselves,
because they believe ye you have fet your doctrine out of scripture: But when it
is proved to them, and they them selves perceive that scripture says not so,
then can they not be content to think the contrary, and judge it no sin at
all. And as touching S. Paul, suerely ye take him wrong, for I will show you
what process he takes, and how he is to be understood, but because it is not
possible to finishe it in few words, I shall defer it unto ye books end,
and then I shall declare him at large.

And what a facion is this, to say More.
that we may believe if we list, that there is the very body of our Lord in
deed, and then to tell us for a truth, that such a faith is impossible to be
true: For God him self can never bring it about, to make his body be there.

If a man take the bare words of Frith.
Christ, and of simplicity be deceived, and think that his very body be in ye
A man may judge of error: but God only must be judge of condemnation.
sacrament present to their teeth that eat it, I dare not say that he sins
therein, but will refer the matter unto Gods judgment, and yet without
doubt, I dare say he is deceived. As by example: If a man (deceived by the
literal sense) would think that Frith is no hasty judge.
men should preach to fishes (as Saint Fraunces did) because Christ bad his
disciples go preach to all creatures, yet would not I think yt he sinned
therein, but will refer him unto Gods Judgment. But yet I wene every woman
that has any wit, will say that he was deceived.

I am very sure that the old holy More.
doctors which believed Christ's body and blood to be there, and so taught
other to believe, as by there books plainly does apere, if they had thought
either that it could not be there or that it was not there in deed, they would
not for all the good in this world have written as they have done. For would
those holy men (wene you) have taught that men be bound to believe, that the
very body and blood of Christ is there, if the^ selves thought they were not
bound there to? would they make men honor and worship that thing as the very
body and blood of Christ which them selves thought were not it? this gear is
to childish to speak.

This the old Doctors and faithful Frith.
fathers so taught or thought as ye feign of them, is very false. For S. Austen
as I have showed, makes wholly for us. Besides that, there is none of the old
fathers but they call it a Sacrament, a mystery, and mystical meat, which
is not eaten with tooth or belly, but with ears and faith. And touching the
honor and worship done unto it, I say it is plain Idolatry. And I say, that
he falsely reports To honor and worship the sacrament is plain idolatry.
on the old holy doctors. For they never taught men to worship it, neither ca^
he allege one place in any of them all which would have men to worship the
Sacrament. Peradventure he may allege me certain new fellows for his
purpose, as Dunce, Dorbell, Durand and such draffe which by their doctrine have
drenched the world with damnable Idolatry. But I speak of the old holy
fathers and Doctors as S. Auste^, Ambrose, Hierom, Cyprian, Cirille,
Chrysostom, Fulgentius, and such other: these I say, do not teach me^ to
worship it, and by that I dare abide. Of this point I am so sure, that I will
use it for a contrary argument, that his natural body is not there present.
For if the holy fathers before named had taken this text after the letter and
not only spiritually, then in there works they The old holy fathers have
not taught to worship the sacrament.
would have taught men to worship it, but they never taught men to worship this
Sacrament, therefore it follows they took not the text after the letter, but
only spiritually. Now do I provoke you to seek a proof of your purpose.
Nevertheless I will not deny, but y^ these holy Doctors in diverse places, do
call it his body, as Christ and Paul do, and so do we likewise, and say also
that his very body is there eaten. But yet we mean, that it is eaten with
faith (that is to say by believing yt his body was broken for us) and have his
body more in memory Note.
at this maundy then the meat that we there eat. And therefore it has the
name of his body, because the name it self should put us in remembrance of
his body, and that his body is there chiefly eaten, even more (through faith)
then the meat with the mouth. And so are they also to be understand.

Yet one great pleasure he does us, in that he puts us all at liberty, More.
that we may without peril of damnation believe as we did before: that is to
wit, that in the blessed Sacrament the whole substance of the bread and the
wine is transmuted and changed into the very body and blood of Christ. For if
we may without peril of damnation believe thus, as him self grants that we
may, then grants he that we may also without peril of damnation believe
that him self lies, where he says, the truth of that belief is impossible.

The believing of this point, is of it self not damnable, as it is not damnable
Frith.
to think that Christ is a very stone or a vine, because the litterall sense
so says: or if you believe that you ought to preach to fishes and go Christen
them an other while, as ye do belles. And I insure you, if there were no worse
mischief that ensued of this belief, then it is in it self, I would never
have spoken against it. But now there follows upon it damnable idolatry. For
through the belief that this body is there, me^ fall down and worship it. And
thinking to please God, do damnably sin against him. This I say, is the cause
that I so earnestly write against it, to Martin Luther says yt the natural
body of Christ is present in ye sacrament, but he would not have it worshipped
avoid the idolatry that is committed through it. Part of the Germans do
think that his natural body is present in the Sacrament and take the words
fleshly, as Martine taught them. But none of them worship it for y^ Martine
forbyddeth both in his words and works, and so blessed be god they avoid
that ieoperdy which thing if you will also grant and publish but this one
proposition, that it ought not to be worshypped, I promise you I will never
write against it. For then is the ieoperdy taken away, and then I am content
that your mastershyp think I lie. But in the mean season I must think that
ye fill the world with damnable Idolatry. And thus have you also answer unto
ye conclusion which you allege out of the kings graces book. For I say in
your way is no hurt, as long as you do but only believe the bare words of the
text (as S. Fraunces did, when he preached to fishes. But if through the
occasion of those words, ye fall into the worshypping of it, then I say that
in your way is undoubted damnation. And so is there great ieoperdy in your way,
and none at all in ours. For though he were there in deed, yet do not we
sin if we worship it not, for we are not commanded to worship the Sacrament.
But if he be not there, then do you commit damnable Idolatry.

The consecration of the Sacrament.
Now as for an other quietness of every ma^s More.
conscience this young man bids every man be bold, whether the blessed
Sacrament be consecrate or vnconsecrate (for though he most especially speaks
of the wine, yet he speaks it of both) and byddeth us not care, but take it
for all that unblessed as it is because the Priest (he says) can not deceive
us nor take from us the profit of Christ's institution, whether he alter the
words or leave them all vnsayd. Is not this a wonderful doctrine of this
young man? We wotte well all, that the Priest can not hurt us by his oversight
or malice, if there be no fault upon our own party, for that perfection that
lacks on the Priests part, the great mercy of God as we trust of his own
goodness supplyeth. And therefore as holy Chrysostom says, no man can take
harm but of him self. But now if we see the thing disordered our own self
by the Priest and Christ's institution broken, if we then wittyngly receive it
unblessed and unconsecrated, and care not whether Christ's institution be kept
and observed or no, but rekon that it is as good without it as with it, then
make we our selves partakers of the fault and leese the profit of the
Sacrament, and receive it with damnation: not for the Priests fault, but for
our own.

I had thought that no Turk would Frith.
have wrested a man's words so unfaithfully, for he leaves out all the pith
of my matter, for my words are these. I will show you a means how ye shall
ever receive it according to Christ's institution, although the Priest would
withdraw it from you. First ye need to have no respect unto the Priests words
which ministers A mean how we may receive ye sacrament according to Christ's
institution, though the minister be negligent.
it. For if ye remember for what intent Christ did institute this Sacrament,
and know that it was to put us in remembrance of his body breakyng and blood
shedding, that we might give him thanks for it and be as sure of it through
faith according to his promises, as we are sure of the bread by eating of it:
if as I say, ye remember this thing (for which intent only the Priest speaks
those words) then if the Priest leave out those words or part thereof, he can
not hurt you. For you have all ready the effect and final purpose for ye which
he should speak them. And again if he should wholly alter them, yet he ca^ not
deceive you. For then ye be sure that he is a liar, and though you see the
Priest bring you the wine consecrated yet never stick at that. For as surely
shall it certify your conscience and outward The worthy receauer of the
sacrament may consecrate the same to him self.
senses though he consecrate it not (so thou consecrate it thy self: that is
to say, so thou know what is meant thereby and give him thanks) as though he
made a thousand blessings over it. And so I say that it is ever consecrated in
his heart that believes, though the Priest consecrate it not. And contrariwise
if they consecrate it never so much, and thy consecration be not bye, it
helps thee not a rishe. For except thou know what is meant thereby, and
believe, geuyng thanks for his body breakyng and bloudshedyng, it can not
profit thee.

Now where you say, that if we M. More.
see the thing disordered by the Priest, and Christ's institution broken, and
wyttingly receive it, we make our selves partakers of the crime.

I answer that if the reformation thereof lay in our hands, then said Frith.
you truth, but since it is written to private persons which may not reform
this matter, and that the reformation thereof rests only in ye hand of your
Prince and Parliament (for ye error consists not in the misordering of the
matter by one Priest only but rather of the doctrine of them all saving such as
God has lightened) to these private persons I say y^ your doctrine should
sooner be the occasion of an insurrection which we labor to eshew, then any
quieting of them by Christ's doctrine. And therefore since there is an other
way to wood (saving all upright) we will avoid that perylous path. But when
ye see Christ's institution broken and the one kind left out unto the lay
people, why are ye pertaker thereof.

How beit as for his belief that M. More.
takes it no better but for bare bread and wine, it makes him litell matter
consecrated or not, saving that the better it is consecrated the more it is
ever noyous to him that receives it, having his conscience combred with such
an execrable heresy, by which well appears that he puts no difference
between the body of our Lord in the blessed sacrament, and the common bread that
he eats at his dinner, But rather he estemeth it less, for the one yet I
think or he begin, if he lack a priest, he will bless it him self, the other
he cares not as he says, whether it be blessed or no.

What I reacon it more the^ bread Frith.
and wine I will show you here after in declaring the mind of S. Paul upon
this sacrament, and that in the conclusion of this book. And in the mean
season I will say no more but that he belyeth me. And as for their blessings
and consecracion profit not The right consecration to him that receaueth the
Sacrament is faith in Christ's death.
me, except I consecrate it my self with faith in Christ's blood, and with
giving him praise and thanks for his inestimable goodness, which when I was his
enemy reconciled me unto his father by his own death: This consecration, must I
set by, if I will have any profit of his death which ye sacrament represents
unto me. And if I my self do thus consecrate it, then shall I be sure of ye
fruit of his death. And I say again, that as ye Priests do now use to
consecrate it, it helps not the poor comens of a rishe. For their
consecracion should stand in preaching unto them the death of Christ, which
has delivered the^ out of the Egypt of sin and from ye fiery furnace of
Pharao the devil. And as for their wagging of their fingers The Popish
consecration in Latin is not worth a rish.
over it, and saying, vj. or vij. words in latten, helps them nothing at all
for how can they believe by ye means of his words when they know not what he
says? And as touching the common bread that I eat at my dynner, whether I
have a Priest or not, I bless it with my heart (and not with my fingers) and
hartly give God thanks for it. For if I have an hundredth Priests to bless
it, yet am not I excused thereby. For except I bless it my self, it profits
me no more then if it were unblessed. And if I bless it my self, then I care
not The Bishops and their proctour can not tell what a blessyng means.
what the Priest prate. For as long as I understand him not it profits me
nothing, but in good faith I wene the bishops and their proctour wot not what
a blessing means. Therefore dear brethren hearken to me. To bless God, is
to give him praise and thanks for his benefits: To bless a king or a prince
is to
thank him for his kindness, and to pray to God for him that he may long reign
to the laud of God and wealth of his comens. To bless a man's neighbor is to
pray for him and to do him good. To bless my bread or Blessyng what it is?
meat, is to give God thanks for it To bless my self, is to give God
thanks for his benefits that I have received of him, and to pray God that of
his infinite goodness he will increase those gifts that he has given me and
finishe his work which he has begone in me, unto his laud and praise and as
touching this flesh, to fulfill his will in it, and not to spare it but
scurge, cut and burn it, only that it may be to his honor and glory. This is
the form of blessing, and not to wag two fingers over them. But alack, of
this blessing our Bishops be ignorant.

But as for those that are good and faithful folk, and have any M. More.
grace or any sparcle of reason in their heads, will (I verily think) never
to be so far ouerseene, as in this article (the truth whereof God has him
self testified by as many open miracles as ever he testified any one) to
believe this young man upon his barren reasons against the faith and reason
both of all old holy writers and all good Christen people this xv. C. years.

As for the miracles, I marvel not at them, neither may they make me Frith.
the sooner to believe it, for Christ told us before that such delusions should
come, y^ if it were possible, y^ very elect Math. 24.
should be deceived by them. And S. Paul exhorts us to beware of such signs
and wonders: And therefore (...). These. 2.
I do as Moses teaches me when I hear of such a wonder, then straight Deutro.
13.
I look on the doctrine that is annexed with it. If it teach me to refer all
the honor to God and not to creatures, and teach me noghyng but that will stand
with Gods word, then will I say, that it is of God. But if it teach me such
things as will not stand with his word, then will I determine that it is done
by the devil, to delude the people with damnable idolatrye. When Paul and
Barnabas preached at Listra and had done a miracle among them, the people
Acts. 24.
ran and would have done sacrifice unto them. But the Apostles ran among
them and tare their clothes, crying unto them, syrs what do you? we are even
corruptible men as ye are, and preach unto you, that you should leave this
vain superstition, and worship the living God, which made heaven, earth, the
sea, and all that is in them. etc. Here the Apostles refused such honor and
worship. And therefore I am sure they would not suffer their images to have it.
Now when I see a miracle done at any How you may judge true miracles from false.
image, and perceive that it brings men to the worshipping of it self,
contrary to the fact and doctrine of the Apostles, which would not receive it
them selves, I must needs conclude, that it is but a delusion done by the
devil to deceive us and to bring the wrath of God upon us. Even so I say of
the sacrament, since the miracles that are done by it, do make me^ think
otherwise then Scripture will, and cause men to worship it: I doubt not but
they are done by the devil, to delude the people. Thou will peradventure say
that God will not suffer him to abuse the sacrament of his body and blood. Yes
verily, God will suffer it, and does suffer it, to see whether we will be
faithful and abide by his word or not. And marvel not thereof, for God
suffered him to take up the very natural body of his son Christ and set him
on Math. 4.
a pinnacle of the temple. And after he took him up again, and lead him to an
exceeding mountain. And therefore think not but that he has more power over
the Sacrament then he had over Christ's own body. And therefore when they tell
me, lo here is False Ante christ's.
Christ, lo there is Christ (as Christ prophesied) lo he is at this altar,
lo he is at that, I will not believe them.

Nevertheless if I should grant that all ye miracles which were done, and
ascribed unto the sacrament, were very true miracles and done of God him self
(as I doubt not but some of them be true) yet thereupon it does not follow
that the sacrament should be the very natural body of Christ. For we have
evident stories that certain persons have been delivered from bodily diseases
through the Sacrament of baptism. And yet y^ water is not the holy Ghost, nor
the very thing it self whereof it is a sacrament. The shadow of Peter has
Acts. 4.
healed many, and yet was not that shadow Peter's own person. We read also that
napkins and handkerchers were carried from Paul unto them that were sick and
possessed with Acts. 12.
unclean spirits, and they received their health. And yet it were
nevertheless madness, to think ye Paul's body had been actually or naturally
in those things. And therefore this is but a very weak reason, to judge by
the miracles ye presence of Christ's body. And surely you might be ashamed to
make so slender reasons. For God may work miracles through many things which
are not his natural body. And as touching the old Doctors, whom you feign to
make with you, and the truth of your opinion which you say has been believed of
all good Christen people this xv. C. years, is sufficiently declared before,
and proved to be but a point of your old Poetry.

D. Barnes did graciously escape M. Mores hands.
ANd also Friar Barnes albeit M. More.
(that as ye wot well) he is in many other things a brother of this young man's
sect, yet in this, he sore abhors his heresy, or else he lies him self.
For at his last being here he wrote a letter to me, wherein he writes that I
lay that heresy wrongfully to his charge. And show eth him self so sore
grieved therewith, that he says, he will in my reproach make a book against me:
wherein he will profess and protest his faith concerning this blessed
sacrament. But in the mean season it well contenteth me, that Friar Barnes
being a man of more age and of more ripe discretion, and a Doctor of divinity,
and in those things better learned then this young man is, abhors this
yongmans heresy in this point, as well as he likes him in many other.

The more your mastershyppe Frith.
prayseth Doctor Barnes, the worse men may like your matter. For in many
points he does condemn your damnable doctrine, as in his book appears. And
therefore if such credence must be given to him, then much the less will be
given to you. But peradventure you will say, y^ he is to be believed in this
point, although he err in other. Where unto I answer that if you will
consent unto him I would be well apayd and will promise you to wright no more
in The Sacrament may not be worshypped.
that matter. For in this we both agree, that it ought not to be worshipped (yea
and blessed be God all the other whom you call heretics) And so both of us do
avoid Idolatry which you with so great danger do daily commit. And therefore
if you allow his learning then am I content that you dissent from me. For let
it not be worshipped, and think as you will: for then is the perillpast. And
since we agree in this point, doubt not but we shall sone agree in the residue
and admit each other for faithful brothers. And your mastership says, that
he wrote you a letter protesting that you lay y^ heresy wrongfully to his
charge I think it was more wisdom for him twice to have written to you, then
once to have come and tell you of it. For it was plainly told him, ye you The
Papists say that no promise nor covenant is to be kept with an heretic.
had conspired his death, and that not withstanding his safe conduyte, you were
minded to have murdered him: and for that cause he was compelled both being
here, to keep him self secreatly, and also privily to depart the realm.

And blessed be God, you have sufficienly published your purpose in More was
fully addict to the mind of the Prelates and to kill and burn as fast as they.
your answer against W. Tyndall, Where you say, that you might lawfully have
burnte him. Here me^ may see how perciable you are addict to our prelates. And
how prone ye were to fulfill their pleasures contrary to our Princes
prerogative royal. And thanks be to GOD which gave you such grace in the
sight of our sovereign, that he shortly withdrewe your power. For else it is to
be feared, that you would further have proceeded against his graces prerogative
which thing whether it be treason or not let other men define. But this I dare
say, that it is Printed and published to our Princes great dishonor: For what
learned man may in time to come, trust to his graces safeconduite, or come at
his graces instau^ce or request, since not only the spiritually (which of
their profession resist his prerogative) but also a lay man promoted to such
pre-eminence by More a Popish and a malicious tyrant.
his graces goodness, dare presume so to depresse his prerogative, and not only
to say, but also to publishe it in Print: that notwithstanding his graces safe
conduite, they might lawfully have burnt him.

But here he would say unto me as he does in his book, that he had forfayted
his safeconduite, and thereby was fallen into his enemies hands. Whereunto I
answer, that this your saying is but a vain gloss: For I my self did read
the safeconduite that came unto him, which had but only this one condition
annexed unto The condition contained in Barnes safe co^duite.
it, that if he came before the feast of Christmasse then next insueing, he
should have free liberty to depart at his pleasure. And this condition I know
was fulfilled, how should he then forfayte his safeconduite? But M* More has
learned of his masters our Prelates (whose proctour he is) to depresse our
Princes prerogative that men ought not to keep any promise with heretics.
And so his safe conduite could not save him. As though the Kings grace might
not No promise nor license made to heretics by the king, without the consent
of our Prelates is to be kept and observed.
admit any man to go and come freely into his graces realm, but that he must
have leave of our Prelates. For else they might lay heresy against the person,
and so slay him contrary to the Kings safeconduite, which thing all wise men do
know, to be prejudicial to his graces prerogative royal. And yet I am sure
that of all y^ time of his being here, you ca^ not accuse him of one crime,
albeit (unto your shame) you say that he had forfaited his safe conduite.
These words had been very extreme and worthy to have been looked upon, although
they had been written by some presumptuous Prelate. But that a lay man so
hyghly promoted by his Prince, should speak them, and also cause them openly
to be published among his graces commons, to reject the estimation of his
royal power, does in my mind deserve correction. Notwithstanding, I leave the
judgment and determination unto the discretion of his graces honorable
counsel.

And as for that holy prayer that M. More.
this deuote young man as a new Christ, teaches to make at the receiuyng of
this blessed Sacrament, all his congregation: I would not give the paryng of a
pear for his prayer, though it were better then it is, pullyng away the true
faith therefro, as he does. How beit his prayer there is so devised and penned
and painted with laysure and study, that I trust every good Christen woman
makes a much better prayer at the time of her housell, by fayth^ull affection
and by Gods good inspiration suddenly. Frith is an unmeet master to teach us
what we should pray at the receiuyng of the blessed Sacrament, when he will not
knowledge it as it is, but take Christ's blessed body for nothing but bare
bread, and so little esteem the receiuyng of the blessed Sacrament, that he
forces little whether it be blessed or not.

Where he disco^mendeth my prayer and says that I am an unmeet master Frith.
to teach men to pray, seeing I take away the true faith from it, and says that
every woman can make a better when she receives the Sacrament. I would to God
that every woman were so well learned that they could teach us both. And surely
I intended not to prescribe to all men that prayer The modesty and meek
spirit of John Frith.
only but hoped to help the ignorant, that they might either speak those
words, or else (taking occasion at them) to say some other to ye laud and
praise of God. And as for your faith (which you call the true faith) must I
needs improve. For it will not stand with the true text of Scripture as it
plainly appears. But to Christ's body is to be eaten with faith and not with
the teeth.
the faith in Christ's blood I exhort all men, and teach them to eat his body
with faith (and not with teeth) which is by having his death in continual
remembrance, and digestyng it into the bowels of their soul. And because you
so sore improve my prayer, to conclude my answer against you, I will write
again. And let all men Judge between us.

Blessed be thou most dear and merciful A prayer made by John* Frith to be
said before the receauyng of the Communion.
father which of thy tender favor and benignity (notwithstanding our grievous
enormities committed against thee,) vouchsauedst to send thine own and only
dear son, to suffer most vile death for our redemption. Blessed be thou
Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, which of thine aboundaunt pity considering
our miserable estate, willingly tookest upon thee to have thy most innocent
body broken and blood shed, to purge us and wash us which are laden with
iniquity. And to certify us thereof, have left us not only thy word which
may instruct our hearts, but also a visible token, to certify even our
outward se^ses of this great benefit, that we should not doubt, but that the
body and fruit of thy passion are ours (through faith) as surely as the bread,
which by our senses we know that we have with in us. Blessed be also A godly
and good prayer.
that spirit of verity which is sent from God our father through our Savior
Christ Jesus, to lighte^ our dark ignorance, and lead us through faith into
the knowledge of him which is all verity. Strength we beseech thee our frail
nature and increase our faith: that we may praise God our most merciful father
and Christ his son our Savior and redemer.

Amen.
The Pascall lamb and our sacrament are here compared together.
NOw we shall shortly express The Paschall lamb and our sacrament compared
together.
the pith of our matter and borow the figure of the Pascall lamb which is in
all points so like, that the offering of the Pascall lamb did signisie the
offering of Christ's body is plain by Paul which says, Christ our paschall
lamb is offered up for us. When the 1. Cor. 5.
children of Israel were very sad and heuye for their sore oppression under
the power of Pharao (for the more miracles were showed, ye worse were they
handeled). God sent unto them by Moses, yt every household should kill a lamb
to be a sacrifice unto God and that they should eat him, with their staves in
their hands, their loins girded and shows on their feet eue^ as me^ yt were
going an hasty Journey. This lamb must they eat hastily The manner of the
eating of the Paschal lamb.
and make a merry maundye. Now because they should not say, that they could not
be merry, for their oppression, and what could the lamb help them: he added
glad tidings vnio it and said, this is the passing by of the Lord. Which this
night shall pass by you and slay all ye first begotten, with in the Land of
Egypt, and shall deliver you out of your bondage, and bring you into ye land
that he has promised unto yourfathers. Mark the process and conueyaunce of
this matter, for even likewise it is in our sacrament. The Apostels were sad
and heavy, The manner of the institution of the Sacrament. John. 16.
partlye considering ye bondage of sin wherewith they were opressed and partly
because he told them that he must depart from them in who^ they did put all
their hope of their deliverance. While they were in this heauynes, Christ
thought to comfort the^ and to give them the seal of their deliverance, and
took in his hand bread, blessed and The institution of the Sacrament.
brake it, and gave it to his disciples saying: this is my body which shall be
given for you. For this night shall y^ power of Pharao ye devil be distroyed,
and to morrow shall you be delivered from Egypt ye place of sin, and shall
take your journey toward the heavenly mansion which is prepared of God for
all that love him. Now compare them together.

1 The paschall la^be was instituted and eaten the night before the children of
The comparison of the Paschall lamb with Christ's Supper.
Israel were indeed delivered from Egypt, Likewise was the sacrament
instituted and eaten yt night before we were delivered from our sins.

2 The pascall lamb was a very lamb in deed And so is the sacrament very
bread in deed.

3 The pascall lamb was cauled the passing by of ye Lord which destroyed the
power of Pharao and delivered the^. The sacrament is called the body of ye Lord
which destroyed ye power of the devil and delivered us.

4 As many as did eat the pascall lamb in faith, were very merry and gave God
great thanks. For they were sure the next day to be delivered out of Egypt,
as many did eat his sacrament in faith, were merry and gave God great thanks,
for they were sure the next day to be delivered from there sin,

5. They that did not eat the pascall lamb in faith, could not be merye. For
they were not so sure of deliverance from the power of Pharao. They y^ did not
eat this Sacrament in faith, could not be merry: For they were not sure of
deliverance from the power of the devil.

6. They that believed the word of the Lord did more eat the passing by of the
Lord which should deliver the^, then they did the lamb. They that did believe
the word of the Lord did more eat ye body of the Lord, which should be given
for their deliverance then they did the bread. For y^ thing does a man most
eat yt he most has in memory and most reuolueth in mind as appears by
Christ, John. 4. I have meat to eat yt ye know not.

7. They that believed not ye next day to be delivered from Egypt, did not eat
ye passing by of ye Lord, although they did eat the lamb. They y^ believed not
the next day to be delivered from sin, did not eat the body of the Lord,
although they eat the bread.

8. The children of Israel were but once delivered from Egypt, notwithstanding
they did every year eat ye lamb, to keep that fact in perpetual
remembrance. Even so Christ bought and redeemed us but once for all and was
offered and sacrificed but once for all though ye sacrament thereof be daily
broken among us to keep that benefit in continual memory.

9. As many as did eat ye Paschall Lamb in faith, and believed Gods word as
touching their deliverance from Egypt, were as sure of their deliverance
through faith, as they were sure of the Lamb by eating it. As many as do eat
this sacrament in faith, and believe Gods word as touching their deliuerau^ce
from sin, are as sure of their deliverance through faith, as they are sure
of the bread by eating it.

10. As many as did eat of that Paschall Lamb did magnify their God,
testifying that he only was the God almighty, and they his people sticking to
him, to be delivered by his power from all danger. As many as do eat of this
sacrament do magnify their God, testifying that he only is the God almighty,
and they his people sticking by him to be delivered by his power from all
danger.

11. When the Israelites were delivered from Egypt, they eat nevertheless the
Paschall Lamb which was still called the passing by (because it was ye
remembrance of the passing by of ye Lord) and heartily rejoiced, offering him
sacrifice, and acknowledgyng with infinite thanks, that they were the fellowship
of the^ that had such a merciful God. Now Christ's elect are delivered from
sin, they eat nevertheless the sacrament which is still called his body
that once dyed for their deliverance, and heartily rejoice, offering to him the
sacrifice of praise, and knowledging with infinite thanks, that they are of
the fellowship of the^ that have such a merciful God.

12. The Paschall La^be after their deliverance it was yearly eaten, brought
as much mirth and joy unto them that did eat it in faith, as it did to their
fathers which felt Pharao his fury, and were not yet delivered. For they knew
right well that except God of his mercy and wonderful power had so delivered
them, they should also them selves have been bond in the land of Egypt and
under that wicked prince Pharao, of which bondage they greatly rejoiced to be
rid already, and thanked God highly because they found the^ selves in that
plenteous land which God provided for them. The sacrament which after our
deliverance is yearly and daily eaten, brings as much mirth and joy unto
us that eat it in faith, as it did to the Apostles which were not yet
delivered. For we know right well that except God of his mercy and through ye
blood of his son, had so delivered us, we should also our selves have been
bond in Egypt the place of sin, under yt wicked prince the devil, of which
bondage we greatly rejoice to be rid already, and thank God highly because we
find our selves in ye state of grace, and have received through faith the
first fruits and a taste of the spirit which testifyeth unto us y^ we are the
children of God.

This Maundy of remembrance was it that Paul received of the The mau^dy of
remembrance that Paul received of the Lord, and delivered to the Corinthians.
Lord and delivered to the Corinthians in the xi. chapter. For though he
borrowe one property and similitude of the sacrament in the x. chapter, that
in my mind makes neither with us nor against us, albeit some think that it
makes whole for the exposition of Christ's words, this is my body. But in my
mind they are 1. Cor. 10.
deceived. For ye occasion that Paul spoke of it in the x. chapter was this.
The Corinthians had knowledge that all meats were indifferent, and whether it
were offered to an Idol or not, that the meat was not the worse, and they
might lawfully eat of it, whether it were sold the^ in the Shambles, or set
before them when they dyned and supped in an unfaithful man's house, asking no
questions: except some man did tell them that it God has ordained all meats
to be indifferent.
was offered to an Idol, and then they should not eat of it for offendyng his
conscience that so told them (albeit they were else free and the thing
indifferent) this knowledge because it was not annexed with charity was the
occasion of great offending. For by reason thereof they satte down among the
Gentiles at their feasts, where they eat in the honor of their Idols, and so
did not only wound the conscience of their weak brethren, but also committed
Idolatry in deed: And therefore S. Paul said unto the^: Paul.
My dear beloved flee from worshipping of Idols, I speak unto them
which have discretion. Judge ye what I say. Is not ye cup of blessing which we
bless, the fellowship of the blood of Christ? Is not the bread which we break
the fellowship of the body of Christ? For we though we be many, are yet one
bread and one body, in as much as we are partakers of one bread. Christ did
call him self bread, Christ called him self bread, and Paul calls us bread.
and the bread his body: And here Paul calls us bread, and the bread our
body. Now may you not take Paul that he in this place should directly expound
Christ's mind. And that the very exposition of Christ's words, when he said,
this is my body, should be that it was the fellowship of his body (as some say
which seeking the key in this place of Paul lock them selves so fast in,
that they can find no way out): For Christ spoke those words of his own body
which should be given for us, but the How the words of S. Paul are to be
understand.
fellowship of Christ's body (or congregation) was not given for us. And so he
meant not as Paul here says, but meant his own body. For as Paul calls the
bread our body for a certain property, even so does Christ call it his body
for certain other properties. In that ye bread was broken, it was Christ's
own body, signifying that as that bread was broken, so should his body be
broken for us. In that it was distributed unto his disciples it was his own
body, signifying that as verily as y^ bread was distributed unto them, so
verily should the death of his body and fruit of his passion be distributed to
all faithful folk. In that the bread strengthens our bodies it is his own
body, signifying that as our bodies are strengthened and comforted by bread, so
are our souls by yt faith in his body breaking: And likewise of the wine in
that it was so distributed, and so comfort us and makes us merry.
Furthermore the bread and wine have an other property, for Why the bread is
called our body.
the which it is called our body. For in that the bread is made one bread of
many grains or corns, it is our body, signifying that we though we be many,
are made one bread, that is to say, one body: And in that the wine is made one
wine of many grapes, it is our body, signifying that though we are many, yet
in Christ and through Christ we are made one body and members to each other. But
in this thing Paul and Christ agree. For as Paul calls the bread our body
and us the bread because of this property, that it is made one of many: even
so does Christ call it his body because of the proporties before rehearsed.
Furthermore in this they agree, that as Paul's words must be taken spiritually
(for I think there is no man so mad, as to judge that the bread is our body
in deed, although in that We must understand the Sacrament spiritually or else
we receive it not to our comfort.
property it represents our body): even so must Christ's words be
understand spiritually, that in those properties it represents his very body.
Now when we come together to receive this bread, then by the receiving of it in
the congregation, we do openly testify that we all (which receive it) are one
body, professing one God, one faith, and one baptism, and that the body of
Christ was broken and his blood shed for remission of our sins. Now since we
so do, we may not company nor fit in the congregation or fellowship of them
that offer unto Idols and eat before the^. For as Paul says: ye ca^ not
drink Paul.
the cup of the Lord, and the cup of the devils: ye can not be partakers of
the table of the Lord and of the table of the devils. I would not that you
should have fellowship with devils. The heathen which offered unto Idols were
the fellowship of devils, not because they eat the devils body or drank the
devils blood, but because they believed and put their confidence in the Idol or
devil as in their God, and all that were of that faith had their ceremonies,
and gave hartye thanks to their God with that feast which they kept. They came
to one place and brought their meat before the Idol and offered it: and with
their offering gave unto the devil godly honor. And then they sat down and
eat the offering together giving praise and thanks unto their God, and were
one body and one fellowship of yt devil which they testify by eating of that
offering before that idol. Now does S. Paul reprehend the Corinthians for
bearyng the gentiles company in eating before the Idol. For they know that
the meat was like other meat. And therefore thought them selves free to eat
it or leave it. But they perceived not that The Gentiles offered their meat to
Idolies.
that congregregation was the fellowship of deuiles which were there gathered
(not for the meat sake) but for to thank and praise the Idol there God in
who^ they had their confidence. And all that there assembled and did there
eat, and did openly testify, yt they al were one body, professing one faith
in their God that Idol, So Paul rebuked them, for because yt by there eating
(in that place and fellowship) they testefied openly, that they were of the
devils body and reioysed in the Idol their God in who^ they had faith and
confidence. And therefore faith Paul, that they ca^ not both drink the cup of
the Lord testifying him to be their God in whom only they have trust and
affiaunce, and the cup of the devil testifiyng yt Idol to be their God and
refuge.

Here you may note that the meat To drink of the cup of the Lord and to
drink of the cup of the devil, how it is to be understand.
and the eating of it in this place and fellowshyp is more thenyt common meat
and eating in other places. For else they might lawfully have dronke^ the
devils cup with them the one day, and the cup of the Lord the next day with his
Disciples. What was it more, verily it was meat which by the eating of it in
that place and fellowship, did testify openly unto all men, that he was their
God whose cup they drank, and before whom they eat in that fellowship: and
so in their eating they praised and honored the idol. And therefore they that
had their trust in the living God and in the blood of his son Christ, might
not eat with them. And likewise it is the in sacrament, the bread and the
eating of it in the place and fellowship where it is received, is more then
common bread. What is it more? Verily it is bread which by yt eating of it in
that place and fellowship, does testify openly unto all men, that he is our
very God whose cup we drink and before whom we eat in that fellowship, and
that we put all our afsiau^ce in him and in the blood of his son Christ Jesus,
geuyng God all honor and infinite thanks for his great love wherewith he loved
us, as it is testified, in the blood of his son, which was shed for our
sins. So that in this place and fellowship may no man eat nor drink with us,
but he that is of our faith and knowledgeth the same God that we do. As by
example, if a man were well beloved among his neighbors (albeit he have some
enemies) and were long absent from his friends in a strange country: when he
were come home, his neighbors A proper example.
that loved him would greatly rejoice and peradventure would bye a Capon or an
other piece of meat to give him his wellcom home, and get them to some honest
man's house or to a Tavern, and make good cheer together, to testify openly
that he is welcome home, and that they all which are at yt banquet rejoice of
his coming home. Now I say, that this banquet is more then an other meal, for
at this banquet his enemies may be loath to come, because they can not rejoice at
his coming home, and therefore can not make good chere among the^, testifiing
that he is welcome home? but rather abhors the meat and drink yt is there
eaten because their heart does not favor the person for whose sake it is
prepared. Notwithstanding if a capons leg were reserved for one of his
enemies and afterward given him when the banquet were done, he might lawfully
eat it. For then it were but bare meat such as he eats at home. And
likewise ye enemies of Christ which believe not that they have remission of
sins through his bloudsheding, can not rejoice The enemies of Christ can not
rejoice in Christ's blood shedding.
of his body breaking. And therefore can make good chere among the^, but if any
be reserved after the maundy, he may lawfully eat it for is but bread. And his
lovers that are there present do rather come thither to give him his welcome
home then for the meat, and they more eat his welcome home then the meat.
But if any of his enemies fortune to be there they eat only the meat, and
not his welcome home. For they rejoice not at his coming home. Likewise the
faithful that are there present, do rather come thither to rejoice in ye faith
of his body breaking, the^ in breaking or eating of the bread or meat. But if
any of the unfaithful fortune to be there they eat only the bread, and not
his body breaking. For they rejoice not at his body breaking. Here
peradventure some will suppose that I were contrary to my self. For before I
said, yt it was more then meat yt was eaten at ye gentiles feast and more then
meat yt was eaten at my neighbors welcome home, and more the^ bread that is
eaten at the receiuyng of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. And
now I say, that if a ma^s enemy be there, he eats only the The faithful
and unfaithful do not eat alike.
meat and not ye welcome home. And likewise the unfaithful eats only
bread and not the body and blood of Christ. How may these words stand
together? I answer, that they eat but ouely bread or meat yt profits
them, but indeed they eat more to their hinderaunce, and even their own
damnation. For they that did eat in yt fellowship of yt gentiles, did but
only eat the meat to there profit but in eating their meat their fact did
openly testyfye that they honored yt Idol for their God (although their heart
were otherwise) wherein they 1. Cor. 8.
committed idolatry. And besides that they wounded the consciences of their
weak brethren and so sinned against God. Besides that, he that enuyeth his
neighbor and comes to that banquet, eats but only ye meat that profits
him: notwithstanding in his own heart, he eats the rancor and malice of his
mind, to his great greuau^ce, when he sees them so rejoice. And of his own
companions which are also these man's enemies, he does purchase him self
hatred, because with his fact he testifies that he loves him, although his
heart be otherwise, and of God shall be condemned. For he that hates his
brother, is a murderer. Furthermore, he that is 1. John 3.
unfaithful and comes to the mau^dy, The unfaithful and wicked eat their
own damnation.
eats but only yt bread that profits him, notwithstanding he eats beside
that, his own damnation, because he believes not that the body of our Savior
which the Sacrament represents, is broken for his sins, and his blood
shed, to wash them away. This I am compelled to do, to stop the chateryng
mouths of Sophisters, albeit to them that be sober, it bad been enough to have
said, they eat only bread, and not the body broken etc. For they right well
understand it by the contrary Antithesie, and know that I meant not by that
(only) that he should eat the bread and nothing else but only bread: but that
I meant by this word (only) that he should eat the bread without the body.
And so likewise in other examples. Thus have we sufficiently declared Paul's
mind in the. 10. Chapter.

In the xj. chapter Paul makes much mention of the maundye and dyscribeth 1.
Cor. 11.
it to yt uttermost. Frst he says when ye come together in one place, a man
can not eat the Lords supper. For every man beginnyth before to eat his own
supper, and one is hungry and an other is dronken. Have ye not houses to eat
and drink in? or else despise ye the congregation of God and shame them that
have not what shall I say unto you? shall I praise you? In this I praise you
not. Paul did instruct according to Christ's mind, yt the Corinthians should
come together to eat the Lords supper. Which lies not so much in the
carnal eating as in the spiritual: and The true eating of the Sacrament is the
spiritual eating of the same.
is greatly desired to be eaten, not by the hunger of the body, but by the
hunger of the faithful heart, which is gredy to publishe the praise of the Lord
and give him hearty thanks, and move other to the same that of many, praise
might be given unto our most mercyful father for the love which he showed us in
the blood of his own most dear son Christ Jesus. Wherewith we are washed
from our sins and surely sealed unto everlasting life. With such hunger did
Christ eat the Paschall lamb, saying to his Disciples: I have in wardly
desired to eat Luke. 22.
this Easter land with you before that I suffer. Christ's inward desire was
not to fill his belly with his disciples, but he had a spiritual hunger: both
to praise his father with them, for their bodily deliuerau^ce out of the land
of Egypt: and specially to alter the Pasichall lamb and memory of the carnal
deliverance, into the maundy of mirth and tha^kesgeuyng for our spiritual
deliverance out of the bondage of sin. In so much that when Christ knew
that it was his fathers will and pleasure, that he should suffer for our sins
(wherein his honor, glory and praise should be published) then was it a pleasure
unto him, to declare unto his Disciples that great benefit, unto his fathers
praise and glory: and so did institute that we should come together and break
the bread in the remembrance of his body breakyng and blood shedyng: and that
we should eat it together rejoicing with each other and declaryng his benefits.

Now were the Corinthians fallen from this hunger, and came not together The
manner of the coming of the Corinthians together.
to the intent that Gods praise should be published by them in the midst of
the congregation, but came to feed their flesh and to make carnal cheer. In
so much that yt rich would have meat and drink enough, and take such
abundance yt they would be drunk (and so made it their own per and not the
Lords, as Paul says, and did eat only the bread and meat, and not the
body breaking, as I have before said, and the poor which had not (that is to
say that had no meat to eat) were ashamed and hungry, and so could not
rejoice and praise the Lord: by the reason that the delicate fare of the rich
was an occasion for the poor to lament their poverty and thus the rich did
neither praise God them selves, nor suffered the poor to do it, but were an
occasion to hinder them.

They should have brought their meat and drink and have divided it with their
poor brethren, that they might have been merry together, and so to have given
them occasion to be merry and rejoice in the Lord with thanks geuyng. But they
had neither lust to praise God nor to comfort their neighbor. Their faith was
feeble and their charity cold, and had no regard but to fill their body and
feed their flesh: And so despised yt poor congregation of God whom they
should have honored for yt spirit that was in them and favor that God had
showed indifferently unto them in y^ blood of his son Christ. When Paul
perceived that they were thus fleshly minded and had no mind unto that
spiritual maundy which chiefly should there be advertised, he reproves the^
sore, rehearsing yt words of Christ. That which I gave unto you I received of
the Lord. For the Lord Jesus the same night in the which he was betrayed,
took bread and thanked and brake it and said: take ye and eat ye, this is my
body which is broken for you, this do ye in the remembrance of me. After the
same manner he took the cup when supper was done saying, this cup is the new
Testament in my blood, this do ye as often as ye drink it in the remembrance
of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of this cup, ye shall
show the Lords death, til he come. As though he should say, ye Corinthians
are much to blame which at this Supper seek the food of your flesh. For it
was institute of Christ, Why Christ did institute the Sacrament.
not for the intent to norishe the belly, but to stre^ghten the heart and soul
in God. And by this you may know that Christ so meant. For he calls it his
body which is given for you, so that the name it self might testify unto you,
that in this supper you should more eat his body which is given for you (by
digestyng that into the bowels of your soul) then the bread which by the
breakyng, and the distributyng of it, does represent his body breakyng and the
distributyng thereof unto all that are faithful. And that be so means is
evident by the words following, which say, this do in the remembrance of me:
and likewise of the cup. And finally concludyng of both, Paul says, as
often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of this cup The sacrament was
ordained to feed our souls, and not our bodies.
(in this place and fellowship) ye shall show yt Lords death until he come,
praising the Lord for the death of his son and exhortyng other to do the
same, rejoicing in him with infinite thanks. And therefore ye are to blame
which seek only to feed the belly with that thing which was only institute
to feed the soul. And theruppon it follows.

Wherefore who soever does eat of this bread and drink of this cup unworthily,
is gilty of the body and blood of the Lord. He eats this bread unworthily,
which regards The worthy and unworthy eating of Christ's body.
not the purpose for the which Christ dydinstitute it, which comes not to it
with spiritual hunger, to eat through faith his very body, which the bread
represents by the breaking and disstributing of it: which comes not with a
merry heart, giving God hearty thanks for their deliverance from sin: Which
do not much more eat in their heart yt death of his body, then they do the
bread with their mouth. Now since the Corinthyans did only seek their belly
and flesh, and forgot Gods honor and praise (for which it was instituted, y^
thanks should be given by the remembrance of his body breaking for us) they
eat it to Gods dishonor and to their neighbors hinderaunce, and to their
own condemnation, and so for lack of faith were giltye of Christ's body which
(by faith) they should there chiefly have eaten to their souls health. And
therefore it follows.

Let a man therefore examyne him self and so let him eat of the bread, and
drink of the cup.
What it is to prove and examine a man's own self.
THis proving or examinyng of a man's self is first to think with him self
with what lust and desire he comes unto the maundy and will eat that bread:
whether he be sure that he is the child of God and in the faith of Christ: And
whether his conscience do bear him witness that Christ's body was broken for
him: And whether the lust yt he has to praise God and thank him with a
faithful heart in the mids of the brethren, do drive him thither ward. Or
else whether he do it for yt meats sake or to keep the custom: for then were
it better that he were away. For he that eats or drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks his own damnation, becaufe he makes no difference of the Lords
body. That is, as it is said before, he that regards not the purpose for
which it was instituted, and puts no difference between his eating and other
eating (for other eating does only serve the bellye) but this eating was
instituted and ordained, to serve the soul and inward man. And therefore he
that abuses it to the flesh, eats and drinks his own damnation, And he
comes unworthily to the maundye where the sacrament of Christ's body is
eaten: ye where the body of the Lord is eaten: not carnally with the teeth and
bellye but spiritually with the heart and faith Upon this follows the text
that M. More allegeth and wresteth for his purpose.

For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep. if we had
truly Judged our selves, we should not have been Indged when we are Judged of
the Lord, we are chastened because we should not be damned which the world.
Wherefore my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for an other. If
a man hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto condemnation.

For this cause (that is) for lack of good examinyng of our selves (as is The
meaning of S. Paul's formet words.
before touched) many are weak and sick in the faith, and many a sleep, and
have lost their faith in Christ's blood, for lack of remembrance of his body
breaking and blood shedding: yea and not that only but many were weak and
sick even stricken with bodily diseases for abusing ye sacrament of his body,
eating the bread with their teeth and not his body with their heart and mind
and peradventure some slain for it, by the stroke of God, which if they had
truly judged and examined the^ selves for what intent they came thither and
why it was instituted, should not have been so judged and chastened of the
Lord. For the Lord does chasten to bring us unto repentance and to mortify
our rebellious members, that we may remember him. Here ye may shortly perceive
the mind of Paul.

An Epitome and short rehearsal of all this book, showing in what points
Frith dissenteth from our Prelates.
NOw to be short, in these three points Frith dissenteth An Epitome of this
whole book.
from our Prelates, and from M. More which takes upon him to be their proctor.

1. Our Prelates believe that in the Sacrament remains no bread, but The
opinion of the Prelates.
that it is turned into the natural body of Christ both flesh, blood, and
bones. Frith says that it is no article of our Creed: and therefore let The
opinion of Frith.
them believe it that will. And he thinks that there remains bread still,
and that he proves three manner of ways. First by ye scripture of Paul,
which calls it bread, saying: the 1. Cor. 1^
bread which we break, is it not the fellowship of the body of Christ? For we
though we be many, are yet one body and one bread, as many as are partakers of
one bread. And again he says: as often as ye eat of this bread or drink of
this cup, you shall 1. Cor. 11.
show the Lords death until he come. Also Luke calls it bread, saying in the
Acts: they continued in the fellowship of the Apostles, and in the Acts. 2.
breaking of the bread and prayer. Also Christ called the cup the fruit of a
Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luke. 22.
vine, saying: I shall not from hence forward drink of the fruit of the vine,
until I drink that new in the kingdom of my father.

Furthermore nature does teach Nature teaches that there is both bread and
wine in the Sacrament.
you that both the bread and wine continue in their nature. For the bread
mouldeth if it be kept long, yea and worms breed in it: and the poor mouse
will run away with it and eat it', which are evidence enough that there
remains bread. Also the wine if it were reserved, would wax sower, as they
confess them selves, and therefore they housell the lay people but with one
kind only, because the wine can not continue nor be reserved to have ready at
hand when need were. And surely as if there remained no bread, it could not
mould nor wax full of worms: even so if there remained no wine, it could not
wax sower. And therefore it is but false doctrine that our prelates so long
have taught and published.

Finally ye there remains bread, might be proved by the authority of The
old Doctors prove that there is bread in the Sacrament.
many Doctors which call it bread and wine, even as Christ and his Apostles
did. And though some sophisters would wrest their saying, and expound them
after their own fantasy, yet shall I allege the^ one Doctor which was Pope,
that makes so plain with us, that they shall never be able to avoid them.

For Pope Gelasius writes on this manner: Certe sacramenta quae sumimus
Gelasius in concilio To.
corporis and sanguinis Christi, diuinae res sunt, propter quod and per eadem
diuinae efficimur consortes naturae. Et tamen non desinit esse substantia vel
natura panis and vini, sed permanet in suae proproprietate naturae. Et certe
imago and similitudo corporis and sanguinis Christi in action mysteriorum
celebrantur. That is to say. Surely the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ which we receive, are a godly thing, and therefore through them are we
made partakers of the godly nature. And yet does it not cease to be the
substance or nature of bread and wine, but they continue in the property of
their own nature. And surely the image and similitude of the body and blood
are celebrated in the act of the mysteryes. This I am sure, that no man can
avoid it, nor so wrest it, but that all men shall soon espy his folly, and
therefore I may conclude that there remains the substance and nature of
bread and wine.

The second point wherein Frith dissenteth from our Prelates and their Proctor.
THe Prelates believe that his very flesh is present to the teeth of The faith
of the Prelates.
them that eat the sacrament, and that the wicked eat his very body. Frith
says that it is no article of our The opinion of John Frith.
Creed, and therefore he reckons that he is in no ieoperdy though he
believe it not. And he thinks that his flesh is not present unto the teeth
of them that receive the Sacrament. For his flesh is only in one place at
once: And yt he proves both by yt authority of S. Austen ad Dardanum, and
also by the authority of Fulgentius ad Thrasuuandum lib. 20. as before
appears in yt book. And Frith says that the wicked eat not his very
flesh, although they receive the sacrament: And that he proves by the
Scripture, Doctors, and good reason grounded upon the scriptures.

The Scripture is this: he that eats John. 6*
Christ's body has everlasting life, but the wicked has not everlasting life,
ergo then the wicked eat not his body. Again the Scripture says: he that
eats Christ's flesh and drinks his blood, abides in Christ and Christ in
him, but yt wicked abide not in Christ, nor Christ in him, ergo the wicked eat
not his flesh nor drink his blood.

This may also be confirmed by August. in sermon. de sacra fe. passch^.
good authority. For S. Austen says: he that abides not in Christ, and in
whom Christ abides not, without doubt he eats not his flesh, nor drinks
his blood, although he eat and drink the sacrament of so great a thing unto
his damnation.

And even the same words has Beda upon the x. chapter of the first Beda.
Epistle to the Corinthians.

Again S. Austen says: he that abides not in me, and in whom I abide Aug.
de Ciuitate Dei in libro. 21. Cap. 25.
not, let him not say nor think, that he eats my body or drinks my blood.
And eue^ the same words has Beda upon the vi. chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians. And even ye same sentence has Ambrose, and Prosper, and Beda
upon the xi. chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

Finally this may be proved by good reason grounded upon the scripture. Christ
would not suffer Mary (though she loved him well) to touch him, because she
lacked one point of faith, and did not believe that he was equal with his
father. And therefore by reason it must follow, that he The wicked eat not
Christ's body.
will not suffer the wicked (which neither have good faith nor love toward
him) both to touch him and eat him into their unclean bodies.

Now since this is proved true, that the wicked eat not his body, it must also
thereof needs follow, that the sacrament is not his natural body. For they
do eat the sacrament as all me^ know. Besides that the faithful do not eat
Christ's body with their teeth. And therefore it must follow that the wicked
do not eat it with their teeth. The antecedent or first part of the reason is
proved by the words of Christ, which says, that the flesh profits nothing
at all, John. 6.
meaning that it does not profit as they understood him, that is to say, it
profits nothing to be eaten carnally with their teeth and belly, as they
understood him. For else it profits much to be eaten spiritually, that is to
say, to believe that through his body breakyng and blood shedding our sins
are purged. And thus does Origene, S. Austen, Beda, Chrysostom, and Athanasius
expound it, as appears in the book before. And therefore Frith says that
only faithful Only the faithful do eat Christ's body and drink his blood.
men eat his body, not with their teeth and mouth, but with their faith and
heart, that digest it into ye bowels of their souls through believing that it
was broken on the cross, to wash away their sins. And the wicked eat not
his body but only the bread and their damnation, because they eat him not
spiritually, that is, because they believe not in his body breaking and blood
shedding.

The third point wherein Frith dissenteth from our prelates and their proctoure.
3. THe Prelates believe that men ought to worship the sacrament. The faith of
the Prelates.
But Frith says nay, and affirms that it is Idolatry to worship it. And he
says that Christ and his Apostles taught us not so to do: neither did the
holy fathers so teach us. And Frith says, that the authors of this The opinion
of Frith.
worshipping are the children of perdition which have overwhelmed this world
with sin. Nevertheless we must receive it reverently, because of the
doctrine that it brings us. For it preaches Christ's death unto us, and
describes it before our eyes, even as a faithful preacher by the word does
instill it into us by our ears and hearing. And that it supplyeth the room of
a preacher is evident by the words of S. Austen which says. Paulus quamuis
portaret farcinam corporis quod aggrauat anima^, potuit tamen significando
predicare Dominum Iesum Christum, aliter per linguam suam, aliter per
epistolam, aliter per sacramentum corporis Christi. That is to fay, though
Paul did bear the burden of the body which does honorate the soul, yet was
he able in signifiyng to preach ye lord Jesus Christ, one way by his tongue, and
an other way by an epistle, and an other way by the sacrament of Christ's body.
etc. For as the people by understanding the fignification of the words which
he spoke did hear the glorious Gospel of God, and as by the reading of his
pistle they understood his mind and received the word of the souls health,
so by the ministration of the sacrament they might see with their eye the thing
which they heard and read and so have their senses occupied about the mystery,
that they might the more earnestly print it in their mind. As by example: The
Prophet Hieremie being in Jerusalem in the time of Sedechias king of the
Jews, prophesyed Ierem. 27.
and preached unto them, yt they should be taken prisoners of Nabugodonesar the
king of Babylon, and the Jews were angry with him and would not believe his
words. And therefore be made a chain or fetters of wood and put them about his
neke and prophesied again and preached that they should be taken prisoners and
led captive into Babylon. And as his words did certify their ears yt they
should be subdued, so the chain did represent their captivity even before
their eye. Which thing did more vehemently work in them then the bare words
could do, and even so it is in the Sacrament. For likewise as the words did
instill into our ears, that his body was given for The ministration of the
Sacrament does lively express the death and passion of Christ.
us, and his blood shed for the remission of our sins, even so did the
mynistration of the sacrament express ye same thing unto our sight, and does
more effectuously move, then the bare words might do and make us more attent
unto the thing, that we may wholye give thanks unto God and praise him for his
bounteous benefits. And therefore seeing it is a preacher, expressing unto our
sight ye same thing that ye words do to our ears represe^t you must receive
it with reverence and sober behavior, aduertising yt thing, that it
represents unto you. And even ye same honor is dew unto it which is given
unto the scripture that is the word of God. For unto yt must a man deuoutlye
give ear and reverently take the book in his hand: yea and if he kiss yt
book for the doctrines sake that he learenth thereout, he is to be commended,
Nevertheless if he should go sense his book, men might well think that he
were very childishe. But if he should kneel down and pray to this book then
he did commyt plain Idolatrye Consider dear brethren what I say and avoid
this Ieoperdye. which thing avoided, I care not as touching the presence of his
body, though you believe that his natural flesh be there in deed (and not
only in a misterye as I have taught) For when yt Ieoperdye is past, he were a
fool that would be conte^tious for a thing as long as there comes no hurt
therbye.

The Germans which believe the presence of his body, do not worship it, but
plainly teach the contrary and in that point (thanks be to God) all they whom
you call heretics, do agree fulwell. Only avoid this Idolatry and I desire
no more.

The conclusion of this treatise.
Now dear brethren I beseech you for the mercy yt ye look for in Christ
Jesus, that you accept this work with a single eye and no contentious heart.
For necessity has compelled me to write it, because I was informed both of my
Lord of Winchester and other credible persons, that I had by the means of my
first treatise offended many men. Which thing may well be true: For it was to
slender, to instruct all them which have since seen it, albe (...) it were
sufficient for their use to who^ it was first delivered. And therefore I thought
it not only expedient, but also necessary, to instruct them further in the
truth, that they might see plain evidence of that thing wherein they were
offended.

By this work you shall espy their blasphemies and the venomous tou^ges where
with they flaunder not only them that publish the truth, but even the truth
it self. They shame not to say yt we affirm it to be only bread and nothing
else. And we say not so: but we say, that beside the substance of bread, it is
ye sacrament of Christ's body and blood. As ye Iuye hanging before the tavern
door is more then bare Iuye. For beside the substance The Sament beside the
substance of of bread is Christ's body and blood.
of Iuye, it is a sign, and signifies that there is wine to be sold. And
this sacrament signifies unto us and poynteth out before our eyes that as
verily as that bread is broken, so verily was Christ's body broken for our
sins: and as that bread is distributed unto us, so is his body and fruit of
his passion distributed unto all his faithful. And as the bread comfort the
body, so does ye faith in Christ's death comfort our souls. And as surely as
we have that bread and eat it with our mouth and teeth, and know by our senses
that we have it within us, and are partakers thereof: no more need we to doubt
of his body and blood, but that thorough faith, we are as sure of them, as we
are sure of that bread. As it is sufficiently declared in my book.

They dishonor the Sacrament that give it that honor that is due unto God.
Again you may perceive how wickedly they report on us which affirm that we
dishonor it which give it the right honor that it ought to have. And you do
plainly dishonor it, which give unto it the honor that is only due unto God.
We give it the same honor that we give unto the holy Scripture and word of
God, because it expresses unto our senses the death of our Savior, and does
more deeply Print it within us. And therefore we call it an holy Sacrament, as
we call Gods word, holy Scripture. And we receive this Sacrament with great
reverence, even as we reverently read or hear preached the holy word of God
which co^teineth the health of our souls. And we grant that his body is
present with the bread as it is with the word, and with both it is verily
received and eaten through faith. But if we should kneel down and pray unto
the holy Scripture, men might count us fools, and might lawfully say, that we
do not honor the scripture by that means, but rather dishonor it. For the
right honor of a thing is, to use it for that intent that it was instituted of
God. And he that abuses it to any other purpose, does in deed dishonor it.
And likewise it is in the Sacrament which was instituted to keep in memory the
death of Christ, which if we do any otherwise honor, then we do the holy
Scripture (unto yt which we may in no wise make our prayers) I say that then we
should utterly dishonor it. Avoid therefore this point of Idolatry, and all is
safe.

Finally we say that they speak Frith here shows what he thinks of the
Sacrament.
well and faithfully which say that they go to the body and receive the body
of Christ, and that they speak vilanously and wickedly which say that they
only receive bread or the sign of his body for in so saying they declare
their infidelity. For the faithful will reckon that he is evil reported of,
and reputed for a traitor and an other Judas, if me^ should say of him that
he did only receive the Sacrament, and not also the thing which the
Sacrament does signify. For albeit he only eats the bread and sacrament
with his mouth and teeth: yet with his heart and faith inwardly, he eats the
very thing it self which the Sacrament outwardly does represent.

And of this, spryng the manner of speakynges that the old fathers do sometime
use, which at the first sight might seem contrary to our senses. But if they
be well pondered, it may soon be seen, how they should be taken. For many
times when they speak of the Sacrament and outward eating, they apply unto ye
Sacrament and outward eating the fruit and conditions of the inward eating and
thing it selse, because that in a faithful man they are so jointly joined that
the one is never without the other. The Godhead is so joined with the ma^hode
of Christ that they both make but one person.
As by example, Mary is named the mother of God, and yet she is not the mother
of his Godhead by the which part only he is called God, but because she is his
mother, as touching his ma^hode, and the Godhead is so annexed with the ma^hode
that they both, make but one person, therefore is she called the mother of God,
which in deed if it be wisely weyed, shall be found to be abused speech.
And yet nevertheless it may very well be used, if men vnverstand what is meant
thereby, but if thorough the use of this speech, men should fall into such an
error that would affirm our Lady to be in deed the mother of his Godhead,
the^ necessity should compel us to make a distinction between the nature of
his Godhead and the nature of his manhood, and so to expou^de the matter unto
them, and bring them home again into the right understanding. As we are now
constrained to do in this Sacrament, because you misconstrue the sayings of
the Scripture and Doctors. Which notwithstanding (if a man understand them)
say very well.

And many such manner of speeches are contained in the Scripture: As where
Christ says. Ioh. 3. There shall noman ascend into heaven, but he that
discendeth from heaven, the son of man which is in heaven. This text does say
that the son of man was then in heaven, when he spoke these words unto
Nicodemus here on earth: which thing, all wise men consent to be understood,
propter vnitatem personae: That is to say, for the unity of the person. For
albeit his godhed was in every place at that time, yet was not his manhood (by
the which he was called the son of man) in heaven at that time. And yet
Christ said that it was in heaven for the unity of his person. For his Godhed
was in heaven, and because the Godhed and manhood made but one person,
therefore it was ascribed unto yt manhood, which was only verified upon the
Godhed, as S. Augustine ad Dardanum August.
does diligently declare.

And likewise in the sacrament of Baptism, because the inward working Of
Baptism.
of the holy ghost is ever annexed in the faithful, unto the outward
ceremony: therefore sometime the fruit of the inward Baptism is ascribed
unto the outward work. And so the scripture uses to speak of the outward
baptism as though it were the inward: that is to say, the sprite of God. And
therefore S. Paul says, that we are buried with Christ thorough baptism. And
yet as S. Augustine Augustinus ad Bonifacium.
expounds it, yt outward Baptism does but signify this burial. And again
Paul says, as many as are baptized have put Christ upon them. And yet in
deed our outward baptism does but signify, that we have put Christ upon
us. But by the inward baptism (which is the water of life and spirit of God)
we have in deed put him upon us and live in him, and he in us. Which
notwithstanding is very false for all the outward baptism, in them that
receive it not in faith. And unto them it is but a bare sign, whereof they get
no profit, but damnation.

And here you may evidently perceive how it is sometime in scripture ascribed
unto the inward work and ceremony, which is only true in the outward
verity. And this place shall expound all the old doctoures which seem
contrary to our sentence. And therefore mark it well.

Thus have you my mind farther upon the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ. Wherein, if you reckon that I have been too long in repeating one
thing so often, I shall pray you of pardon. But surely, me thought I could
not be shorter. For the world is such now a days, that some would hear and
can not, and some do hear and will not. And therefore I am compelled so often
to repeat that thing which a wise man would understand with half the words.

Pray Christen reader that the word of God may increase, and that God may be
glorified thorough my bonds.
Amen.
The Articles wherefore John Frith dyed, which he wrote in Newgate the. 23.
day of June, the year of our Lord. 1533.
I Doubt not dear brethren, but that it does, some deal vex you, to see the
one part have all the words, and freely to speak what they lift, and the
other to be put to silence, and not to be heard indifferently. But refer
your matters to God, which shortly shall judge after an other fashion. But in
the mean reason, I shall rehearse unto you the articles for which I am
condemned.

They examined me but of two articles which are these.
First whether I thought, there The first article.
were no Purgatory to purge the soul after this present life. And I said, that
I thought there was none. For man is made but of two parts, the body and the
soul. And the body is purged by yt cross of Christ, which he lays upon
every child that he receaueth: as affliction, worldly oppression, persecution,
imprisonment etc. and death finisheth sin. And yt soul is purged by the word
of God, which we receive thorough faith, unto the health and salvation both of
body and soul.

Now and if I did know any third part whereof we are made, I would also gladly
grant the third Purgatory: but seeing, I know none such, I must deny the Popes
Purgatory. Nevertheless, I count neither part a necessary article of our faith,
necessarely to be believed under pain of damnation, whether there be such a
purgatory or not.

The second article was this, whether The second article.
that I thought, that the Sacrament of the altar was the body of Christ. And I
said yea, yt I thought that it was both Christ's body, and also our body, as
S. Paul says. 1. Cor. 10. chapter.

In that it is made one bread of many graynes it is our body signifying that we
though we be many, are yet one body: and likewise of the wine in that it is
made one wine, of many grapes.

And again in that it is broken, it is Christ's body, signifying that his body
should be broken, that is to say suffer death, to redeem us from our
iniquities.

In that it was distributed, it was Christ's body, signifying that as verily,
as that Sacrament is distributed unto us, so verily is Christ's body, and the
fruit of his passion distributed unto all faithful men.

In that it is received, it is Christ's body signifying that as verily, as
outward man receaueth the Sacrament with his teeth, and mouth, so verily does
the inward man, through faith, receive Christ's body and fruit of his passion,
and is as sure of it, as of the bread that he eats.

Well said they, do you not think, An other question.
that his very natural body, both flesh and blood is really contained under
the Sacrament, and there actually present, beside all similitudes. No said I, I
do not so think. Notwithstanding An answer.
I would not that any should count that I make my saying (which is the
negative) any article of the faith For even as I say that you ought not to
make any necessary article of yt faith of your part (which is yt affirmative.)
So I say again, that we make none necessary article of the faith of our
part, but leave it indifferent for all men to judge therein, as God shall open
his heart, and no side to condemn or despise the other, but to nourish in all
things brotherly love, and to bear others insirmities.

The text of S. Augustine which they there alleged against me, was this: S.
Augustines text.
that in yt Sacrament Christ was borne in his own hands. Whereunto I said, yt
S. Augustine does full well expound him self. For in an other place he^e
says Ferebatur tanq in manibus suis. That is, he was horn after a certain
manner, in his own hands. And by that he says after a certain manner, ye may
soon perceive what he means. Howbeit if S. Augustine had not thus expounded
himself, yet he says ad Bonifacium, that yt Sacrament of a thing, has a
similitude or property of the thing which it signifies. And for that cause
it has many times, yt name of yt very thing which it signifies. And so he
says yt he bare himself, because he bare yt Sacrament of his body and blood
which did so earnestly express him self, that nothing might more do it. If
you read ye place of S. Augustine ad Bonifacium, which I allege in my last
book, ye shall soon see them answered.

An other place they alleged out of Chrysostom, which at the first blush
Chrisostomus.
seems to make well for them. But if it be well wayed, it makes much less
for them then they ween. The words are these.

Do thou see bread and wine? Chrisostomes words.
do they depart from thee into the draught as other meats do? God forbid for
as in wax when it comes to the fire, nothing of the sub staunce remains
nor abou^deth: so likewise think that the mysteries are consumed by the
substance of the body.

These words I expounded, by the words of the same Doctor S. Chrysostom,
which in an other Homily says on this manner. The inward eyes as soon as
they see the bread, they fly over all creatures and think not of the bread
that is baken of the baker, but of the bread of everlasting life, which is
signified by the mystical bread.

Now confer these places together and you shall perceive, that the last
expounds the first clearly. First he says, will thou see bread and wine, I
answer by the second, nay. For the inward eyes as soon as they see ye bread,
think not of it, but of yt thing it self yt is signified thereby. And so he
sees it and sees it not. He sees it with his outward and carnal eyes, but
his inward eyes sees it not. That is to say, regard not the bread or think
not on it. Even as we commonly say, when we play a game neglige^tly (by my
truth I see not what I do) meaning that our minds, is not upon that thing
which we see with our outward eyes. And likewise we may answer the next part,
where he says.

Do they depart from thee into the draught (as other meats do? Nay forsooth
said I, for other meats do only come to nourish yt body, and to depart into
the draught. But this meat The exposition of S. Chrisosto. text.
yt I here receive, is spiritual meat received with faith and norisheth us
euerlastyngly, both body and soul, and never enters into the draught. And
eue^ as before the outward eyes do see the bread and yet the outward eyes do
not regard that or think upon it. So likewise the outward man digesteth the
bread, and casts it into the draught. And yet the inward man does not regard
that nor think upon it. But thinks on the thing it self that is signified,
by that bread.

And therefore said Chrysostom even a little before the words which The true
meaning of Chriso stomes words.
they here alleged, lift up your mind and hearts (said he) whereby he
monisheth us, to look upon and consider those heavenly things, which are
represented and signified by the bread and wine, and not to mark the bread and
wine in it self.

Here they will say unto me, that it is not Chrisostomes mind (for by his
example he plainly shewith that there remaneth no bread nor wine) that I deny.
For the example in this place, proves no more but yt ye shall not think on yt
bread and wine, no more then if they were not there, but only on that thing
which is signified by them. And that ye may evidently perceive by the words
following where he says, think that the mysteries are consumed by the
substance of the body.

Now whether Chrysostom thought that there remained bread or Solution.
no, both ways shall our purpose be proved. First if he thought there
remained still bread and wine, then we have our purpose. Now if he thought that
the bread and wine remained not, but were changed, then are the bread and wine
neither mysteries nor Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ. For that
that is not, can neither be mystery nor Sacrament.

Finally if he speak of ye outward appearaunce of bread: then we know
Conclusion.
that that remains still and is not consumed by the substance of the body.
And therefore he must needs be understood as I take him.

I think many men wonder how I can dye in this article, seeing that it is no
necessary article of our faith, for I grant that neither part is an article
necessary to be believed under pain of damnation, but leave it as a thing
indifferent, to think therein as God shall instill in every man's mind, and
that neither part condemn other for this matter, but receive each other in
brotherly love, reserving each others infirmity to god.

The cause of my death is this, because I can not in conscience, abjure Behold
the cause of mi death.
and swear, that our Prelates opinion of the sacrament, (that is, that the
substance of bread and wine is verily changed into the flesh and blood of
our savior Jesus Christ) is an undoubted article of the faith, necessary to
be believed under pain of damnation.

Now though this opinion were indeed true (which thing they can neither prove
true by scripture nor doctors) yet could I not in conscience Note.
grant that it should be an article of the faith necessary to be believed.
etc. For there are many verities, which yet may be no such articles of our
faith. It is true that I lay in yrons when I wrote this: howbeit I would not
have you to receive this truth for an article of our faith. For you may think
the contrary without all ieopardy of damnation.

The cause why I can not believe their opinion of transmutation is this.
1 FIrst, because I think verily Three causes.
that it is false, and can neither he proved by scripture, nor faithful
doctors, if they be well pondered.

2 The second cause is this, because I will not bind the congregation of
Christ (by mine example) to admit any necessary Article beside our Creed,
and specially none such as can not be proved true by Scripture. And I say
that the Church, as they caul it, can not compel us to receive any such
articles to be of necessity under pain of damnation.

3 The third cause is, because I dare not be so presumptuous in entering into
Gods judgment, as to make the prelates in this point a necessary article of
our faith. For then I should damnably condemn all the Germans and Almaines
with, infinite more, which in deed do not believe nor think that the
substance of bread and wine is changed into the substance of Christ's
natural body. And surely I can not be so foolish hardy, as to condemn such
an infinite number for our prelates pleasures.

Thus all the Germaynes and Almaynes, both of Luthers side and also of
Oecolampadius, do wholly approve my matter. And surely I think there is no man
that has a pure conscience, but he will think that I dye righteously. For
that this transubstantiation should be a necessary article of the faith, I
think no man can say it with a good conscience, although it were true in deed.

By me John Frith.
An exact and diligent Table, whereby you may readely turn to any special
matter that is contained in all John Frithes books. 1572.
A.
ABraham. 20 Abrahames bosom, what it signified. 55 Abraham by faith did eat
Christ's body and drink Christ's blood. 109 Ambrose opinion of Purgatory. 52
Antithesis between Christ and the Pope. 97 Arguments to prove that Christ's
natural body is not in the Sacrament. 142 Articles of our faith are to be
believed upon pain of damnation. 111 Articles of our faith are as many as are
necessary for our salvation. 145 Augustine being 400. years after Christ
doubted of Purgatory. 32 Augustines opinion of purgatory. 52
B.
Baptism defined what it is. 92 Baptism is the founteine of our new birth. 94
Bishopric in the primative church was a charge and not a Lordshyp. 116
Blasphemy to say that Christ's blood is not the full remission of our sins.
11 Blessyng, what it is. 154 Books of the Machabees are not Canonical. 37
Books against Rastall. 60 Boasting that is modest is commendable. 64 Body of
Christ eaten by our fathers and his blood drunk. 109 Body of Christ is no
more in the Sacrament the^ a man's face in the glass. 146 Brethren is an
ancient name in the holy Scripture. 114 Bread and wine remain in the
Sacrament. 117 Bread why it is called our body. 160
C.
CAuse of our blyndnes and gross errors. 3 Causes why the Sacraments were
first instituted. 112 Ceremonies of some sorts are guydes unto the knowledge
of God. 95 Christ only has satisfied for our sins. 14. 15 Christ's merits
puts out the fire of Purgatory. 14. 17. 18 Christ is our Advocate. 17
Christ's sacrifice only takes away sin. 17. 38 Christ only is our head. 43
Christ's death has ouerco^med our death. 55 Christ was meek and gentle 57
Christ only is the mean to put away our sins. 73 Christ's blood is the
strength of our Baptism. 94 Christ and the Pope compared together. 97. 98. 99.
100. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106 Christ is not to be eaten carnally, but
spiritually. 118. 119 Christ's words are spiritual and not carnal. 124
Christ gave to his Disciples the sign of his blood. 129 Christ's body is
neither material bread nor drink. 131 Christ his body occupyeth one place
only. 137 Christ as touching his Godhead is in all places. 139 Christ his body
is in one place only. 147 Christ is eaten with faith and not with the teeth.
157 Christ calls him self bread. 159 Church cannot err says Rochester 56
Contradictories cannot be true. 26 Corruption when it entered into the Church.
116 Corinthia^s, how they came together to eat the Supper of the Lord. 162
D.
DEath is terrible to all flesh. 34 Dead persons can neither do good nor
evil. 53 Doctors have erred in many things. 53 Doctors prove that there is
bread in the Sacrament. 165 Dippyng in water and liftyng up again, what it
means. 93
E.
EXample of the Alepolle. 113 Epitome of Frithes book of the Supper of the
Lord. 164
F.
Faith in Christ is our righteousness. 28 Faith is not procured by violence. 57
Faith is the gift of God. 58 Faith is the spiritual eating of Christ in the
Sacrament. 108 Faith that saved our fathers, the same now saves us. 109 Faith
eats Christ joyfully. 143 Faith in Christ's blood consecrateth the Sacrament.
153 Faithful and unfaithful do not ^ate a like. 161 False Antichrists. 154
Fear makes faith no faith. 5^ Fire of Purgatory is of great force. 50 Flesh
may not rejoice in the gifts of nature, but must fear and tremble 89 Flesh of
Christ does profit nothing and yet it does profit. 123. 140 Foundation of
Frithes treatise of the Sacrament. 108 Frith, why he wrote against Purgatory.
4 Frithes conclusion against Rastals book. 32 Frithes answer to Sir Thomas
More. 32 Frithes judgment upon the book of the Machabees. 40 Frith and More
do not agree. 42 Frithes opinion of Christ's death, read it, for it is
excellent. 48 Frithes answer to the Bishop of Rochester. 51 Frithes Bulwark
against Rastall. 60 Frith a good player at the tennyce. 62 Frith handles
Rastall gentely. 63 Frith a true Martyr of Christ. 65 Frithes answer to
Rastals second chapter. 66 Frith a good scholar. 68. 69 Frithes answer to
Rastals third chapter. 69 Frithes judgment upon Tracyes last will and
testament. 77 Frithes letter to the congregation. 81 Frithes mirror or glass
wherein a man may learn to know him self. 83 Frithes mirror or glass,
wherein behold the efficacy of the Sacrament of Baptism. 90 Frithes answer
to Master Mores first book of the Sacrament. 107 Frith met with false
brethren. 114 Frithes offer to the Clergy. 115 Frithes earnest zeal. 115 Frith
fears not death. 115 Frith is no hasty judge. 150 Frith has great modesty.
156 Frithes prayer. 157 Frith does plainly declare his doctrine is the
Sacrament. 168
G.
Germans believe the presence of the body, but worship it not. 167 Glass that
represents the face, is not the face. 146 God has left us two Purgatoryes. 5
God is to be honored of all creatures. 13 God forgeueth our sins for
Christ's sake. 14 God neither the better nor the worsse for our doings. 15 God
can not be against him self. 48 God is said to be almighty, because there is
no superior power above him, and that he can do all things that he will.
145 God is so united to the manhood of Christ, that they make but one person.
169 Gods honor consists not in our service. 13 Gods word is the touchstone
to try all doctrine. 53 Gods word is the keye of knowledge. 58 Gods spirit
is not bound to any place. 91 Gods Church, what it is. 92 Good and bad are of
the se^sible church. 93 Gods Church is without spot or wrincle. 93 Godfathers
and Godmothers and their charge. 96 God cannot do all things. 142 Good
works are to be done, because God commands them to be done. 28 Good
works are the fruits of faith 74 Good works do mortify our members. 75 Good
works are profitable to our neighbor. 75 Good gifts given to us of God, why
they are given? 85. 86 Goodness is of God, and all evil of our selves. 83 Grace
is the gift of God. 76
H.
Heaven and hell is expressed in the Scripture, but no word of Purgatory. 54
Hell there is none to them that are in Christ Jesus. 72 Hell is ordained for
such as fear not God. 72 Heresy, what it is? 50
I.
Jews slain for Idolatry. 38. Institution of the Sacrament. 157. 163. Judas
Machabeus believes the resurrection. 39. Judas Machabeus profitable to the
Papes clergy. 39. Justification freely excludes purgatory. 10.
K.
Keys how they were given to Peter and Paul. 58.
L.
Law of God and law of man do greatly differ. 19. Lazarus. 20.
M.
MAn, why he was made. 13. Manna was to the Jews the same that the Sacrament
is to us. 110. 118. Maundy of remembrance. 159. Ministers must be
circumspect. 96. Miracles how the true are tried from the false. 154. More and
Rochester cannot agree. 30. 36. 56. Mores false and fond argument. 33. More
understands not the Scripture. 35. More proved to be an insipient. 40. More,
a quarelling brabler. 144. More a confused interpreter of the Scriptures. 41.
More a procter for purgatory. 42. More a subtle Sophister. 46. 137. More and
his purgatory confuted and confounded. 50. Mores Poetry. 84. 137. More a
trifeling mocker. 120. More has a chekmate. 121. More pretely nipped. 122.
More a subtle Poet. 137. More an ignorant procter for the clergy. 144. More
daunsing naked in a net, thinks himself invisible. 84. More harpeth on a
wrong string. 148 More and Frith dispute two things. 149. More a popish and
malicious tyrant. 156.
N.
Natural reason not mete to reason against Scripture. 13. Nature teaches us
that there is both bread and wine in the Sacrament. 165.
O.
OBstinate persons. 95. Oecolampadius dyed of a Canker. 118. Opinion of Frith.
164. 165. 166. Opinion of the Prelates. 164. 165. 166.
P.
Paul prophesies of the latter times. 116. Papists imagined a purgatory for
themselves. 5. Papists corrupt the Scriptures. 126. Papists say that no
promise or covenant ought to be kept with heretics. 155. Parables prove
nothing. 54. Paradise, what Christ meant by that word. 138 Paschall Lamb
compared with the Sacrament of Christ's body. 157 158. Philip his manner of
Baptism. 95. Pope is merciless if there be a purgatory. 6. Pope is the Devils
vicar. 59. Pope sells Christ's merits for money. 11. Pope is Antichrist. 59.
Prayers and good deeds how they help. 49. Prayers for the dead are vain. 52.
Prayers made by John Frith. 157. Purgatory pickepursse. 17. Purgatory a
fantasy of man's imagination. 17. 27. Purgatory on the earth. 18. Purgatory,
there is none. 21. 27. Purgatory is in many places. 21. Purgatory can not fear
us from sin. 25. Purgatory is needless. 29. 31. Purgatory quite excluded.
45. Purgatory and pardons have been good marchaundise for the Pope and his
clergy. 58.
R.
RAstalles dialogues and what they contained. 7. Rastall follows More. 7. 8.
Rastall clearly and quicklye confounded. 8. 9. Rastalles lies. 13. 14.
Rastalles similitudes and his arguments are naught. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
21. 22. Rastall says Purgatory is on the earth. 18. Rastalles natural reason
deceaueth himself and his Turk Gingemyn. 18. 20. Rastall cannot tell where
purgatory should be. 21. Rastalles ignorance. 22. Rastall recogniseth his
fault. 61 Rastall shows two causes why he stands in yt defense of
purgatory. 62 Rastals blind argument. 70 Rastall falsefieth the Scripture. 71
Repentance is no satisfaction for sin. 14 Reconciliation to our neighbor is
required of God. 14 Reprouyng of hypocrites may not be called raylyng. 6^
Repentance, what it is? 74 Rochester the first patron of Purgatory. 5^
Rochester and More agree not. 5^ Rochester, More and Rastall defenders of one
heresy. 6^ Rochester contrary to More, and More contrary to Rochester. 6^
S.
Sabbath kept on Saturday. 96 Sabbath kept on Sunday. 96 Sabbath abrogated. 96
Sacraments, why they were instituted. 111. 112 Sacraments has three things
to be considered. 91. 112 Sacrament to be the body of Christ is no Article of
our faith. 108. 109 Sacrament to be Christ's natural body is to gross an
Imagination. 111 Sacrament diligently set forth by our Savior Christ. 112
Sacrifices of the Jews. 113 Sacrament of Christ's body and blood what it
signifies. 113 Sacrament is a figure of the breakyng of Christ's body and
shedyng of his blood. 115. 130 Sacrament may not be worshypped. 151. 155
Sacrament is the memorial of Christ's death. 128 Sacrament what it is. 132
Sacrament of Christ's body is a thanks geeuyng. 135 Sacrament, how it is our
body. 136 ibidem Satisfaction is of two sorts. 23. 57 Scripture makes no
me^tio^ of Purgatory. 12 Scripture has many senses. 120 Scripture is to be
understood spiritually. 121 Sects of heretics. 51 Simon Fish made the
supplication of Beggars. 6 Siluester Pope in whose time corruption entered into
the Church. 116 Sin against the holy ghost what it is. 341 Sins are not
remitted after this life. 45 Sin may be committed, and yet it is no sin.
73 Supplication of Beggars. 6
T.
TVrkes and Jews believe that there is a Purgatory. 33 Truth is not to be
sought at the dead. 46 Tracyes last will and testament. 77 Thieves and
murderers who they are. 86. 87. 88 Tyndall a man of most innocent life. 118
V.
VOluntary or wilful ignorance is not to be excused. 4
W.
WIckle^^e burned. 118 Wicked and unfaithful persons do not receive the body
of Christ. 136. 141 William Tracyes will. 77 Wisdom of the world, is
foolishnes with God. 6 Words figuratively spoken. 44 Worshyppyng of the
Sacrament is Idolatry. 151
Z.
ZWinglius slain. 118
Finis. Here ends the Table of M. Frithes book.
DIEV ET MON DRIOT

THE WORKS of Doctor Barnes. His life and Martyrdom.
1 A supplication to K. Henry the viij. fol. 183 2 His Articles condemned by
Popish Bishops. 205. 3. The disputation between the Bishops and him. 217.
4. Faith only justifies before God. 226. 5. What the Church is: and who be
thereof, and whereby men may know her. 242. 6. An other declaration of the
Church, wherein he answers M. More. 252. 7. What the keys of the Church
be, and to whom they were geeuen. 257. 8. Freewill of man, after the fall of
Adam of his natural strength, can do nothing but sin before God. 267. 9.
That it is lawful for all manner of men to read the holy Scripture. 282. 10.
That men's constitutions, which are not grounded in Scripture, bind not the
conscience of man under the pain of deadly sin. 292. 11. That all me^ are
bound to receive the holy Communion under both kinds, under the pain of
deadly sin. 301. 12. That by Gods word it is lawful to Priests that has
not the gift of chastistie, to marry wives. 309. 13. That it is against the
holy Scripture to honor Images and to pray to Saints. 339. 14. Of the
original of the Mass. 356. 15. A collection of Doctors testimonies. 358.


ARISE, FOR IT IS DAY.



The death and burning of the most constant Martyrs in Christ, D. Rob. Barnes,
Tho. Garret, and W. Hierome, in Smithfielde. an. 1541.


A brief discourse of the life and doings of Robert Barnes Doctor in
Divinity, a blessed servant and Martyr of Christ, summarely extracted out of
the book of Monumentes.
THe first bringing up of the said Rob. Barnes from a child, was in the
university of Cambridge, and was made a Nouice in ye house of ye Friar
Augustines there. And being very apt unto learning, did so profit, that by the
help of his friends, he was removed from thence to the university of Louayne
in Brabant, where he remained certain years, and greatly profited in the
study of the tongues, and there proceeded Doctor of Divinity. And then from
thence returned again into England, and so to the university of Ca^bridge,
where he was made Prior and Master of the house of Augustines, wherein he was
first brought up. And at that time the knowledge of good letters was scarcely
entered into the university, all things being full of rudenes and barbarietie,
saving in very few, which were priuye and secret: whereupon Barnes having
some feeling of better learning, and had red better actours, began in his house
to read Terence, Cicero, and Plautus, so that what with his industry, pains
and labors, and with the help of Thomas Parnell his scholar, whom he brought
from Louayne with him, reading Copia verborum et rorum, he caused the house
shortly to florishe Doct. Barnes a bolisher of barbarism, a founder of
learning, and a light of the truth.
with good letters, and made a great part of ye house learned, which before
were drowned in barbarous rudenes, as M. Cambridge. M. Field, M. Colman, M.
Burley, M. Couerdale, with diverse other of the university, that soiourned
there for learnings sake.

After these foundations laid, then did he read openly Paul's Epistles, and
put by D^ns and Dorbell, and yet he was a questionary himself: and only
because he would have Christ there taught and his holy word, he turned their
unsavory problemes, and fruitles disputations, to other better matter of the
holy Scripture, and thereby in short space he made diverse good deuynes. The
same order of disputation which he kept in his house, he observed likewise in
the university abroad, when he should dispute with any man in the common
schools. And the first man that answered M. Barnes in the Scriptures was M.
Stafford for his form to be Bacheler of Divinity, which disputation was
merueilous in the sight of the great blind Doctors, and very joyful to the
godly spirited.

Thus Barnes, what with his reading, disputation, and preaching, became famous
and mighty in the Scriptures, preaching ever against Bishops and hipocrites,
and yet did not see his inward and outward Idolatry, which he both taught and
maintained, until that good Master Bilney with other converted him unto
Christ.

The first Sermon that ever he preached of this truth, was yt Sunday before
Christmas day at S. Edwardes Church longyng to Trinity halle in Cambridge by
ye Pease market: whose theme was the Epistle of the same Sunday, Gaudete in
domino semper. etc. And so postilled the whole Epistle, following the Scripture
and Luthers postill. And for that Sermon, he was immediately accused of heresy
by ij. Fellows of yt Kings hall. Then the godly learned in Christ, both of
Pembrooke hall, S. John's, Peter house, Queens college, yt kings college,
Gunwell hall, and Benet college, showed themselves, and flocked together in
open sight, both in ye Schools, and at open Sermons, at S. Mary's, at S.
Austens, and at other disputations: and then they conferred continually
together.

The house that they resorted most commonly unto, was the white Horse, which
for despite of them, to bring Gods word into contempt, was named Germany. This
house specially was chosen, because of them of S. John's. The Kings college,
and yt Queens college, came in on the backside. At this time much trouble
began to ensue.

And first the adversaries of D. Barnes accused him in the Regents house before
the Vicechauncelour, where as his Articles were presented with him and
received, he promising to make answer at the next convocation, and so it was
done. Then Doctor Notoris, a rank enemy to Christ, moved D. Barnes to recant,
but he refused so to do, as appears in his book made to K. Henry the viij.
And this tragedy continued in Cambridge, in preaching one against an other in
trying out of Gods truth, until within vj. days of Shroftyde. Then was sent
down a Sergeaunt at Arms called Gibson, who suddenly arested Doctor Barnes
openly in the convocation house, to make all other afraid: and privily they
had determined to make search for Luthers books, and all the Germaynes works
suddenly. But good Doctor Forman of the Queens college, sent word
incontinently thereof to the chambers of those that were suspected, which were
in number xxx. persons. But God be praised, they were conveyed by that time
that the Sergeaunt of Arms, the Vichchauncelour and the proctours were at
every man's chamber, going directly to the place where yt books lay, whereby it
was perceived that there were some privy spies among that small company. The
next day in the morning the Sergeaunt of Arms carried Barnes with him, and
brought him to London before Cardinal Wolsey, where after long waiting, he by
the reason of Doctor Gardener Secretary to yt Cardinal (of whose familiar
acquaintance, Doctor Barnes had been before) and M. Fox master of the
wards, at the last he spoke with the Cardinal in his chamber of estate, and
there before him kneeled on his knees. Then said the Cardinal unto them, is
this Doct. Barnes your man that is accused of heresy? They answered, yea and
it please your grace, and we trust you shall find him reformable, for he is
both wise and well learned.

Then said the Cardinal, what master Doctor, had you not a sufficient scope
in the Scriptures to teach the people, but that my golden shoes, my pillars,
my Polleares, my golden cusheons, and my crosses did so sore offend you, that
you must make us Ridiculum Caput amongst the people? We were that day iolily
laughed to sckorne. Verily it was a Sermon more fitter to be preached on a
stage, then in a pulpit: For at the last you said I did wear a pair of red
gloves (I should say bloody gloves quoth you) that I should not be cold in
the midst of my Ceremonies. Then Barnes answered, I spoke nothing but the
truth out of the scriptures, according to my conscience, and according to the
old Doctors: and then he delivered him vj. sheets of paper written, to
confirm and corroborate his sayings.

The Cardinal received them, smilyng on him, and saying: we perceive that you
intend to stand to your Articles, and to show your learning: yea said Barnes
that I do intend by Gods grace and your Lordships favor. Then said the
Cardinal unto Barnes, such as you are bear us little favor and the
Catholic Church. I will ask you a question: whether do you think it more
necessary that I should have all this royalty, because I represent the kings
majesty's person in all the high courts of this Realm, to the terror and
keeping down of all rebellions, treasons, traitors, and all the wicked and
corrupt members of the common wealth, or to be as simple as you would have us,
and to sell all these aforesaid things, and to geeue it to the poor, which
shortly would piss it against the walls, and to pull away this majesty of a
princely dignity, which is a terror to all the wicked, and to follow your
counsel in this behalf? Barnes answered, I think it necessary to be sold
and geeuen to the poor, for this is not comely for your caulyng, nor the
kings majesty is not maintained by your pomp and pollares, but by God, who
says, per^me Reges regnant. Kings and their majesty's reign and stand by me.

Then said the Cardinal, lo master Doctors, here is the learned and wise
man that you told me of. Then they kneeled down and said: we desire your
grace to be good unto him, for he will be reformable. Then said he, stand you
up, for your sakes and the university, we will be good unto him. And then said
the Cardinal to Barnes, how say you M. Doctor, do you not know that I am
Legatus de latere, and that I am hable to dispe^ce in all matters concerning
religion within this Realm, as much as the Pope may? He said, I know it to be
so. Will you then be ruled by us, and we will do all things for your
honesty, and for the honesty of the university. He answered. I thank your
grace for your good will, I will stick to ye holy Scripture, and to Gods book
according to the simple talent that God has lent me. Then said the Cardinal,
answer well I would advise thee, for thou shall have thy learning tried to
the uttermost, and thou shall have the law.

Then D. Barnes required him that he might have justice with equity, but
foorthwyth he should have gone to the tower, but that Gardener and Fox became
his suertyes for that night. And in the morning he came again to York place
to Gardener and Fox, and forthwith he was committed to ye Sergeaunt at Arms,
to bring him into the Chapter house at Westminster, before the Bishops and
the Abbot of Westminster cauled Islip.

So soon as the Sergeaunt had presented Barnes, the said Bishops and Abbot*
did first swear him, and laid Articles unto him, who answered in like manner
as hefore he had answered to the Cardinal, and he offered unto them his book
of probations: who asked him, whether he had an other for him self, and he
said yea, and shewe^ it unto them, and they took them both from him, saying
that they should have no la^ sure at that present to dispute with him: But
demanded of him, whether he wou^ subscribe to his Articles or not? And he
subscribed willingly. Then was he committe^ to the Fleet, and the Warden of
the Fleet commanded that no man should speak^ with him.

On the Saturday following, he was again brought before them into the Chapt^
house at Westminster, where he remained almost the whole day, and late in the
eu^ning they cauled him before them, and demanded of him, whether he would
abi^ or burn? He was then in a great agonye, and thought rather to burn then
abiur^ But then was he sent again to have the counsel of Gardener and Fox,
and they persuaded him rather to abjure then to burn, because they said he
should do more good in time to come, and with diverse other persuasions that
were mighty in the sight of reason and flesh. Upon that kneelyng upon his
knees, he consented to abjure, and the abiuration put into his hand, he abiured
as it was there written, and then he subscribed it with his own hand, and yet
they would scarcely receive him into the bosom of the Church, as they termed
it. Then they put him to an oath, and charged him to execute do and fulfill
all that they commanded him, and he promised so to do.

Then they commanded the warden of the fleet to carye him with v. other of
the stiliard that then were in like trouble with him unto the fleet from
whence they came, and to keep them close prisoners, and in the morning to
provide v. Faggots for Doctor Barnes and iiij. stilliard men, the which was
readely done the next day by viij. of the clock in the morning. At which time
the knight Marshall with all his Bills, and gleues, and all the Tipstaues he
could make was commanded to bring them from the Fleet unto Paul's Church, and
in like manner to bring them from thence to the fleet again. And in the
morning they were all ready by their hour appointed in Paul's Church
aforesaid, the which Church was then so full that no man might get in. The
Cardinal had a skaffolde made for him in the top of the steyers before the
Quyer door, where he him self with xxxvj. Abbottes, mitred Priors and
Bishops, and he in his whole Pomp mitred (which Barnes had spoken against)
sat there inthronized, his Chapleynes and spiritual Doctors in gowns of
Dammaske and Satin, and he himself in Purple, even like a bloody Antechrist.
And on the top of the stayers also, there was erected a new pulpit for the
Bishop of Rochester, whose name was fisher to preach against Luther and Barnes,
and great basketes full of Books standing before the^ with in the rayles,
which after the end of the Sermon, a great fire being first made before the
Roode of Northen, were commanded to be there brent, and the aforesaid
heretics after the sermon to go thrice about the fire, and to cast in their
fagottes.

Now while the Sermond was a doing, Doctor Barnes and the Stilliard men were
commanded to kneel down, and to ask God forgeuenes, yt Catholic Church and
the Cardinals grace. And after that he was commanded at the end of the
Sermon to declare, that he was more charitabler handled then he deserved, or
was worthy (his heresies were so horrible and so detestable) and once again
kneeled down on his knees, desiring the people of forgeuenes, and to pray for
him. And the Cardinal departed under a canapye with all his mitred men with
him until he came to the West door of Paul's, and there he took his Mule, and
the mitred men came back again.

Then Barnes and the other said poor men, being commanded to come down from
^he stage (whereon the sweepers use to stand when they sweep the Church) the
Bishops ^at them down again, and commannded the knight Marshall and the
warden of the fleet with their company to carry them about the fire, and so
were they brought to the Bishops, and there for absolution kneeled down. At
which time Rochester declared to the people, how many days of pardon and
forgeuenes of sins they had for being (...) that Sermond, and there did
assoyle Doctor Barnes with the other, and showed yt people that they were
received into the Church again.

These things being done, the warden of the Fleet, and the knight Marshall
were commanded to carry them again unto the Fleet, and charged yt they should
have the ^tie of the fleet as other prisoners had, and that their friends
might resort unto them, and there to remain until the Lord Cardinals
pleasure were known.

After that Barnes had continued in y^ Fleet by the space of half a year, at
length ^ng delivered he was committed to be free prisoner at the Augustine
friars in Lon(...). When those Caterpillars and blouddy beasts had undermined
him, they complay(...) again to their Lord Cardinal. Whereupon he was removed
to the Austen friars (...) North hampton, there to be burned. Yet he him self
understanding nothing there(...), but supposing still that he should there
remain and continue in free prison. At the (...) one M. Horn who had brought
him up, and was his special friend, having intel^nce of the writ that should
shortly be sent down to burn him, gave him counsel to feign him self
desperate, and that he should write a letter to the Cardinal, and leave it on
his table where he lay, and a paper by, to declare whether he was gone to
drown A witty and pleasant devise to escape the cruelty of tyrants.
him self, and to leave his clothes in the same place: and there an other
letter to be left to the Mayor of the town to search for him in the water,
because he had a letter written in parchment about his neck closed in wax for
the Cardinal, which would teach all men to beware by him. Upon this they were
vij. days in searching for him, but he was conveyed to London in a poor man's
apparel, and tarried not there, but took shipping and went to Antwarp, and so
into Germany to Luther, and there fell to study until he had made answer to
all the Bishops of the Realm, and had made a book entitled Acta Romanorum
Pontificum, and an other book with a supplication to King Henry the viij.

Imediately it was told the Cardinal that he was drowned, and he said, Perijt
memoria eius cum sonitu. But this did light upon him self shortly after, which
wretchedly dyed at Lecester.

In the mean time D. Barnes was made strong in Christ, and got favor both of
the learned in Christ, and of foreign Princes in Germany, and was great with
Luther, Melanction, Pomeran, Iustus Jonas, Hegendorphinus and Aepimus, and with
the Duke of Saxon, and king of Denmark: which king of Denmark in yt time of
More and Stokesley sent him with the Lubeckes, as an Ambassador to King Henry
the eight. And during the time he remained here, he lay with the Lubeckes
Chauncelour at the Stiliard.

Sir Thomas More being then Chauncelour would feign have entrapped him, but the
king would not let him, for Cromwell was his great and dear friend. And ere he
went the Lubeckes and he disputed with the Bishops of this Realm in defense of
the truth. And so he departed again without restreynt with the Lubeckes.

After this he went again to Whittembergh to the Duke of Saxson and to Luther
and there remained to set forth his works in Print that he had begone. And
from thence shortly after he returned again into England in the time of Queen
Anne Boleyn and continued a faithful preacher in this City of London all the
time that she remained Queen. And was well enterteyned and promoted.

After this by the mean of the Lord Cromwell he was sent Ambassador from K.
Henry the viij. to the Duke of Cleue, for the marriage of yt Lady Anne of Cleue
between the king and her, and was well excepted in that Ambassade, and in all
his doings, until the time that Stephen Gardener came out of France: But
after he came, neither Stephen Gardyner the author of mischief and decay of
religion in England.
Religion prospered, nor the Queens majesty, nor Cromwell, nor the preachers,
who after the marriage of the Lady. Anne of Cleue, never ceased until he had
graffed the marriage in an other stock, by the occasion whereof he began his
bloody broyle.

For not long after the dissolution of yt said marriage between king Henry yt
viij. and yt Lady Anne of Cleue, yt said Doctor Barnes with two of his
brethren fellow preachers, named Iherome and Garret, were apprehended and carried
before the kings majesty to Hampton court, and there were examined: where the
kings majesty seeking the means of Barnes safety to bring Winchester and
him agreed, at Winchesters request granted him leave to go home with the
Bishop to confer with him, and so he did. But as it happened, they not
agreeing, Gardener and his comparteners sought by all subtle means how to
entangle and intrappe them into farther danger, which not long after was
brought to pass. For by certain complayntes made to the king of them, they
were enjoined to preach iij. Sermons the next Easter following at the Spittle
beside London. At the which Sermons besides other reporters which were thither
sent. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester was there present, sitting with the
Mayor, either to bear record of their recantation, or else as the Phariseys
came to Christ, to trippe them in their talk, if they had spoken any thing
awry.

When the aforesaid three had preached their Sermons, among whom Barnes
preaching the first Sermon, and he seeing Stephen Gardener there present,
humbly desired him in the face of all the audience to forgeeue him, and that if
he forgave him to hold^ up his hand, and the said Gardener thereupo^ held up
his finger. Yet notwithstanding, by the means of yt said reporters, they all
iij. immediately after they had preached, were sent for to Hampton court, and
from thence carried to the Tower by Sir John Gostwyke, and there they remained
until the xxx. day of July next following. The^ ensued process against them by
the kings counsel in the Parliament, to the which Gardener confessed
himself to be privy among the rest. Whereupon all the aforesaid three Saints
and true Martyrs, the xxx. day of July (not coming to any answer, nor yet
knowing any cause of their condemnation, without any public hearing) were
drawn on herdelles from the Tower to Smithfield, where they preparing them
selves to the fire, had there at the stake diverse and sundry exhortations,
amongst whom Doctor Barnes first began with this protestation following.

I am come hither to be burned as an heretic, and you shall hear my belief
wereby you shall perceive what erroneous opinions* I hold. God I take to
record I never (to my knowledge) taught any erroneous doctrine, but only those
things which the Scripture lead me unto, and that in my sermons I never
mainteyned any error, neither moved, nor gave occasion of any insurrection.
Although I have been slaundered to preach that our lady was but a Saffron
bag, which I utterly protest before God that I never meant it nor preached it:
But all my study and diligence has been utterly to confound and confute all
men of that doctrine: as are the Anabaptists, which deny that our Savior
Christ took any flesh of the blessed virgin Mary, which sects I detest and
abhor. And in deed in this place there has been burned some of them, whom
I never favored nor mainteyned, but with all diligence I did study evermore
to set forth the glory of God, the obedience to our sovereign Lord the King,
and the true and sincere religion of Christ. And now harken to my faith.

I believe in the holy and blessed Trinity three persons and one God, that
created and made all the world. And that this blessed Trinity sent down the
second person Jesus Christ into the womb of the most blessed and purest virgin
Mary. And hear bear me record that I do utterly condemn that abominable
and detestable opinion of ye Anabaptists, which say that Christ took no
flesh of the blessed virgin. For I believe that without the consent of man's
will or power, he was conceived by the holy ghost, and took flesh of her, and
that he suffered hunger, thirst, cold, and other passions of our body (sin
except) according to the saying of S. Peter, he was made in all things like to
his brethren (except sin)

And I do believe that he lived here among us: and after he had preached and
taught his fathers will, he suffered the most cruel and bitter death for me
and all mankind.

And I do believe that this his death, and passion was the sufficient price
and ranso^e for the sin of all the world. And I believe that through his
death he overcame the devil, sin, death, and hell, and that there is none
other satisfaction unto the father, but this his death and passion only: and
that no work of man did deserve any thing of God, but only his passion as
touching our justification. For I knowledge the best work that ever I did is
vnpure and imperfect. And here withal he cast abroad his hands and desired
God to forgive him his trespasces. For although perchance (said he) you know
nothing by me, yet I do confess that my thoughts and cogitations be
innumerable. Wherefore (said he) I beseech the o Lord, not to enter into
judgment with me. According to the saying of the Prophet David. Non intres in
iuditium cum seruo tuo domine. And in an other place. Si iniquitates
obseruaueris domine quis sustinebit. Lord if thou straightly mark our
inniquitie who is able to abide thy judgment. Wherefore I trust in no good
work that ever I did, but only in ye death of Christ, and I do not doubt but
through him to inherit ye kingdom of heaven. Take me not here that I speak
against good works, for they are to be done, and verily they that do them
not, shall never come to the kingdom of God. We must do them because they are
commanded us of God to show and set forth our profession, not to deserve or
merit, for that is only the death of Christ.

I believe that there is a holy Church and a company of all them that do
profess Christ: and that all that have suffered and confessed his name, be
Saints, and that all they do land and praise God in heaven, more then I or
any man's tongue can express, and that always I have spoken reverently of
Saints, and praised them as much as scripture willed me to do: And that our
Lady (I say) she was a vergyn immaculate and undefiled: and that she is the
most purest virgin that ever God created, and a vessel of God elected, of
whom Jesus Christ should be borne. Then the shriefe somewhat stayeing him and
hastening him to make an end, he turned him to the people and desired all men
to forgive him: and if he had said any evil at any time unadvisedly, whereby he
had offended any man, or given any occasion of evil that they would forgive it
him, and amend that evil they took of him: and to bear witness that he
detested and abhorred all evil opinions and doctrines against the word of God:
and that he dyed in the faith of Jesus Christ, by whom he doubted not but to be
saved. And with those words he desired them all to pray for him, and then
turned him about, and put of his clothes, and made him ready to the fire, where
patientlye he suffered the bitter and cruel Martyrdom and death. And the like
did the other his companio^s that suffered with him. Which was in the year of
our Lord. 1541.

A Supplication unto the most gracious Prince King Henry. viij.
Grace and peace from God the father of our Savior Jesus Christ be with your
most noble and excellent grace for ever. Amen.
The complaynt of Doctor Barnes made to K. Henry the viij. against the Lordly
Bishops and Prelates of England.
IN most humble wise co^plaineth unto your grace your continual orator Robert
Barnes, of the intolerable injuries, wrongs, and oppressions wherewith
certain Bishops of your realm vex and have vexed, contrary unto the word of
God, and their ownelawes, and doctors, not only me, but also all true
preachers and professors of the same, in condemning them for heretics, as
they did me: which thing they were not able to prove by the Scripture of God,
nor yet shall, if it would please your grace indifferently (according to the
office wherein God has set you) to hear the small as well as the great, and
to sustain your poor Orator against their violence and strength.

God I take to record that I am right sorry to make this complaint unto your
grace against them, if I could conjecture any other mean to cause them to
redress their intolerable oppressions, wherewith they daily oppress your
poor and true subjects, so sore and so violently, that without doubt (if your
grace see not shortly a remedy) God must needs punish. For I do not believe
that ever he will suffer long so great tyranny against his word, and so
violent oppression of true Christen me^, as they do now use, and that in the
name of Christ and his holy Church. For verily we do not read in any
memoryes, that our fathers have left us, that ever the people were under so
great tyranny, as now your poor subjects be unto the^. Now it is so far
come, that what soever he be, hye or low, poor or rich, wise or foolish,
The tyrannous government of the Bishops of England.
that speaks against them and their vicious living, he is either made a
traitor unto your grace, or an heretic against holy Church, as though they
were Kings, or Gods. This may your most excellent grace perfectlye know, if you
call to remembrance those good men that they have had to do with. Is it not a
marvelous court In the Bishops court no man can be found Innocent.
that they have? wherein there was never man accused of heresy, were he
learned or not learned, but they found him gilty? Is not that a marvelous court
ye never has innocents? What court within your realm may say this again?
And if any man speak of Gods law and right conscience, against this damnable
tyranny, little will they stick to make him an heretic. And if that will not
help (to color and maintain their oppression) then add they treason against
your grace, though he be never so true a subject, and all unlikely to make any
resistaunce, or to think any evil unto your grace.

Now if it please your grace, let us consider to what end this uncharitable
and unrighteous accusation of the Bishops, yea rather of ye devil is invented.

First, if there be any men ye preach dispute, or put forth in writing any
What soever is not against the Clergy, though the same be never so wicked,
yet find they no fault therewith.
thing not towching the^, though it be never so blasphemous against God, ye
blood of Christ, and his holy word, they will not once be moved therewt, the
examples thereof are so plain yt it needs no proof. Your grace may see what
blasphemous rubrikes they allow against yt blood of Christ, what shameful and
abominable pardons they they tolerate and admyt, what disputations they do
mayntaine to prove yt Pope a God and no man, having these words, That the Pope
is neither God nor man. And whether ye Pope In vi. Cap. Quo. in ver (...) Papa.
Did. xl. Ca. Si Papa.
can sin or not? and that no man can condemn the Pope though he bring
innumerable souls to hell by his occasion. Again let us consider, that if any
man but once speak against their cloked ipocrisie, or against never so little a
thing yt longs to them by the which their abominations should be disclosed.
And we shall euydently Whosoever speak against or preach against any of their
abuses and abominations, her ^st needs be caught and most shamefully and
cruelly handled and tormented.
perceive that their can no scripture, no place, no maistership, nor excuse in
the world save, but he must either to open shame, or cruel death. So that is
plain that their cruelnes serves to no other end, but as they should say,
if that any man will take in hand to preach the verety, and the true Gospel of
their Master Christ purely whereby those winnings should be deminyshed,
wherewith we maintain our honor, our dignity, our worldly promotion, our
delicious living, our gorgious apparel, our su^ptuous palaces, our lordships,
briefly all things that we use to our pastime and pleasure should be manifest
to all me^, ye we not only get these things by false feigned holiness in
deceyuing and robbing the people of their goods, but also ye dyspendyng of
them to be abhomynable, and contrary to the ordynance and word of God. Now
rather then this should come to pass, we had lever No power nor potentae may
hinder the gain and profits of the Clergy
gather our strength together and oppress by vyole^ce as many as will hold with
this learning, be he King, Duke, Lord, Baron, knight, man, woman, or child.
So that by there practice it is evident to all that will see: that it is they
that go about to make insurrection to yt mayntayning of their world ly pomp,
and pride, and not the true preacher, for he entendeth to maintain Is yt
false preacher is a persecuter, so the true preacher is a sufferer.
nothing, but to bring to light the most glorious and heavenly word of God,
which by them has been darkened and kept under, and that with suffering
persecution, as the nature of the word is) and not with persecuting, for he
makes no stryuyng (if be be the true preacher of God) nor fighting for this
world, but suffers the children of the world to enjoy these worldly
things. Not withstandyng they are not ashamed thus falsely to lay it to the
preachers charge, and all because they would make your grace to maintain their
maliciousnes. So that under the pretense of treason, they might execute the
tyranny of their hearts. For who is he that would be a traitor, or mayntaine
a traitor, against your most excellent and noble grace? I think no man yea
and I know surely that no man can do it, without the great displeasure of the
eternal God. For S. Paul commands straightly unto all christians, to be
obedient in all things, on this manner: Let every man submyt Roma. 13.
himself to the auctoryte of the higher power. For whosoever resists the
power, resists yt ordinance of God, And they that resist, shall receive to
them selves damnation. Also S. Peter confirms this saying: Submit your selves
unto all manner 1. Pet. 2.
of ordinance of man for yt Lords sake, whether it be unto the king, as unto
their chief head, either unto Dukes as unto them that are sent of him for the
punishment of evil doers, but to the praise of them ye do well. wherefore The
scriptures in the common tongue teach all obedience to the rulers, and is not
the mouer of sedition.
if every man had the scriptures, (as I would to god they had) to judge every
man's doctrine, then were it out of question, that the preachers thereof, either
would or could make, or cause to be made any insurrection against there
Prince: seeing the self same scriptures straytely commands all subjects to
be obedient unto their Princes, as Paul witnesses, saying: warn them (says
he) that they submit them selves to Princes and to powers, and to obey the
officers.

Now how ca^ they that preach and The Gospel of Christ is not ye cause of
insurrection.
exhort all men to this doctrine cause any insurrection, or disobedience
against their prince. But let us go further, and consider the preachers, which
only have preached the word of God, and mark if ever they were occasion of
disobedience or rebellion against princes.

First call to mind ye old Prophets, No Prophet that ever styrred up the people
against the Prince.
and with a single eye judge if any of the^ either privily or apertly sturred
up the people against their Princes.

Look on Christ, if he submitted not him self to ye hye powers: Paid Christ
submitted himself to the higher powers.
he not tribute for all he was free, and caused Peter likewise to pay?
Suffered not he with all patience the punishments of the princes? yea death
most cruel, although they did him open wrong, and could find him gilty in no
cause.

Look also of the Apostles (which both taught and wrote the doctrine of The
Apostles obeyed the Princes.
Christ, and in their living followed his steps) and if ever they sturred by
any occasion the people against their princes, yea if they themselves obeyed
not to all princes, although the most part of them were tyrauntes and infidels.

Consider likewise those Doctors, which purely and sincerely has handled All
true preachers teach obedience to the Prince.
the word of God, either in preaching, or writing, if ever by their means any
insurrection or disobedience rise among the people against their princes: But
you shall rather find, that they have been ready to lay down their own
heads, to suffer with all patience, whatsoever tyranny any power would
minister unto them, giving all people example to do the same.

Now to conclude, if neither the Scriptures, neither the practice of the
preachers thereof teaches, or affyrmeth that ye people may disobey their
princes, or their ordinances, but contrarywyse teaches all obedience to be
done unto them, it is plain that those Bishops or rather Papists, do falsely
accuse those true preachers and subjects: which thing would appear in every
man's sight, if by their violence, the word of God were not kept under.

Now is this ye doctrine that I do preach and teach, and none other, as
concerning this matter, God I take to record, and all my books and writings
that ever I wrote or made. And only I allow and favor them, which furthereth
this doctrine of Christ, and of this I am sure mine adversaries, or rather
adversaries to Christ's doctrine, must bear me witness.

But now as we have breefly touched the doctrine that the true preachers
preach to the people, both by word, writing, and practice of them: So let us
somewhat touch ye doctrine and practice of the Pope, and the Papisticall
Bishops, and then let every man seek out ye heretics, and traitors to their
princes.

First, where the preachers only of the word of God, preaches and teaches
all men to obey their princes and their ordinances, according to the words of
S. Peter. There the In 6. Lib. 1. titulo. 33. de matori obedientiae cap. Solite.
Pope and the Papisticall Bishops, contrary unto the mind and fact of Saint
Peter, expounds S. Peter's words saying: that S. Peter meaned not him self,
nor his successors, The Pope falsifyath the Scriptures.
but his subjects. And by this false interpretation excludes him self with
his, from all obedience to princes. And yet not so content, but craftily
drawing all other subjects from the obedience of their princes, says to them
also, that ye words of S. Peter were not spoken as a commandment, but as a
counsel.

And by this craft, if any prince espy his falsehode, and of conscience go
about to reprove him, then by his The Papists teach disobedience to Princes.
false preachers, and maintainers of him, he lightly withdraws ye hearts of
the commons from their prince, affirming the commandment of God to be but a
counsel, and at the least wise his authority to be sufficient to dispense
with all ye commandments of God. And thus (the people being ignorant,
because they lack ye word of God to judge every doctrine by) they delude their
wits.

And if any man that perceaueth their craft, of very love that he has to God
and his commandments, exhorts the people to judge the doctrine of those
Papists by the word of God: Anon they lay heresy unto his charge, laying
for the^ there Gods The doctrine of the Papist.
law, saying: No man may judge the Pope, no man also may geeue sentence above
his judgment, but he shall Did. xl. c. Si papa. 9. q. 6. ca. Cuncta. 30. q
1. cap. Ideo permit
judge all men upon earth.

Item, the seat of Rome geeueth strength and might to all laws, but it is
subject to none.

Item, that the subjects may be disobedient to their own Lords, and In 6.
Lib. 2. de sen. and re iudic.
that he may depose kings.

Item, that he has authority to break all oaths, bonds, and obligations
15. q. 6. cap. Alius.
made between any man of hye or low degree.

Item, that the Pope has power to interpret, declare, and to lay forth 26. q.
capit. Quotiens
the holy scripture after his own will, and to suffer no man to expound it
contrary to his pleasure.

Item, that the Pope is a God upon In 6. de co^c. preb. ca. Ad Apostolatus in
verb. continetur did. 40. cap. Si Papa.
earth, over all, heavenly, earthly, ghostly, and worldly, and he is all his
own, and no man may say to him, what do thou?

Item, though the Pope were so evil, that he lead innumerable me^ by great
heaps to hell, yet shall no man reprove him therefore.

Now after that they had sytten in the consciences of men, with these and The
shameless doings of the Papists.
such like abominable doctrines, and had excluded me^ from ye scriptures, as
an unlawful thing to have in their mother tongue, lest they should espy their
disceatfulnes: Then as me^ past shame, being both without fear of God and man,
spared not to put in execution these abominable doctrines insomuch that they
deposed openly Princes, and Emperors, yea and assoyled all their subjects
from the obedience of them, the commandment of God not regarded. But that my
words should the better appear to all men, I shall recite some of their
practices, both out of Aute^ticke crownycles, and out af their own law.

Zacharias did depose the king of ^5. quest. 6. Alius item.
France, not all only for his iniquity, but also because he was unprofitable
for so great a power, and set t^ The shameful arroga^cie and tyranny of the
Pope.
his ^^eede Pipinum the Emperors father, and did assoyle all France of their
oath and alleagyaunce that they had made unto the old king. The which thing,
the holy church of Rome does oftimes, by her auctorite. etc.

Now would to God your grace earnestly would look on this law, or at the
least, to suffer and geeue the word of God into ye hands of your subjects to
compare the obedience, that these men both preach and practice, to it. But
feign would I know of them all, who has deposed any king sith Christ's
passion, saui^g they only? who will be kings fellows, yea and co^troulers,
saving they only? Is not this a subtle craft of Antychrist, to warn other
men of heretykes, A cast of Antichrist.
and of traitors, and in the mean season, while men stand lokeing fhr
traitors, comes he in and plays the part of an open traitor saving
only he colors his name, and calls himself a true Bishop, and is ready
to accuse other me^ of treason, that he might escape himself, but he is sure,
that he will never accuse none of them that speak against the auctorite of
Princes. But if a man do begin but to open his mouth, for to declare that
he has no temporal power, then rages he, and cries out, treason, treason.
But let us return to their law, and see how they can prove it by Gods word,
and how it stands with true subjection. Is this reasonable, that the Pope, and
Popes take upon them the deposition of kings.
they (being by Gods law, but subjects) shall depose a king? what example
have they of our master Christ or if any of his Apostles? what scripture have
they to help them? How dare they be so bold, as to depose a king, which is
ordained of God, yea and by his holy word, having no example, nor scripture
for them? Be they above God and his blessed word? But they will say, that the
king was a wicked man, I answer the crownicles give contrary witness, how ye
he was a very good man, and right simple. And because he was simple, Therefore
Pipinus, which had all ye rule under him, thought him self better worthy to
rule then the king, so wrote by a Bishop, and by his chaplayne unto the Pope,
and desires him to give sentence, whether he was better worthy to be king,
that had all the pains and labors, or he that had no labor and could do
nothing? Now the Pope. to make Pipinum his friend and trusting by that means to
have help of him against the Emperor, with who^ he had then been at
variance, gave se^te^ce with him, and deposed the other, and made him a Monk:
and that this falshod should not be perceived they fained that ye king had
been a Monk before, called Samuel. This can I prove by good cronicles. Now
let your noble grace consider, if it were right, not only to depose such a
king, but also to make him a Monk. Thus have they done with other noble kings,
And no doubt, but that same or worse, will they attempt to do unto your grace,
if you displease them, and at the least they will do their vttermoste. Let all
the hole rabble of the^ tell your grace, when a true preacher of Christ's
Gospel did such a deed? There is no officer that has need to be afraid of
Christ's Gospel, nor yet of the preachers thereof. But of these preuye
traitors, can no man be too wary. But let us grant them, that ye king was a
wicked man. The Scripture commands us, to obey We ought not to depose a king
though he be wicked.
to wicked Princes, and gives us none auctoritye to depose them, as their own
gloss testifyeth upon this text: Subdeti estote. Who was more wicked then
Herod? and yet S. John suffered death under him, who was wyckedder the^
Pilate? And yet Christ did not put him down, But was crucified under him.
Breeflye, which of all ye Princes were good in the Apostles days? and yet they
deposed none. So that Gods word and their own learning, and the practice of
our Master Christ, and his holy Apostels, are openly against them. Moreover
their own gloss says, that he 1. Pet. 2.
was not deposed, because he was insufficient, but because he was wanton and
lecherous with weemen. O my Lords, if you be not afraid of the vengeance of
God, at the least take a little shame of the world unto you, that have so long
time with so great tyranny defended these laws, that be so openly against
Gods ordinance, against Gods word, and against the common ordinance and
consent of all the world. And this have you done, to the great injury of noble
Princes, to the intolerable subduyng of all noble blood, to the oppression of
their true subjects, to the destruction of all common wealths, and finally to
the everlasting damnation of many a Christened soul. Tell me by your faith,
do you believe that there is a living God, that is mighty to punish his
enemies? if you believe it, say unto me, can you devise for to avoid his
vengeance, which be so openly contrary to his word? What answer think
you to make to him? Think you that he will suffer your word to be heard, and
let his godly word be despised? Think you, that it will be sufficient for
you to say, that they be the laws of holy Church? Think you that he will
be thus taught of you? Then were it time to pluck him down, and set you up.
Nay my Lords he is no child, nor you shall find it no childs game, thus to
trifle and play with his holy word, and his blessed ordinance, yea and that
to the despising of the maker both of heaven and earth. Say what ye will, ye
are not able by no learning, to defend this matter, neither before God, nor yet
before our noble Christ and his Apostles are the ouerthrowers of the Popes,
doctrine.
Prince, nor before any man of learning, that will be true to his prince. For
which way soever you turn you, our master Christ, and all his blessed
Apostles be against you, and will openly accuse you, that you be contrary to
their word, and to their deed. Answer you to them, answer not to me. If I
hold my peace, they will speak. Nor it will help you but little, to cry after
your old manner, heresy, heresy, a traitor, a traitor: for now you cry
against your selves, and of those things. Christ and his Apostles do accuse
you. Do you think it with the ordinance of God, that you shall depose a king,
because he lives in aduoultry, or is a lecherous man? If you think it a
lawful cause, why do you not preach it openly? why do you not lay it to
kings charge? Why suffer you them to be kings, that live in aduoultry? Why
do you not put your laws in execution? You say they be the laws of holy
church, and thereby may you depose Princes. But if you will put them in
execution, then were it much better, to be a Bishop, or a Priest, the^ to be a
King, or a Duke. For you may live in whoredom, or in any other ungracious
living, yea and that to the destruction of many men's souls, and yet no man so
hardy to reprove you, as your own law does openly command in these words. If
the Pope do draw with Did. ul. Si Papa.
him innumerable people on a heap to the devil of hell, there to be punished
for ever, yet shall no mortal man presume to reprove his sins, for he must
judge all men, and may be judged of no man. etc. Likewise have De hereticis.
Cu^ ex iniuncto. Et sieut in.
you an other law in your Decretals, that no lay man may reprove a Priest. etc.
How think you by these laws, if they be not of the devil, tell me what is
of the devil? You will both reprove, yea and also depose Princes, but you will
neither be deposed, nor yet reproved of any mortal man. What think you your
selves? Gods? But and ye will depose Kings for fornication, how would you
handle king David? and king Solomon? would you depose them because of aduoutry?
David. Solomon. Nathan.
So do you more then the Prophet Nathan durst do. Briefly will ye be content
that the king shall depose you for fornication, then shall we shortly be rydde
of the most part of you.

But let us come to Herod, that Herod.
kept his brothers wife, would you depose him therefore? Then do you more then
S. John durst do. For he durst no more do, but reprove his vice, and dare
you depose him? But let us go forth with your law. What authority had ye Pope
and you to set Pipinum in that rowme, and not rather to let the kingdom choose
the^ a king? Our master Christ said, his kingdom was not of this world. But
you will be above kings in this world, and not all only depose them, but
also set in new at your pleasure. Moreover by what authority did the Pope
dispense with the Realm of their oath? Your law says, that the holy church of
Rome is wont so to do. I pray you of whom has she learned this same wont? who
has given her this authority? The Pope will dispe^ce with ye oath of
obedience that subjects make to their prince.
Can she discharge us of our obedience that we owe to our Princes? Is not this
of the law of God? Stands it not also with yt law of nature? Yea do not
Turks and infidels faithfully obey to their princes? Is not the Princes power
of God? and will you depose this power? or can you dipe^ce with this law? S.
Peter learneth Actuum. 5.
you, yt you are more bound to obey God and his law, then man. but you little
regard S. Peter's saying. wherefore what say you to your own 23. q. 5. Regu^
officium.
law? whose words be these? we must keep unto Princes and powers faith and
reverence. etc. My Lords here you not fidem and oportet. and how come you with
your despensation, for our oath, and say, Non oportet, that we are not bound to
be obedient to our princes, if you despence with us. How ca^ you dispense with
us of our oath, seeing it is against Gods law? Here may men see, what teachers
you have been, and also be toward God and his holy Apostles, and toward your
noble Princes. And ye this thing may be clearly known, I shall resyte an
other practyse of yours.

Our Chronicles make mention, An. 1366.
that in the time of Edward the iij. Pope Urban did depose Perse King of
Spain, because he was a vicious liver, and set in his stead one Henry a
bastard. How think you, stands this fact with Christ's doctrine? Bishops
captains of Rebels against the Prince.
which of us all that preach the Gospel, has gone about to do princes such a
villanye? you do the deed, and lay the blame to us. Do you not remember,
how that in the days of Henry the iiij, a captain of your Church, called
Richard Scroupe, Archbishop of York, did gather an host of men, and waged
battle against his king? but God the defender of his ruler, gave the king the
victory, which caused ye traitor to be beheaded. And then your forefathers
with their deuilishe craft, made the people believe by their false Chronicle,
that at every stroke that was geeue^ at the Bishops neck, the king received an
other of God in his neck. And where as the king was afterward stricken with a
sickness, you made him and all his subjects believe ye it was Gods punishment,
because he had killed the Bishop. And not thus content, but you feigned after
his death, that he did miracles. Is not this toe much, both to be traitors to
your king? and also to feign God to be displeased with your king, for
punishing of treason? finally to make him a saint, and also that God had done
miracles to the defending of his treason? How is it possible to invent a more
pestilent doctrine then this is? Here is Gods ruler despised, and hereby is
open treason maintained? Think you that God will show miracles to fortify
these things? But no doubt the proverb is true, such lips such lectuse,
such saints such miracles.

Here were many things to be said, but I will pass it over. I am sure you
do remember how obediently King John was cruelly handled of the Clergy.
you drove King John out of his kingdom? And the very original of the strife
was, because there were iiij. Bishops of England at variaunce with the kings
grace, and because he required a dymie of the pyed Monks of England, for to
maintain his war against the Irishe men, but they would geeue him none.
Wherefore after ye king had sped well in Ireland, he revenged him of ye Monks,
and took of every place a certain. For yt which thing your forefathers,
maintainers of your deuilishe doctrine, wrote unto their God yt Pope, and
caused him first to excommunicate the king, and afterward to interdicte the
land, and gave it to the French kings son, which was maintained through your
fathers, and your natural king compelled to flee into Wales, and there to
tarry till ye time that he was content to make agreement with your holy Idol
the Pope. The conditions of ye agreement were, that he should first geeue xl.
M. mark to the iiij. Bishops, and make restitution to the pyed Monks again,
and also should geeue to Pandolphus the Popes Legate, a great sum of money.
Finally, he should be bound to geeue yearly to the Pope of Rome a certain
great sum of money, and he and all his successors should receive the land
of the Pope, and hold it in see ferme, and unto this your fathers set their
hands and seals, binding them selves to tompell the King John poisoned.
king to keep this contracte. But yet you were not so content, but afterward
you found the means that this good king was poisoned by a traytorous Monk of
Swinested, because he should say, that he would make a halfepeny loaf worth
xx. shillinges if he lived a year. For the which Abominable hypocrisy.
word your holy Monk was moved, and went and confessed him self to the Abbot,
how that he would poison the king for this, and the one devil, as good as the
other, the holy traitor absolved the holy murderer before the deed was done,
and for this holy murderer is there founded v. masses for ever.

This is the blessed obedience of your holy Church. How would you cry? how
would you yaulpe, if we There is no such ennemy to a true man as is a thief.
had handled a gentleman's dog on this fashion: but you can call us poor men
traitors, and in the mean season, you bring both king and kingdom into
servitude and bondage? What is treason? if this be no treason? to bring so
honorable a king, and his land into such bondage, and compel him to receive
his natural and free kingdom, of such a vyllayne, and lymme of ye deuell.
What can be said or thought to defend this matter: you have not all only done
wrong to the king, but unto the youngest child ye lies in the cradell, ye
which by your means is bond. And think it not sufficient, to say that it is
not your deed: for first you are the children of these fathers, and you have
always allowed this act. This has been blased, blown, preached, and cried
out, and all your books full of this matter, and many a true man's blood has
been shed for speaking against this. And yet was there never none of you, ye
did ever preach against this damnable fact: but with full consent with full
agreement, both in word, deed, and in writing, you have allowed this treason.
Therefore I take you for the auctors, as well as your forefathers. I would not
speak how dampnable it is, to institute masses, for a willing traitor, and
murderer: there was never no learning that could allow this. But there is no
remedy, he that dies against his king, and for the maintayning of your treason
must needs be a saint, if masses, blessings, and miracles will help, for all
these be at your commandment to give where you list. So that we pore men
must be accused of insurrection and treason, and we must bear all the blame, we
must be driven out of ye realm, we must be burned for it, and as God
knows, there is no people under heaven, that more abhors, and with
earnester heart resists, and more diligenly does preach against disobedience,
then we do. Yea I dare say boldly, let all your books be serched, that were
written this. 500. years, and all they shall not declare the auctorite of a
prince, and the true obedience toward him, as one of our little books shall
do, that be condemned by you for heresy, and all this will not help us. But
as for you, you may preach, you may write you may do, you may swear, against
your Princes, and also assoyle all other men of their obedience toward their
princes. You may compel princes to be sworn to you, and yet are you children
of obedience, and good christen men. And if ye dye for this doctrine, then is
there no remedy but you must be saints, and rather then fail, ye shall do
miracles. To prove this, I will tell you of a holy saint of yours, of whom your
legend The story of German one of ye popes Saints.
and cronicles makes mencyon, his name, as ye call him is s. Germayne. So it
chanced ye in the time of king Vortiger he came into England, into a place
where the king lay, and desired for him and his company lodging. The king
because he kept no common Inn, would not receive him. So he departed very
angerly, and went to the kings Neteherdes house, and there desired lodginge,
and meat, and drink for him and his company. The Neteherde was content to
lodge him, but he said he had no meat for him, saving a young calfe, that
stood suckyng of the damme by the crybbe. The bishop commanded the calfe to
be slain, and to be dressed, and brought A worthy miracle for the Popes
Saints.
before him, and he and his company eat it up, and after commanded the bones
of the calfe to be gathered together and put in the calves skin again, and
to be laid in the cribbe by the damme, and by and by ye calfe starte up alive
again. The next day the bishop went to king Vortiger, and reproved him
merueilous straightly, because he would not lodge him, and said that he was
vnworthey to be A king deposed by a Saint, and a cowheard set up in his
kingdom.
king, and therefore deposed him, and made his Neteherde king in his stead. Of
the which Neteherde as ye cronicles makes mension, came afterward many kings.
This is written by one called Petrus de netalibus, the which writes the lives
of all saints I think no man will bind me to prove this thing a lie, but
yet it must be preached, and taught in your church it must be written in holy
saints lives, and he must be a saint that did it, and why? because he
deposed a king, and set in a Neteherde. These shameful and abominable things
do you praise, and allow: and in the mean season, condemn us for heretics,
and for traitors. And if we chance (moved by the abhomynablenes of your
doctrine) to give you but one evil word, then all the world rekoneth us
uncharitable. But as for my part, I take God to record, before whom I shall
be saved or damned, that though you have done me shameful wrong, and
intolerable violence, yet with your own persons am I never displeased nor
angry: but against that horrible devil ye dwells in you, that is the causer,
and auctor and mayntayner of such abominable doctrine, that is against God and
his blessed word, against him (I say) is my quarrel, and against him do I
strive, this is the truth, let men take my words as they will. Is it not
abominable, think you, so shamfully to depose princes? so to rebuke them so
to handle them? to compel them to be sworn to you? and to hold their lands
of you? and to be your ministers? to the great dishonor of the living God,
and blaspheming of his blessed word, and to the great dispight of all noble
potentates? Ye remember the Just. li. ij. de sen. and re iuds. ca. ad Apost.
fact that is declared in your law of the noble Emperor Friderike, and that
wretch Innocent the fourth: the thing was this. The Pope by ye reason of
certain complaints, made by the Fridericke the Emperor deposed.
Emperors enemies, cited the Emperor to appear at Rome, and because the
Emperor would not appear, he cursed him with book, bell, and candell, and
afterward deposed him, and commanded the electours to chose an other. This is
the cause of your law briefly. But your text declares certain artycles
against the Emperor, which be these. The first Articles alleged against
Friderike the Emperor
that he had sworn to keep peace with ye church of Rome, which oath he
brake, says ye Pope. The second that he had done sacrilege, in taking 22.
Gallyes laden with holy spiritual prelates the which would have gone to ye
council, gathered against the Emperor in Lugdune. The third, because ye
Emperor was accused of certain articles of heresye, the which be not set
out. The fourth, because that he had not paid the annual pencyon for the
kingdom of Sicill (Sicill the which the Pope calls the spiritual patrimony
of S. Peter) in the space of ix. years. For these same things did he depose
ye Emperor and pryuate him of all his dignity, and assoyleth all his subjects
of their oath and obedience, and commands every man not to obey him, but all
men ye either gave him council, help, or favor, to be excommunicate and
cursed. This is your fact, this is your deed, this is your doctrine, in this
learning you be promoted doctors, and unto this learning you are sworn,
these books be read openly in your vnyuersities. Mark now, which of us
twain be traitors. Either you that do depose Emperors, and kings for such
trifles, yea and also make a Note here the difference between the Papists and
Protestants.
law thereof, and swear unto it, and compel all other to swear unto it: or
else we, that speak against it, and say ye you do wrong both to God, to his
blessed ordinance, and to all noble potentates. For First, ye ought to be
under them, and not they under you, and more can you not do but repreue by
Gods word their unlawful factes, but to depose them though they be
infydelles, and heretics, have you none authority. Ye see how our master
Christ, and all his blessed Apostles did use them selves toward vnbeleeuyng
Princes, they neither deposed them, nor yet caused them to be sworn unto
them. What a matter is it to depose an Emperor, because he lays hands of a
carnal Cardinal? Is not Paul and Peter, as holy as all the College of you?
And yet for laying hands of them was no man deposed. What and if he keep no
peace? is that a sufficient cause to depose him? your own law testifies
otherwise. The holy church xxxiij. q. q. Inter haec.
of God has no sword, but the spiritual sword, with the which she does not
kill, but quicken. Likewise in an xxiij. q. viij Conuenter.
other place, blessed S. Ambrose says, willyngly will I never forsake you, but
if I be compelled I may not resist, I may sorrow, I may weep, I may wayle.
Against weapons, against soldiers, against the Gothans, my tears are my
weapons. For such things be the defense of a Priest, otherwise ought I not,
nor may not resist. etc. Blessed S. Ambrose durst not depose the Emperor,
neither for laying hand of him, nor yet for heresy, neither for defendyng the
liberties of holy Church. But S. Ambrose was a simple fool, and knew not what
the liberties of the Church meant, nor yet what the holy spiritual flesh of
Cardinals is worth, and therefore he could do nothing, but weep and wayle. But
and if he had been half so wise, as I read of a certain Bishop of Salisbury
was, he had done more in The hauty mind and lofty courage of a Bishop.
this matter.

In the time of king Richard the second, it chanced a baker of London to bear
horsebread in a basket, and there came a servant of the Bishop of Salisbury,
and took by violence a loaf from him. The baker asked why he did so, and he
made him none answer, but brake his head, and the pore fellow cried for help
against this violence, whereby the people were moved in the street to come out,
and keep the kings peace, so that the Bishops servant was compelled to fly
into a house: Nevertheless the people moved at this great violence, caused the
Constable to come for to take him, and to bring him to prison, but anon the
Mayor and the Shriues came and pacified the multitude, and so departed, and did
the Bishops servant no more hurt. Notwithstanding the Bishop The patience of
Bishops are soon turned to wrath.
of Salisbury, and the Archbishop of York were so moved with the City, for
making an asaute to the Bishops house, that they made such a co^playnt to the
kings grace, that he put the Mayor, and both the Shriues out, and set in a
Knight called Sir Edward, to rule yt City, and all this was done for a
horseloafe. What shall a man say to the patience of these spiritual men? They
do open violence, they break the kings peace, they rob men of their
goods, yea and that in the kings chamber, and also in the kings high street,
to the great disdain of justice, to the rebuke of the king, and to the great
dispeasure of his subjects, and yet they can pack the matter so, that they
be white sons, and other men must suffer for it. I can believe none
otherwise, but that they have witched the world, that men could neither hear
nor see. For if this be not a shameful fact, I can not tell what is
shameful. It had becommed them a great deal better, to have punished their
servant in example of all other. But that was never the wont of the spiritual
Church, and yet they will accuse all other men of insurrection, but I dare say
there was no rebellion in this Realm this v. C. years, if the king had
displeased them, but they were at the beginning of it. We do read in the time
of king Henry the second, that he required of his spiritual Henry the second.
Bishops, that none of them should depart out of yt land, but they should
find him sureties, that they should purchase nothing, to the hurt of the kings
person, and his Realm. But the spirit of the spiritual fathers would not
agree to it, but rather found the means, that Pope Alexander the Alexander
the third.
third (the which was an usurper of the sea of Rome) condemned this article
for heresy, and afterward one of the Bishops (but against his will) dyed for
this, and such like articles mo, and you declared him a stynkyng martyr, but of
this holy martyr, I will speak more an other time. If this be obedience to
Princes, to intend and The true occasions and matters that stir up
insurrection against Princes.
purpose to betray them, and their Realms, then are ye the best obedient
children that ever were. But if making of dissension, debate, and strife, and
setting men together by the ears, assoylyng men of their oath toward their
Princes, may be cause of insurrection, and treason: then are ye the master of
all masters, and the best conueyers of all iugglers. What true English heart
would think, but that the kings request was both godly and lawful? what
learning is able to defend the contrary? Stands it not with our fidelity
that we owe toward our Prince? yea with the truth that we owe to our father and
mother? to our brethren and sisterne? and to all our country men? Does not our
oath made to our Prince, bind us to it? and yet you will not agree to it: but
all your books must rather be fulfilled with contrary doctrine, and all men
must be condemned for heretics, that speaks against the^. Believe me, if I
were your mortal enemy (as you reken me to be, and as you have well deserved,
that I should be) I could so set out this matter, that all me^ should spytte
at you: but I will use my self charitable toward you, and if the matter had
not been so haynously, and so violently handled of you, I would not have given
you one ill word. But now let no man require of me, that I should (unto such
an abominable and detestable devil, as has brought in this wicked and
shameful learning and manners) put of my cappe, and make low courtesy, and give
fair words, and say: God give you good morrow sir devil, how fare you? I am
glad of your welfare, and prosperity, your Lordship does rule very graciously,
and all men prayseth you. I doubt not but God shall prosper you. I say, let no
man require this of me: for I am, and will be so taken, for his mortal enemy,
whersoeuer I do find him, whether he be Lord, or Bishop, saving
peradventure, if I spy him dwelling in a Bishop, I will not handle him with
so rough words, for the weakness of certain men, as I would, if I found him
in an other place. It were not uncharitable, if I recited here by name the
innocent blood, that you have shed in my time, for the speaking against your
unlawful doctrine. Alas what fault could ye sinde in good master Bylney,
who^ ye have cast away so violently? I dare Master Bylney.
say, there is not one among you (that knew him, but must commend and praise
his virtuous lyuinge. And though you had found him with a little fault (the
which I think, and he were now alive, should be no fault) alas would you
cast away so cruelly, so good a man? and so true a man? both to God, and to his
king? But I will return again to my purpose, and show an other example, how
you have learned, and taught to set kings and kingdoms together by ye ears,
for the maintenance of your dignities and doctrines.

Pope Urban the vj. which was chose^ in the year of our Lord 1378. Johan Fros.
in Croni. suis.
by sedition, and violence of Romans, which would have no Cardinal of
France, because they would the Pope should be resident in Rome. This Urban
(I say) devising how to mayntaine his sect and part against his adversary,
which was called Clement, of whose side ye king of France held, sent to the
king of England, Ed. the 3. (the which as than was not well content with the
French king) certain Bulls contaynyng clean remission a poena and a culpa,
for all them that would wage battle against the king of France, and against
them that were of Clementes side. And because the king and his Lords Pope
Clement against Pope Vrbane, and Vrbane against Clement, each defiyng and
cursing other.
should be the willinger to take battle on them, he sent a commandment
to the Bishops, to raise of the spirituality a tax, for to pay the soldiers
with. Moreover because the Duke of Lancaster had a title to the kingdom of
Castle, the which held of Clementes side: therefore ye Pope granted, that
part of this money should also be delivered to him, if he would wage battle
against ye king of Castle, promysing him also, that he would stir the king
of Portyngale (which than had also varyaunce with the said king of Castelll)
to war against the said king, and to the mayntaynyng of his war, he would
grant yt king of Portyngale a demi of his spiritualty through all his Realm.
How much was gathered in Portyngale, our stories makes no mension: but in
London, and in the diocese was gathered a tu^ne of gold, and in the whole
realm of England was gathered xxv. C. M. frankes, which makes in English
money. CC. lxxvij. M. vij. C. lxxvij. (...). And because this money was
gathered of ye spiritualitie, and by their diligence therefore the Pope
ordained Henry Spenser the Bishop of Norwych to be the chief captain of this
war: but or ever the Pope could bring this matter to pass, he sent to ye
king, to his Lords, and to his Bishops xxx. Bulls: So that at the last,
this foresaid Bishop of Norwyche was sent forth with a great number of men,
in the wages of the Church, And the Duke of Lankester likewise against the king
of Castle. Their oath was given them, to fight against no man, nor country
that held with Pope Urban. And our chronicle says, that Pope Urban would have
made peace between the French king, and ours at the last. How think you? Popes
the styrres up and procurers of war and destruction of people and countries.
is not this a pretty practice, to set men together by the ears? and than to
make them believe, that he would make a peace? First we must have clean
remission to fight, and tha^ we shall be curssed as black as a pot, if we
will make no peace, And why? because the Pope has his purpose.

Is not this a goodly packyng of spiritual men? Is not here goodly obedience
taught toward Princes? Be not men's souls well fed with this doctrine? Be not
these good fathers, that thus watches night and day, for yt cure and charge,
that they have of men's souls? Mark how charitable, and liberal that the holy
Fathers be, in distributing of Christ's merits? Every man that fights in
his cause, shall have clean remission a pena, and a culpa, and must needs be
the child of salvation. Let Christ say and do what he can, for the holy
Church has so determined. And that no man should doubt of it, there be xxx.
Bulls granted, and that under lead. And the Church of Rome Did. xix. Si.
To. and enim vero and null ifas. and ca. Sic omnes.
can not err, for the spiritual law says: what the sea of Rome does
approve, that must needs be allowed: and that, that she reproves must be of
no strength. Likewise in an other place: So must the decrees of the sea of Rome
be accepted, as though they were spoken by the godly voice of Peter himself.

Against these things dare I not speak, for I would feign be taken for a
Christen man: but yet I must be so bold to speak one word, the truth is,
the devil himself has blown out these presumptuous voices. And yet me^ must
set both life, and soul on these words. For there be xxx. Bulls of lead,
to confirm the matter. And that is a weightye thing. But when king John, our
natural prince, should have had of the pyed Monks, for the defense of this
realm, but a small sum of money. Than was there never a Bull to get, nor
yet one Bishop in England, to preach on his side: But now CC. M. pound gathered
in one Lent, and a great deal more, and for the maintainau^ce of ye pope his
holy flesh. Was not this a marvelous subjection? that we should suffer our
selves so lightly to be moved, to give, not only so great a su^me of money?
but also to send forth, in the defense of such a wicked person, our natural
brethren, kinsemen, and countrymen? I dare say of my conscience, that in five
hundred years, there was not such a sum of money so lightly granted, (were
the cause never so great) unto our right natural, and liege Lord. Ye I do
believe, that if the kings grace at this same day, should desire of ye
spirituality, but half of this sum, I dare say How ready the spirituality is
is to help the Pope.
they would never grant him with their good will, nor there should not be
found one Divine in England, of the holy Popes Church, that could and would
prove by good Divinity, that the king might take it, and the spiritualitie
were bound to give it.

Alas, what shall I say? believe me, I do want words, to ye setting out of
this matter: where is natural affection? where is natural love? where is
fidelity? where is truth of heart, that men ought to have, and to bear toward
their natural Prince? toward their native country? toward their fathers and
mothers? toward their wives and children? yea toward their lives? God of his
infinite goodness has given us a noble Prince, to the maintaynyng and defense
of all these things, and toward him we have little or none affection. But unto
this idol of Rome, are we ready to give both body, and goods, and the more we
give, the better we are content. Was not this a merueilous poueryshyng to this
Realm? to send out so many thousands? and to receive nothing again? but
deceitful Bulls? and sheep skynnes? and a little piece of lead? yea and
worst of all, to make men believe, that their salvation did hang on it? I dare
say boldly, that if we poor men (which be now condemned for heretics, and
also for traitors against our king) had not been, the Realm of England had
not stand in so good a condition as it is, for men had been bound still in
their conscience, What profit England has by the Gospel.
for to obey this wretched idol. Who durst have kept ye innumerable sum of
money, within the realm, ye yearly was sucked out, by this adder, if our
godly learning had not instructed their conscience? Let all the Liberaries be
sought in England, and there shall not be one book written in. iiij. C.
years, and (admitted by the Church of Rome, and by our spirituality) found,
that does teach this obedience, and fidelity toward Princes, and delivers
our Realm, from the bondage of this wicked Satan the pope, or else that is
able to satisfy, and to quiet any man's conscience within this Realm: and yet
I dare say, he is not in England, that ca^ reprove our learning, by the
doctrine of our master Christ, or else of his holy Apostles. Yea me^ have
studied, and devised how they might bring our mighty Prince, and his noble
Realm, under ye feet of this devil. There could be nothing handled so
secretly within this Realm, but if it were, either pleasant, or profitable to
the Pope to know, then were all the Bishops in England sworn, to reuelate that
matter to him. This may be well proved, by their shameful, and traiterous oath,
that they contrary to Gods law, man's law, and order of nature) have In. vi.
lib. ij. tit. de iure iurando c. Ego Episcopus.
made to this false man, the Pope. The words of their oath, written in their
own law, be these.

I Bishop. N. from this hour forth, shall be faithful to S. Peter, to the holy
The oath of the Bishops made to the pope.
Church of Rome, and to my Lord the Pope, to his successors, lawfully entryng
into the Popedom. I shall not consent in counsel, nor in deed, that he
should lose either life, or lymme, or that he should be taken in any evil
trap. His council, that shall be showed unto me, either by him self, or else
by his letters, or by his Legates, I shall open to no man, to his hurt, or
damage. I shall help to defend and mayntaine the Papacy of the Church of
Rome, the rules of the holy fathers (saving mine order) against all men living.
I shall come to the Council, when soever I be called, onles I be lawfully
let. The Popes Legate I shall honorablye entreat, both going, and coming, and
in his necessities, I shall help him. I shall visit yearly, either by mine
own proper person, or else by some sure messenger, the sea of Rome, onles I be
dispensed with. So help me God, and this holy Evangelist.

There has been wondrous packing used, and has cost many a thousand men's
lives, ere that the spiritualitie brought it to pass, that all they should be
sworn to the Pope, and owe none obedience to any man, but to him only. This
matter has been wondrous craftily conveyed, for at the beginning the Bishops
were not sworn so straitely unto the Pope, as now. For I do read in the time
of Isidorus in Decretis Gregoris mi noris c. In nomine.
Gregory the third, which was in the year of our Lord. vij. C. lix. how their
oath was no more, but to swear for to keep the faith of holy Church, and to
abide in the unity of the same, and not to consent for any man's pleasure to the
contrary, to promise also to seek the profits of the Church of Rome. And if
any Bishops did live against the old statutes of holy fathers, with him they
should have no conversation, but rather forbid it, if they could, or else
trewly to show the Pope of it. This oath continued a The Pope changes the
bishops oath, as often as it makes for his profit.
great many of years, till that a mortal hatred sprang between the Emperor,
and the Pope, for confirming of Bishops, than as many Bishops as were confirmed
of the Pope, did swear the oath, that I have first written. For this oath,
that Gregory makes mention of, was not sufficient: because that by it, the
Bishops were not bound to betray their Princes, nor to reuelate their
counselles to the Pope. The which thing ye pope must needs know, or else he
could not bring to pass his purpose, that is to say, he could not be Lord
over the world, and cause Emperors, and kings, to fetch their confirmation
of him, and to kneel down, and kiss his feet. The which when he had brought
to pass, he proceeded farther, First kings he brought with violence under
the Popes foot, and then Bishops be sworn to maintain it.
adding more things in the Bishops oath, to the maintayning of his worldly
honor and dignity, as it shall afterward appear. But first we will examine
this oath, how it stands with Gods word, and with the true obedience to our
prince. I pray you tell me out of what Scripture, or else out of what example of
our master Christ and his holy Apostles, you have taken this doctrine, to
learn to swear to Saint Peter? or else to the Church of Rome? or else to the
Pope? What need you to swear to Saint Peter? ye ca^ neither do him good by
your fidelity, nor yet hurt by your falshode. Oaths be taken, that he that
the oath is made unto, might be sure of the true help, and succor of him
that swears, against all men that could hurt him.

Now Saint Peter has none enymies, and though he had, yet is not he afearde
of them, neither can you help him, nor deliver him, if he had need. But the
verytie is, that good S. Peter must here stand in the fore frunt, to make men
afraid with, and to make men believe that you are his friends: but God
knows, that you neither favor his person, lrarnyng nor living For if S.
Peter's person were here with his net on his neck, I think you would bid him
walk beggar, if you called him not heretik. Why do you not swear to follow
his living? and to preach and teach his doctrine? but that makes nothing for
your purpose. Therefore you swerre all only to S. Peter's name. But wherein
will you be faithful to S. Peter? to mayntane his worldly honors? dignities?
or riches? you know well, he says, that he has forsaken all these things
for Christ's sake: and And for these things, I think he will require none
oath of you. Wherefore if you will needs be faithful, and sworn unto S.
Peter, it must be in mayntayning, and in defending spiritual things, as
preaching of Christ's Gospel purely, and sincerely, mynystring truly after
the institution of our master Christ, ye blessed sacraments of holy church,
and in virtuous living, giving example to the holy church of Christ. But now
if this be your oath, truly you are perjured, and worthy to wear papers, for
you do reken your selves to hye, and to honorable, to go about such simple
things, as these be. And therefore you have applied your selves, to The holy
works of Bishops.
other greater matters, as to christening of belles, to halowing of churches,
to blessing of candels, to consecrating of holy oil, to halowing of chalesies,
vestementes, and aulters, and to giving 40. days of pardon, to them that
receives your blessings in the streate, and to some that visyte holy saints,
and such like great matters, which partayneth nothing to your oath. wherefore
I do reckon, ye after the true form of your oath, we have but few bishops,
but ye be perjured or abiured (call it as you will) both against God, against
S. Peter, and against their prince. It follows And to the holy church of Rome
what needs this? what good can you do to ye holy church of Rome. Or what
profit is it to her, that you swear? where is any request of her in holy
scripture that you should swear? Think you that she will compel you by your
oath to be true to her? then must she needs sue you of perjury if you
break your oath. But mark how ye church of Rome is set in your oath. as the
better person, before the Pope. wherefore it must needs follow, that ye Pope
is under ye church, and less then the church, and no head of the church, except
you will make him a third person, that neither pertayneth to S. Peter nor yet
to holy Church: but is a thing of him self, and as your law says: neither
God, In Prohe. vi. ca. Quoni. in verbo Papa.
nor man, but middle between them both, that is as much to say, after my
learning, as the devil him self.

But what means it, that you swear only to the holy Church of Rome? will
you be traitors to the holy Church of Constantinople? or else to the holy
Church of England? Or do you think other Churches not holy? tell us what you
mean? for it seems a marvelous thing, and also a special thing, that you
make such an oath all only to the holy Church of Rome, naming none other
church. Why are you not rather sworn to keep? and to feed? to norish? and to
be true to your own Church? of the which you have taken cure and charge? As
S. Peter commands you: See 1. Pe^. 5.
that you feed Christ's flock, which is among you. For of these you have
taken your name, living, and dignity. You are called Bishop of Winchester, of
London, and of Lyncolne, And of these you are fed, but these be forgotten in
your oath, and these you little regard, but to maintain the holy Church of
Rome, that gives you never a penny, but robs all other Churches, you must
be straightly sworn. And why? Antichrist must have a cloak for his treason. For
now if he be a traitor, he is to be excused, Bishop Fisher otherwise
called B. of Rochester. answered that he was sworn to yt Pope, and therefore
he would not swear to ye kings supremacye.
why? for he is sworn to it. But shall I tell you what I do take out of it?
The truth is, that you swear, to betray, to kill, and slay all members of all
other Churches, saving those, that lives after the whoredom, and mischief,
that is used in Rome. For if you should be bound to seek out in Rome,
Christened men, and those that does live after the living of holy church, I
think you should find but few. Yea and unto those, you would think scorn to
be sworn, Ergo, it must follow, that you are sworn to the worst sort of Rome,
and that your holy Church of Rome is taken for such a sort, as lives against
God, against his blessed word, against the living of holy Aposties, against
the co^ditio^s of our holy mother ye church. I could say, in all whoredom, in
all oppression, in all Sodomytrie, in all murder, in all po^pe, and pride,
summa summarum, in all manner of mischief, what tongue ca^ tell, or heart can
think. But I will not say so, for men would reken me uncharitable, and to
vehement. Nevertheless all the world knows, that you do reckon your self,
by the virtue of your oath, bound to no men: but unto such, as in very deed,
lives after this ungracious manner: and yet will you be faithful, and true
unto them against all men. Yea I dare say, if that their conscience had A true
description of the leudnes of the Bishops of Rome.
not condemned them of such mischief, they would never have desired this
assistence of you, or else have thought it necessary to have required an oath of
you. But the verity is, they be naught, and have need of mayntainers in
their mischief. And also suspect you, not to be true, except you made an oath
to them, yea and scarsly then, onles that you in very deed, at time and place
convenient, do betray your Princes, for that is ye cause of your oath, and
other profit has not the king by it. I will be reported by all practice that
ever came out of your oath.

It follows, And to my Lord the How comes the Pope by the name of Lord.
Pope. I would gladly learn, where the Pope has got the dignity of a Lord.
This thing is little regarded of my Lords the Bishops, to bring in such a
worldly dignity, yea they will say, it is but a trifle, and mock men for
speaking against it. But the truth is, if they durst as much now, as in times
past, they would burn for this little trifle, the best Lord in England. For I
dare say, it has cost many a man's life, or ever they brought the Pope to
Lordshyp. Blessed S. Peter (whose successor the Pope boasts him self to
be) knew nothing of this Lordshyp, for be says unto his fellows, 1. Pet. 5.
they shall not exercise no Lordshyp over the congregation. And likewise S.
Paul durst not take upon 2. Cor. 8.
him to command, as a Lord, collections to be made for poor men, but mekely
desires the^ without any Lordshyp. Also in an other place: Let no 1. Cor. 4.
man judge us, but as the Ministers of Christ. Blessed S. Paul rekeneth him
self but a minister, and a servant: And yet ye day has been, that he was so
good, as my Lord the Pope. Our master Christ, that came to teach both Peter,
and Paul, learned his Disciples Math. 20.
not to use the^ selves as Lords, but as servants. And mark the occasion
that he had.

There be two new Disciples brought unto him, and the old (being not yet
perfect) thought scorn, that these two should sit above all other, ye one of
the right hand, and the other of the left hand: But our master Christ reproves
this proud stomach of theirs, very straitely, saying: How ye Princes and
rulers of the infidels has power over their subjects, but so shall not ye. For
he that will be greatest among you, shall be least. Here our master Christ
learneth none hypocrisy, that they should be called lest in name, and be
greatest in very deed: but he will that this doctrine shall be expressed in
their deeds. My Lord the pope, calls him self in words, the servant of
all servants: but in very deed he will be Lord over all Lords. Seruus
seruorum.
Yea and my Lords Bishops, will be sworn to him, as unto a Lord, and they
will reken them selves perjured, if they burn not all them, that will take the
Pope but for a servant. Is not this a marvelous hypocrisy? to The Pope is a
monstrous hipocrite.
be called servant of all servants? and yet desire for to be taken as Lord
and King over all Kings? Yea and unto this be our Bishops sworn, because
they will be obedient to their Princes. But and their consciences were rypped,
you should find no man sit there as a King, but my losell the Pope. And we
poor men must be condemned, for reprouyng of this. And why? Verily because my
Lords have sworn to him, against their Prince, and all his true subjects.

But how stands it with your oath toward your Prince, for to be sworn to
the Pope? which is not all only an other Lord: but also contrary, yea and as
the world now is the greatest mortal ennemy, that our Prince has. For I dare
say, that if What good mind Clement the Pope bare unto king Henry the viij.
this wretched Clement could drown our noble Prince with one word, it should
not be long undone, sine Clementia. The common saying went in Hamburgh, that
this caytyfe has not al only excommunicated our noble prince, but also given
away the kingdom to an other. And this fact must you defend, for you are
sworn to ye Pope. Yea I dare say, if you had convenient occasion, you would
declare your fidelity. I do Judge after your factes, that you have done to
kings in times past, whenever that you had power and might to bring to pass
ye which you have conceived against your Prince. If you think I judge a mysse,
or else do you wrong. let me be put to my proof, and you shall see, what an
heap of holy factes ye I will bring you out of your own chronicles and books,
for the which you will be lauded, and praised hyely, that you have so
faithfully stuck unto this damnable Idol of Rome. Yea I dare say it had been
heresy within this two years, to have written, or said thus much against the
lymme of the devil on our princes side. This all ye world can testefye,
wherefore I think you will put me to no trial. But to your oath. How does it
stand with your allegyance toward your prince, to be sworn to the Pope? your
own law says, that a lege man can make none In. 6. lib. 2. de senten. et re
iudicata. ca. pastoralis in verbo homoque.
oath of fydelytye, to none other man, but to his own king.

Moreover you do remember your oath made unto your prince, wherein you do
renounce all clauses, words and sentences, made unto the Pope, which may be
hurtful or prejudicial to his highness. How agrees these ij. oaths? you may
set them together as well as you ca^: but I know no ways Excuse the Bishops
perjury who can.
to avoid your perjury. For the very truth is, that the kings grace, and his
council, considering your oath made to the Pope, to be periudiciall to his
regal power, causes you, in your oath afterward made unto him to revoke
those things that you have before sworn to ye Pope, and to declare that his
grace and his counsel did reckon your oath made to ye pope to be against him,
therefore he makes you to revoke it by name, naming the same oath, and also the
same Pope. So that you may clearly perceive, how that our prince does suspect
you, for your Bishops be assoyled of their oath toward their prince, but never
from oath made to the Pope.
oath making. And in very deed, the popes meaning and yours was none other:
but for to betray ye king and his realm. And therefore as soon as there was
any variance, between ye king and yt pope, the^ were you first of all,
assoyled of your allegyance dew unto our king, and that absolucion, was blasen
and blown, preached, and taught, throughout all the world, and all doors and
posts must be decked with papers and bulls, for your discharge. But for to
help your Prince, you could never be discharged of your heretical, and
traiterous oath made unto the Pope, against your Prince. Here neither Peter nor
Paul can help, nor there is no key ye can open that lock.

O Lord God how have we been blinded thus traitorously to handle our natural
Prince? But how this Caterpiller is come to be a Lord, and has brought
kings under his feet, I will speak (God willing) after this in a peculiar
treatise. It follows, and to his successors, lawfully and regularly entryng
in. After what law? I read in your own Di. 23. Qui episcepus ex consilio. 4.
Cartha.
books of law, after which me thinks there be very few bishops made wherein
I find among all other good things, that he should be chaste of living,
meek, gentle to speak to, mercyful, well learned in yt new and old testament,
and ye we should not forbid marriage, nor should blame the eating of flesh,
and should also believe, that all manner of sins, as well actual, as
original, be clearly forgiven in baptysme. How many of these things the Popes
holiness is indewed with all, and how many he aloweth, his own books, and
deeds will testelie. Wherefore I reckon that your oath does not mean this laws,
nor yet ye law that blessed S. Paul writes of. For then I reckon, that by
the virtue of 1. Timo. 3. Tit. 1.
your oath, you have not been bound to one Pope this 400. years, so that it
must follow, that you have other laws, then blessed S. Paul speaks of, or
the council of Charthaginence to chose your Pope by: the which as far as men
can reckon, by common experience, and practice, be these,

In primis, He that shall be able to Who is lawful to be Pope.
be Pope, must be a ve^geable tyrau^t, never keepeing peace, but all ways
warryng for the defense (as ye call it) of S. Peter's patrimonye. To suffer no
Prince to dwell in rest by him but to snatch his possessions, to the unholy
Church of Rome. To set princes together by the ears, till they be both weary,
and then to take ye matter in his hand, and never to make an end, till both
parties has given some possessions to his holy fatherhed: to assoyle the
souls, that has been slain through his packyng. And he The popes wickedness
described at large.
that dare most boldelye, and with least shame, depose Princes, without a
cause, he is best able to be pope. He that can by any train, craft, or
subtyltye, bring under him any bishop, or any spiritual person, or invent any
new clausein their oath, he is to be allowed before other. Moreover, he ye
keeps fewest women, and has most of them, that you wot of, he is holiest,
and apt to be head of your church. And he ye can most tyranously burn me^
for preaching of ye Gospel, and he him self to take no labors therein. Item
to burn priests ye mary wives and he him self, to live in all myschefe, and
whordome: yea in such abhominablenes, as no man may with honestye speak (you
know what I mean) this man I say, has a good testimony, before his
spirituality, that he is a lawful man to that office.

Furthermore, he that is a whores Clement the Pope was the son of a Curtisan.
son, as our holy father is now, and can find the means, that. 12. men will
forswere them self, that he is lawfully borne, as this holy Clement did. This
is a fit father, for such children. Finally, he ye can give most money, and
bye ye greatest part of cardinales of his side, he is best worthy to be
called Pope, and to sit on Peter's stool. For it can not be unknown to you,
how ye Thomas Woulcy, an holy pillar of your Church, would have been Pope,
when this Clement was chosen, and did offer for it a reasonable penny: But
Clement dasshed him out of consayte with. 20000. li. more then he offered, and
so he was judged best worthy, and entered in lawfully, and regularly, and unto
him our bishops be sworn, and obedient. And why because they will have such a
head, as they be members: for how could else their kingdom stand? For If
Popes should be chosen after S. Paul's rule. then all ye vain trompery of ye
clergy were clearly overthrown.
if one should be chosen, after the rule of blessed S. Paul, or else after the
living of these new heretykes, which be simple and poor, and care not for
no dignityes, nor will never swear, nor fight, and would rather mary a wife of
their own, then take other men's, and always studying, and preaching Gods
word, seeking only the honor of God, and the profyt of his neighbor, and
will be subject and obedient in all things (desiring none exception) to his
prince. This man I say, should be unlawful, and not eligible, for he were
able to destroy ye whole kingdom of ye papists and not worthy to receive an
oath of my Lords ye bishops, which will not gladly be perjured for such a ma^s
sake. For he were able to destroy ye whole church of Rome, unto the which our
Bishops have been before sworn. It follows in your oath, I shall not consent
in counsel or in deed, that they should lose either life or member, or that
they should be taken or trapped, by any evil mean. What need you to swear
thus unto the Charity by^deth all men to think well one of another.
Pope? does not the order of charity bind you thus to use your self toward
all men? that is to say, neither to hurt them, nor to harm them, neither to
intrappe them, nor betraye them. But all men must be betrayde and with craft
and subtlety undone, for the mayntenaunce of this one wretched person. The
truth is, that never man spoke against this popet, but you destroyde him, and
betrayde him. But this popet has blasphemed and betrayde all potestates, and
yet you were never against him. And why? because you be sworn to him. And you
will keep your oath, be it right or wrong.

But in your last oath, which has been newely made, is added this clause.
That no man should lay violent bands upon them in any wise, or any wrong
should be done unto them by any manner of color. This part is newly brought
in, since the The flesh of the pope is now much more holy, then in time past
it has been.
flesh of the Pope has been so holy, that no man might touch it but
harlottes. Christen men must patiently suffer injuries and wro^ges, but your
head will forswear that point, and mayntaine himself through your power
against all men. How near that this is the Apostles living, all Christen men
can well judge. It follows in your oath. Their counsel that shall be showed
unto me, either by their letters, or by their messengers, I shall open to no
man to their hurt or damage. Let Princes beware, when the pope sends
cou^selles unto you, for the meaning is to betraye them. For all the world
knows that the pope and you does little regard, what the beggars of the
world does handle: But what Emperors, kings, and Dukes does handle, that must
you let, and destroy. For that is the Popes counsel. And you may show it to
no man, No not to your king. And why? because you are sworn to the pope.

But what say you to your oath made unto your prince? wherein you swear, that
you shall be faithful and true, and bear unto him above all creatures, love,
and favor, to live and to dye with him, and to open unto him all manner of
counselles, that may be hurtful unto his grace. Now is it well known, that
the pope has The Pope does practice counsels against the honorable state of
Princes.
done and daily does handle such cou^selles, as be against our princes honor,
and conservation. And yet you may neither tell it to your prince, nor let it.
And why? because you be sworn to the pope, and for sworn to your prince. Tell
me when any thing was opened unto our prince, by you, that the pope had
handeled in counsel against our prince. Of this thing I will take record of
his noble grace, whether I say true or false. And yet must I be accused of
treason. And why? because you are sworn to the pope, And I am true to the
king. It follows. I shall help to defend and mayntaine the papistry of Rome,
against all men, saving mine order. And in your new oath, now in our days
made, is added. The regalles of Saint Peter. What and in all me^ be contained
your prince? you must needs defend him. And why? because ye be sworn to the
pope, and forsworn to your prince. For your oath to your prince, is to defend
him with all your wit and reason against all men. Now must you forsake one of
them, And your practice has been always to forsake your prince, and stick
to the pope. For of your oath made to your prince, you have been oftentimes
assoiled. And as your law says, the (...). quest. vi. c. Alius.
Church of Rome is wont so do do. But of your oath made unto ye pope, there is
no absolution, neither in heaven nor earth. Neither was it ever Here is
specially to be noted the practice of Prelates. For such are the doyngs of the
holy father of Rome that for the rebellion against princes, he would give
absolution but for matter against his popedom, there was never absolutio^
might be obtained.
read, heard, nor seen, that there could be any dispensation for it.

Let me be reported by all ye books that ever were written, and by all the
bulls that ever were granted, and by all the experience that ever was used.
And if I be found false, let me be blamed. And yet I am sure many me^ will
reckon, that I speak uncharitably. But I would feign learn of all ye
charitable me^ in England, with what other English words I could declare this
intolerable or subtle treason, thus long and shamefully used against my
prince, which is necessary to be known. And I am compelled by violence to
declare both my confession and learning in this cause. For me^ has not been
ashamed to report, that I would (which am but a wretch and poor simple worm,
and not hable to kill a Catte, though I would do my uttermost) to make
insurrection against my noble and mighty prince, whom (as God knows) I do
both honor, worship, love, and favor, to the uttermost power of my heart, and
am not satisfied, because it is no more. This I speak before God. Let him be
merciful unto me as it is true. And if I were not so true in mine heart, it
were not possible for me so earnestly to write against the^, whom I do
reckon to handle unfaithfully, and untruly with their prince, yea against both
Gods law, and man's law. The very truth is, I can suffer, (through Gods grace)
all manner of wrongs, injuries, and sclaunders: but to be called an heretic
against God, or a traitor against my prince, he lives not, but I will say,
he lies. And will be able so to prove him, if I may be reported by my works
or deeds, by my conuer sation or living, or by any thing that ever I did.

But unto my purpose: the Bishops does swear one oath to the pope, and an
other contrary to their prince. And yet they will be taken for good and
faithful children. And I poor man must be condemned, and all my works for
heresy, and no man to read them under the pain of treason. And why? because I
write against their perjury toward their prince. But how comes S. Peter The
popes Regales.
by these regalles, that you are sworn to defend? seeing that he was never no
king, but a fisher? All the world knows, that regalia belongs to kings,
and to like power of kings. Why are you not rather Peter was acquaynted with
his nets, but not with Regalles.
sworn to defend Peter's net, and his fisherie? the which things he both
hadand used, and never regalles. But these things will not maintain the holy
Church of Rome, and therefore ye swear not to maintain them. But what mean
you by that sentence: Saving mine order? why say you not, saving my kings
pleasure? Your gloss says, you may not defend In Verb. salve ordine.
these things with weapons. But oh Lord God, what vnshamefulnesse is this?
thus to delude with words all the whole world? Men knows, that when the
Pope has need of your help, there is no men sooner in arms then you are, if
you call arms harneys, bylles, and glaues, swords, and gunnes, and such other
things. Do you not remember how soon the Bishop of Norwiche, Henry Spenser,
was in arms to defend pope Vrbane? It were but folly to recite examples.

In the year of our Lord. 1164. was there a controversy between the kings
grace, and the Bishops of England, for certain prerogatives belo^gyng to the
king. Wherefore the king These Articles be now granted and are none heresy.
required an oath, and a confirmation of the Bishops, as concerning those
Articles and prerogatives. But answer was made of the Bishops, that those
prerogatives, cum omnibus prauitatibus in regio scripto contentis, were of none
effect, nor strength, because they did forbid to appele to the Court of Rome,
onles the king gave license. And because that no Bishop might go at the Popes
calling out of the Realm, without the kings assent. And because that Clerks
should be conuented in criminal causes before a temporal judge. And because
the The Prelates can not abide to use obedience to their prince.
king would hear matters, as concerning tithes and other spiritual causes.
And because that it was against the sea of Rome, and the dignity of the same,
that a Bishop should be conue^ted before ye king. Briefly, they would not be
under the king, but this addition should be set unto it, Saluo honor Dei, and
Ecclesie Roman, and ordine nostro, that is, we will be under your grace,
saving the honor of God, of the Church of Rome, and of our order. The cause
why they did except these things, was this, as they them selves grant: For
kings received their authorities, and power of the We have been lead by
blind guydes.
church, but the Church receives her authority of Christ only, wherefore
they conclude, that the king can not command over the Bishops, nor absolve
any of them, nor to judge of tithes, nor of Churches, neither yet to forbid
Bishops, the handlyng of any spiritual cause.

Is not here a marvelous blyndnesse and obstinacy against their Prince? They
will make it against Gods honor, to obey their king, and The kings power is
immediately of God.
are not ashamed to say in the kings face, that his power is of them. But I
pray you whether was kings before Bishops? or Bishops before kings? You shall
find, that God had long admitted kings, or any Bishop (as you take him) was
thought of. Does not the holy ghost commau^de, that we should honor kings?
Also 1. Pet. 2.
in an other place. Let all men be under the high powers, for the power is
Roma. 13.
of God, and he that resists the power, resists Gods ordinance. Here
blessed S. Paul says, that kings power is of God, and not of Bishops.
Furthermore, what reason is it to defend the Popes prerogative against He that
defends the Pope against his sovereign Lord or Lady is a unnatural subject.
your Princes? Is not your Prince nearer, and more natural unto you, then this
wretch the Pope? But here is a thing, ye makes me to marvel. When you swear
to the Pope (Saving your order.) Is as much to say, as you shall not use no
weapons: but else you shall be ready and obedient in all things. But when you
shall swear to your king, then (Saving Saving of order has two significations.
your order) is as much to say, as you have authority to confirm kings, and
to be their fellows, and neither to be obedient unto them, nor yet to
answer to any Justice before them, but clearly to be exempted, and they not
to meddle with you, except they will give you some worldly promotion. If I
would use my self as vnchatariblye against you, as you have handled me,
doubtless I could make some thing of this, that should diplease you. How would
you cry? and how would you handle me poor wretch, if you had half so much
against me, as this is? But I will let you pass, God has preserved me
hitherto of his infinite mercy against your insaciable malice, and no doubt but
he shall do the same still. I will return to your oath.

It follows. I shall come to the Synod when I am called, unless I shall be
lawfully let. But why do The Pope will hold a Council where and when it
pleases him.
you not swear to compel the Pope to call a Council? seeing that it has
been so often, and so instantly required of him, by many and noble Princes of
Christendom, yea, seeing that all Christendom does require with great sightes,
an order to be taken, and set in the highest articles of our faith? But unto
this you are not sworn. And why? because it is against your holy popet of
Rome. For if there were a general Council, both he, and you do know, that
there must needs follow, both over him and you a straight reformation. Therefore
after my counsel say, that you can not come, for you be lawfully let. It
follows I shall honorably entreat the popes Legate, both going and coming,
and in his necessity I shall help him. I pray you see, and provide well, that
he go not a begging, as Peter did. And see also that he neither preach nor
teach, but pyll and poull, with all mischief, and unshamefastness. And why?
because you are sworn this to maintain. It follows. I shall visit yearly
my self, or by some other messenger, the pope of Rome, unless I be dispensed
with of them. I pray you what pertains this to the office of a Bishop,
yearly to visit Rome? Christ and the most of his Apostles, were never at
Rome, and yet they were meetely good Christen men. But I read in the
traditions of the Turk, that certain of them must yearly visit their
Mahomet. From whom I think, In. vi. lib. i. de maioritate and obedientia
Dilecti filij, De iure iurando. ca. Ego in verb singulis.
you have taken this custom. Your own law says, that unto this clause must
these bishops all only be bound, that be immediately underneath the Pope. Now
are not you such, for you swear in your oath to the king, that you will
immediately take your Byshopprick of him, and hold it all only of his grace.
Wherefore then do you here swear against your own law? And also against
your oath made to your prince?

Moreover, you know that there was an old custom, in the days of king Henry
the second, that no Bishop should go out of the Realm, without the kings
license. Are you not bound to keep this custom: but answer, that the Pope
has dispensed with you, and that you are not The Prelates will obey the Pope,
but not the Prince.
bound to keep any obedience toward the acts that your prince makes.
Moreover, I marvel sore, that you be all so straightly sworn of so long time,
and never one of you that ever went in my days to Rome to discharge his oath.
And why? because you are dispensed with. But were it not as good to leave it
out of your oath at the first, seeing you entende not to keep it, as
afterward to dispense with you for it? No forsothe, for than the Pope could
not bind you to come to Rome at his pleasure, and betraye your king, and all
his counselles. But in your oath that is newly made, and that you have sworn
last, is added. That if the pope be on this side ye mountains, you shall
visit him every year. But if he be beyond the mountains, then every three
years. One that knew not your practice and the circumstau^ces of your factes
ye has been done, would little suspect this addition. But the very truth is,
there is a mischievous and abominable treason in it against Princes. For if it
chanced the Emperor, or else any temporal Prince near unto Rome, to fall at
variaunce with the Pope, then did ye Pope straight run into France, that is
to say, on this side the mountains, where you must visit him yearly. And
why? Because your god is in distress, and has conceived a deadly hatered
against a Prince, and can not bring it to pass without your help and
counsel. Wherefore you must come yearly. And also he must know, through your
betraying, how A deuilish practice of Prelates.
your Prince is minded, and whether he be addicted to his contrary part or
not. If he be, then must you betraye his counsel, and that yearly. And why?
because the pope is on this side the mountains. But and if he be in Rome,
and has all Princes necks under his gyrdell, then is it sufficient that you
come every third year. For you ca^ at ones coming, devise as much treason, as
Princes shall avoid in five years.

But what belongs this unto a Bishop? that the Pope is on this side The
Bishops swear to visit the Pope yearly.
the mountains, or beyond. If ye be bound by Gods law, yearly to visit
the Pope, then must you visit him, where soever he be, though he were
either with God, or the devil, And if you be not bound by Gods law, what a
presumption is it of him to bind you? Yea what an oversight is it of you, to
let your self thus to be bound? And what a wickedness is it of you so
straitely to keep this oath? to the which you are not bound by Scripture,
against your obedience made to your Prince, which is commanded by Gods word?
But I pray you what example has either he or you of blessed S. Peter, to
bind by the virtue of an oath, the other Apostles yearly to visit him at
Rome. All the world may perceive, that this oath is invented of insaciable
covetousness, that the Pope and you have toward honors and dignities. And that
is well declared by these words, that follows in your oath. The possessions
The Pope takes sure order with his Bishops for his own gain.
of my Church, I shall not sell, give, lay to morgage, or make any feoffement,
or by any other means alienate the same, without the counsel of ye pope. But
I pray you tell me one thing, why do you not swear, that you shall neither
bye, nor yet receive any possessions to your church, nor you shall neither
pill, nor poull, nor shave, to increase the possessions of your Church. But the
truth is, all is fish that comes to the net with you. And if it come ones
within your cloukes, it never comes out again, though the King and his
Realm should stand in never so great need. But to receive all his land, you
are always ready, and it is not against your oath.

I do not say thus, because I would ye should sell, or alienate the possessions
of the Church, but because I see that there is nothing maintained by them, but
all only your mischeuous pomp and your pride. Your own ^ij. quest. ij. c.
Quatu. and de reditibus, etc. Mosest.
law commands, that the fourth part of the spiritual goods, should be
distributed among poor men. And for that cause they be called, Bona pauperum,
but how little their part is, all the world can testify. Wherefore do you
swear, not to alienate your goods, without the popes license? The pope gave
them not to you, but the king and his subjects. How comes he now to be so
near of your counsel in alienating them? and the king is thrust out, the
which has deserved best to be of your counsel. But do you not remember
your own law? the which xij. quest. ij. c. non liciat Papa.
does forbid that the pope in any wise, or sor any necessity, should alienate
the goods of the Church, except it be old houses, which can not be kept
without great charges. This is your own law, and against this will you swear?
Then must you needs be perjured, for if you alienate your goods with the
Popes license, then is this Decree against you and curses you. Wherefore then
put you this in your oath, seeing you can not alienate your goods with his
consent, nor yet without it?

It follows in your new oath, decrees, ordinances, sentences, disposions,
reseruations, provisions, and commandments apostolic, with all my power I
will observe, and shall and cause other men to observe them These things were
added, when this Idol was brought so high, that no man durst wynche against
him. and when he might say, and do what he would. And as your law
commands, no man so hardye to ask him why he does so. Then began decrees,
ordinances, depocytions, disposycyons, In vi. tit. iiij. ca. ad Apost. in verbo
conti^etur.
reseruations, prouysions with like shamefulnes sor to spring. and there is no
remedy, but they must continue? And why? Because you are sworn to keep them
your self, and to compel other men also to keep them. And out of the keepinge
of this part of your oath, springs out an other sentence that follows, which
is this. All heretykes, sysmatikes, and rebels, toward our said Lord ye
Pope, to my power I shall persecute and withstand.

This is the cause that has made This is the clause that mainteyneth the Popes
pomp and glory. And this is that yt to gives him liberty say and do what
he list.
us poor men so great heretykes. For it can never be proved, that ever we
spoke against God, or our king, and yet be we heretics. And why? Forsooth
because the Bishops are sworn to the Popes decrees, the which condemns all
them for heretics, that speaks against his holiness, though he be as holy
as my horse. For he says him self in his law, that he needs not to be
holy him self, but it is sufficient, that he sytteth in an holy seat. These
be his words: who doubts Did. xl. ca. Non nos.
but he is holy, ye which is exalted to so great a dignity? In who^ though
good works of his own merits be wantinge yet are those good works
sufficyent, the which were done by his predecessors. Upon the which Glosa in
verbo quis.
text their gloss says, that if it be openly known, that the Pope be an
aduoulterer, or a murderer, yet ought he not to be accused. etc.

Now we poor men can not suffer such myscheuous vices, wherefore we must be
heretics. But why? because my lords ye bishops are sworn to persecute us. But
nevertheless, I The preachers of the doctrine of Christ must needs be
heretics for the said doctrine is against the Pope, and so they preach
against the Pope, and therefore are heretics.
trust to Gods grace, and the Kings, that my Lords the Bishops, will not be
so hard, in this point of their oath, as they have been. And why? Because me^
may now come to their answer. Surely, there be many clauses in his last
oath added, that be clear injury unto princes, and against Gods law, and
man's law. And yet our Bishops will swear them, yea and that, which is worst of
all, they will accuse other men of treason and rebellion, And there is no man
sworn to treason, nor rebellion, but they only.

Wherefore most gracious prince with all mekenes and lowlynes that is due to so
noble a prince, and also The writers petition of the kings grace.
that does beecome a true subject to do, I lowly and meekely require and
desire your grace, to Judge between the Bishops and me, which of us is
trewest and faythfullest to God and to your grace. I speak all only of those
that has and also would now (if they durst) defend the Pope, and his laws.
Against them I make this supplication, and against them have I declared the
learning and doctrine, that I have both taught and written. And as for my
factes, and deeds, what I have done against God and your grace, I require them
to say their uttermost, that they can prove, or else by your gracious favor,
I am bear present and offer my self to prove the^ liars, And that under any
manner of pain, that your grace shall assign. And against them I have declared
the learning and doctrine of their Church, and also brought examples of their
factes and deeds, with the which they have put their doctrine in exercise.
Now if they be grieved, or think the^ selves wrongfully handled of me, then
I require no more of your grace, but indifferently and graciously, to here both
them and me, the which thing, no doubt as your grace does know our heavenly
father does require of you. who preserve your highness in all honor and dignite.

Amen.
The cause of my condemnation.
Most gracious Prince, ye your grace should know what cause of heresye the
Bishops had against me, for ye which, they so vncharitablye, and so cruelly
has cast me away. Therefore have I set out ye articles ye were laid against
me. And as they were laid against me, as I will be reported by their own
acts and books. The which articles doubtless were uncharitably, and falsely
gathered against me, in a sermon ye I made in Ca^bridge, in S. Edwardes Churrh.
(...). 1525. die, 14. De^bris.
Wherefore I will beseech your grace, with all meekenes, and lowlynes, to be my
gracious Lord, and Prince. And not to suffer me thus shamefully, and cruelly,
against all law, and conscience, utterly to be undone, and cast away. But of
your most high goodness to suffer me to come to mine answer, and then, if I
can not justify my cause I will be at your gracious commandment, to be
punished after right, and conscience.

IF thou believe, that thou art more The first Article.
bound to serve God to morrow which is Christmas day, or of easter day, or of
whitsonday, for an holiness that is in one day more then in an other, then art
thou no faithful christean man, but supersticious, And S. Paul is Galat. 5.
against thee, saying: You do observe days, years, months, and tides. For
unto a faithful christean man, every day ought to be Christmas day Easter
day, and whitsonday. The Why holy days were ordained.
which thing the fathers considering that thou did not observe, yea, and
that thou would never observe, if it were left to thy judgment, because
thou art given so much to worldly businesses, For that cause they have assigned
thee certain days to come to the certain days to come to ye church to pray
together, to hear the word of God together, and to receive the blessed
sacrament together. what fault find you in this article? because I There is
not one day of it self higher or better then an other.
say, that one day is not holyer then an other? I pray you what is ye cause or
what nature is in one day, that is not in an other, whereby that it should be
holyer then the other? Because (you will say) that we halowe the remembrance
of Christ's birthe and of Christ's resurrection in one day, and not in an
other. This thing I say must you do every day, for Christ is every day
borne, every day risen, every day ascended up. And this must you believe every
day steadfastly. This must you sanctify in your hearts daily, and not one day.

Now vary we but in this thing. You say that we are bound to sanctify but one
Christmas day in the year, and that is supersticiousnes, and heresy say I, not
that I condemn your one day, but that you set it to one day all only, that
we are bound to do every day. Briefly, my Lord of Rochester allowed this
article, saying: he would The Bishop of Rochesters great and deep judgment.
not condemn it for heresy, for an C. li. (this was a great su^me of money)
but it was folishely said (quod he) to preach this before the butchers of
Cambryge, As who say, they were all butchers, that were at the sermon And not
ye most part of ye university. But the bishop of Bathe asked me, whether we
might labor on the holy days or not, seeing it is written, Thou shall
observe thy holy day. I Let us not play the Jews.
answered that Christen men were not bound to abstain from bodily labor by
that commandment, for it was so given to the Jews. And if we were bound to
abstain from bodily labor by that commandment then was the kings grace,
and all his council, my Lord Cardinal, and all That would they not do, if it
were against gods commandment.
his counsel, in the way of damnation, For they cause men to carye their
stuff on the holy day, what day so ever it be, when they will remove. At
this reason all my Lords were astonished, and wist not what to say: they were
loath to condemn my Lord Cardinals grace, seeing he was so holy a prelate of
Christ's church, and that fact they could not deneye. Wherefore at ye last, my
Lord of Rochester remembered him self, and objected in The Bishop of Rochester
against the Bishop of Winchester
this manner. A goodly reason, I will make you a like reason, The bishop of
Winchester suffered ye stues, Ergo the stues be lawful. At this reason I
ineruayled much. For I perceived, that it was as lawful for our noble Prince
to carye stuff on the holy day (which is not against ye word of god) as it is
for an harlot of ye stnes to live in open whordome, which is against the word
of God. And yet my Lords the bishops of their great charity, and and of their
innumerable spiritual treasure suffers against their conscience both to be
done.

Briefly it were to long to recite all the uncharitable manner that they did
use with me. And yet earnestly I must be condemned poor man for an heretyke.
But I will recyte the saying of doctors for me, ye men may see how shamefully
I have erred. Saint Gallat. 4.
Hierome says, Therefore be certine days assigned, that we should come
together, not that, that day, in the which we come together is holyer then an
other, but all days be like, All days be alyke.
and equal, And Christ is not alonely crucified in Parasceden, and risen only
on the sunday, but the day of resurrection is always, and always may we eat
of our Lords flesh. etc. Here S. Hierome says ye self words ye I spoke, And
of these words was I moved to speak, as God does know. Also S. Augustine
says, we must observe the sabbath day, not ye Epist. c. xix
we should reckon our self not to labor, but that all thing that we do
work well, must have an intention to the everlasting rest. Wherefore we must
observe the holy day, not by corporal idleness, and unto the letter, but
spiritually must we rest from vices, and concupisences, wherefore among all the
ten commandments, that of the sabbath day is alonely commanded to be
figuratively observed etc. Also Tertullyan. The Carnal Aduersus Iudeos.
circumcision is put away, and extincted at his time. So likewise the
observation of the sabbath day is declared to be for a time, for we must keep
ye sabbath day, not alonely the seventh day, but at all times, as Esaias says
etc. But here my Lord of Rochester said, first, that I understood not
Tertulian, seco^darily, that he was an heretic. But I pass over mine
answer, for this is but a Lordly word, and he could none otherwise save his
honor, but yet stands my scripture fast. And S. Hierome, and S. Augustine,
and also their own law, whose words be these: It is come unto me, that
certain men, which be of an evil Do consec. did. iij. cap. peruenit.
spirit, have sown certain evil things among you, and contrary to the holy
faith, so that they do forbid, that men should work on the Sabbath day. The
which men, what other thing shall we call them, but the preachers of
Antichrist, the which Antichrist shall make the Sabbath day, and the Sunday be
kept from all manner of work. etc. This law clearly declares you to be
Antichrists, this is more then I said. I have great marvel, that the Bishop
of Bathe, being so mighty a Lord in condemning of heretics, was not learned
in this law, seeing it is his own faculty.

NOw dare no man preach ye truth, The second article.
and the very Gospel of God, and in especial they that be feeble, and
fearful. But I trust, yea and I pray to God, that it may shortly come, that
false and manifest errors may be plainly showed. There be certain men like
conditioned to dogs, if there be any man, that is not their countryman, or
that they love not, or know not, say any thing against them, then cry they, an
heretic, an heretic, ad ignem, ad ignem. These be the dogs that fear
true preachers. What heresy find you in this article? I do think that you
do feel my prayer to be herds. For doubtless there be many shameful
errors now manifestly opened, that at those days had been heresy to have
touched them.

We make now a days many The third article.
Martyrs, I trust we shall have many more shortly. For the viritie could never
be preached plainly, but persecution did follow. Here did my Lord of Bathe
inquire of me, if I reckoned them for martyrs, that were burnte at Bruselles,
I answered, that I knew not their cause, wherefore they died, but I reckoned
as many men to be martyrs, as were persecuted, and dyed for the word of God,
but he said, he would make me to frye for this. How think you by this
holy prelate? was not this a charitable argument to refell mine answer with?
But this was the strongest argument, that ever they used. And paraduenture I
may see the day, that this argument may be made against them.

THese laws, these lawyers, these The iiij. article.
Iusticiares, that say, that a man may lawfully ask his own good before God
forgive them that laid this to me.
a Judge, and contend in judgment, have destroyed all patience, devotion, and
faith in Christen people. On this article hangs also ye next.

THis pleading in judgment, is The fifth article.
manifestly against the Gospel. Luke 12. Homo quis constituit iudice^. And
contrary to S. Paul, Iam omnino delictum est etc.

Mine adversaries most uncharitably laid these two articles against me, as
though I had condemned the lawemaker, law, and execution thereof, when I
only spoke against As it is lawful for a Christen man to demand his debt by
the order of the law. So is it not lawful to vex and sue uncharitably those
in who^ there is such necessity as they can not make payment, but rather shall
perish and dye in prison, which thing is against charity and therefore it is
sinful.
the vnchariblenes of some me^, which rather seek vengeance of their
brethren, than any right or help of the law. Nor I speak not against all
lawyers, or against any for pleading justly, after the form of the law: but
only against those which taught men, that they were bound to prosicute the
uttermost of the law, under the pain of deadly sin, were the man never so
poor, and unlike to pay the debte. Against these two persons spoke I, and
against none other. For it is not, nor never was mine intent, to forbid suing
at the law, for I do know very well, that maiestratus is of God. Ergo, it
must needs follow that all laws, having probable reasons of nature, made to
conserve a common wealth, must also be allowed of God, for laws be a part
of the power that is instituted of God.

Moreover, S. Paul does appeal to the Emperor, which is also pars litis. And
that he could not do, if suing were simpliciter, forbidden. Also good laws
be Gods gifts. Wherefore it must needs follow, that we may lawfully use
them. But as men may misuse cunning, and beauty, so may me^ also misuse the
excellent gift of the laws, not that laws be evil, but because we use them
not to the intent that they were ordained for. No man doubts, but in using of
all Gods creatures, there must be an epykya, that is, a mean, a measure, and
an order, so that no man may thereby destroy his neighbor against the order of
charity, which is a guide and a ruler in using of all creatures. As for men to
make a rumor in a whole country, for a trifle, or else for a man to sue his
neighbor, which is not able by no means to pay his debte, and so utterly to
undo him, and to take none end with him, but after the extremity of the
law: I say that this manner of suits do not become Christen men. Vbi
transgreditur equitatis, et charitatis limits. And that all men may clearly
perceive, that these only were both my words and intent. I shall rehearse the
occasion, that moved me to speak of the lawyers, and sueters. The cause was
this.

There was a poor man dead, and had made an other poor man his executour, and
bequethed in his will to a Church in Cambridge a kettell, worth. ij. s. iiij.
d. the which kettel was Extreme law is extreme justice.
afterward required by the Church Warden. But this executour being a poor
man, and not able to give this bequest at that time, therefore he desired the
Church Warden of longer respite, but he could not be heard, for the Church
Warden would have the uttermost of the law, and sued him be fore the
Commissary, and at the last, condemned him unto prison, where he lay, and
neither was able to pay his debt, nor to help his wife, and children. Now,
because I might do something with ye Church Warden, therefore the poor man's
wife came weeping, and waylyng to me, desiring me in the way of charity to
speak to the Church Warde^, for to be good to her poor husband, whereby I was
moved to send for this my friend, his name is called Ihon Drake, a man well
known in Cambridge, unto whom I spoke in this manner.

Countreyman, I am very sorry to hear of your uncharitable demeanor. Here has
been with me a poor woman weepyng, and waylyng, and crying out, how you have
undone her, her poor husband, and her miserable children, for all they have
not one bitte of bread, toward their food, neither is she able to labor.
Wherefore I marvel sore at you, that you will be so extreme unto poor men,
whom God visited with poverty, to prove your charity. What mercy will you have
at Christ's hand? the which is so extreme unto your poor neighbor? whom he
has bought with his precious blood. Unto this he made me answer on this
manner, how that thing pertained not to him, but unto the Church, wherefore The
evil counsel of the Doctors of law.
he said, that all Doctors of law did say, that they must sue therefore,
under the pain of deadly sin. And if it were wrong, why did they learn so?
Now, I had many words with him between him, and me, as concerning this manner.

But the next day, when I preached, by the reason that the self same man
stood before me in ye Church, was I brought to remembrance of the case, that
he, and I had commoned of. And because I had not clearly converted him,
therefore I recited the case in a parable, that no man knew what I meant, but
he, and I. And of this thing was I moved (as God knows) to speak of suitors,
the which I think in this case, no Christen man can allow. And therefore I say
in mine Article, these lawyers. Now is there utterly sin among you (says
Paul) 1. Cor. 6.
because you go to law one with an other, why rather suffer you not wrong? why
rather suffer ye not your selves to be robbed? Also our master says, If any
man will sue at the law, and Math. 5.
take thy coat from thee, let him have thy cloak also. May not I say these
words? wherefore were they written I do not condemn suing, but in a case.
by the holy ghost? but that they should be learned? Here our master Christ,
and S. Paul speaks against suitors, no man can deny it, the text is so
clear. Now, what suyng can be unlawful? if this be not unlawful, against
the which I did speak? Here is a poor man, wife, and children destroyed, and
no charitable ways taken with the poor man, whereby he might make
restitution. And my learning says: That Summum ius summa iniuria est.
Wherefore I will be judged by all Christen men, if I ought not in this case to
geeue my friend counsel, not for to sue. Or whether I be worthy to be
condemned for an The spirituality forbids Priests to sue, in causa
sanguinis et tamen non da^pna^t leges Athanasius.
heretic, because I counsel my friend and brother, rather to suffer wrong,
than for to undo a whole household for a naughty leude kettel. But let us
see, how the holy doctors that has written over these places of scripture,
does erpounde them.

First, Athanasius, on this text of Saint Paul, that I bring: There is utterly
sin among you, that is to say, It is to your condemnation, and to your
ignomynie, that you do exercise judicials among you. Wherefore do you not
rather suffer wrong? Also saint Hierome, It is sin unto S. Hiere. ad Cor. 6.
you that you do against the commandment of Christ, that you have
judgments among you, the which ought always to keep peace, yea, though it
were with the loss of your temporal goods. Wherefore do you not rather
suffer wrong? Where as ye ought by the commandment of the These doctors
will not, nor can not destroy all iudicialles, but only, uncharitable suits.
Gospel, and by the example of the Lord, patiently to suffer, there do you
the contrary, not all only not suffer, but you do wrong unto them, that do
no wrong. etc. Mark how S. Hierome calls it a precepte, and a
commandment, and no counsel, and also calls it sin to do against this
commandment. Likewise Haymo says: It is offense and sin in Haymo ad Cor. 6.
you, that you have judicials. For accusation engenders strife, strife
engenders discord, discord engenders hatred. And least paraduenture they
would say, this is no sin, to require mine own: Therefore says the
Apostle: Truly it is sin unto you, for you do against the commandment
Luke. 6.
of the Lord, the which says: He that takes away thy good, ask it not
again. Wherefore do you not rather suffer loss? that ye might fulfill the
commandment of the Lord. etc. Mark how he calls it the commandment of
God? and it is sin to ask our own with contention? Now, what have I said
in mine article, that holy scripture, and also holy Doctors do not say?

But after this came a Doctor of If it be a counsel, than can ye not
condemn it for heresy.
law (whom I knew not) and said, that their law had condemned this epinio^,
and declared those scriptures to be but counsels. But I denied that, and said,
I knew no such law. And suddenly Doctor Steven, now Bishop of Winchester,
showed me their law, whose words be these: Illud euangelij, si quis
abstulerit. etc. 14. quest. 1. His ita.
non est precipientis sed exhortantis. Now let every Christen man judge,
whether that these words of their law be of sufficient authority, to refell
the holy words of Scripture or no? But than came doctor Wolma^, and he
brought this text. If thy brother do offend thee, than tell the Church. What
is that (said he) tell the Church? to whom I answered, that this place made
not for his purpose, aleaging Saint Augustine for me. For it speaks of the
crimes, that should be reproved by the congregation, and not of the
correction of the temporal sword. It also follows, If he hear not ye
church, count him as an heathen, and as a publican. This is the uttermost
pain, that our M. Christ assigns there, ye which is no pain of the
temporal law. But at this answer, was he sore moved and said: if I did
abide by it, I should be burnt. This was a sharp sentence, of so great a man
as he is. Apppelles was a ioly wise fellow, that said They understood mine
answer so well that they were than content with me.
once to a shomaker, Ne suitor vltra crepidam. But nevertheless let him, and them
burn as many as they can, yet it is plain, that I have spoken never a word,
but the holy scripture, and holy doctors say the same, both in sentence, and
in words. Wherefore I can not see how they can condemn this article, for
heresye, yea, and I dare say for them, that they reckon it none heresy, nor
they did not condemn me for this article.

I Will never believe, nor yet I can never believe, that one man may be The
sixte article.
by the law of God a bishop of 2. or 3. cities, yea of an whole country, for
it is contrary to S. Paul, which says, I have left thee behind, to set Tit.
1.
in every city a bishop. And if you find in one place of scripture, ye they
be called Episcopi, you shall find in diverse other places, that they be
called Persoiteri.

I was brought before my Lord Cardinal into his galary, and there The
Cardinal and Doctor Barnes reasoned together.
he read all mine articles, till he came to this, and there he stopped, and
said, that this touched him, and therefore he asked me, if I thought it
wrong, that one bishop should have so many cities underneath him, unto whom I
answered, that I could no But therefore was. I an heretic.
farther go, then to S. Paul's text, which set in every city a bishop. Then
asked he me, if I thought it now unright (seeing the ordinance of the
church) that one bishop should have so many cities? I answered, ye I knew none
ordinance of ye church (as concerning this thing) but S. Paul's saying
only. Nevertheless I did see a contrary custom and practice in the world, but
I know not the original thereof. Then said he, ye O sigme^tu^.
in the Apostles time, there were diverse cities, some 7. mile, some vj. mile
long, and over them was there set but one bishop, and of their subbards also.
So likewise now, a bishop has but one city to his cathedral church and the
country about, is as subbards unto it. Me thought this was far fetched, but I
durst not deny it, because it was so great auctorite, and of so holy a
father, and of so great a If I feigned sut^ thing (...) should be an
heretic.
divine. But this dare I say, that his holiness could never prove it by
scripture, nor yet by any auctorite of doctors, nor yet by any practice of the
Apostles, and yet it must be true, because a pillar of the church has spoken
it. But let us see what ye doctors say to mine article. Athanasius does
Athanasius.
declare this text of the Apostle, I have left thee behind. etc. He would
not commit unto one bythop a whole ylde but he did inioyne, that every city
should have his proper pastor, supposing, ye by this means they should more
diligently over see the people, and and also that ye labor should be more
easy to bear. etc. Also Chrysostom Chrysostom.
on that same text. He would not ye a whole country should be permitted
unto one man, but he enjoined unto every man his cure, by ye means he knew,
that the labor should be more eaysye, and the subjects should be with more
diligence governed, if the teachers were not distract with ye governing of many
churches, but had cure, and charge of one church only. etc. Me thinks these
be plain words, and able to move a man to speak as much as I did. But
grant, that you may have all these cities, yet can you make it none heresy.
For my lord Cardinal granted, that it was but against him, and against you,
which be no Gods. But I poor man must be an heretic, there is no remedy,
you will have it so. And who is able to say nay? Not all scripture, nor yet God
himself.

IT can not be proved by scripture, The vij. article.
that a man of the church should have so great temporal possessions. But
they will say, if they had not so great possessions, they could not keep so
many servants, so many dogs, so many horses, as 40. or 50. and maintain so
great pomp, and pride, and live so deliciously, what heresye find you in
this? Is it heresye to speak against your horses, and your hounds and your
abominable living? And doubtless, I did not say, but that you might have
possessions, all only I spoke against the superfluousnes, and the abuse of
them, for the which all ye world wondereth on you. What mischief is there in
the world used, ye is more clearly, and openly known, then that you do abuse
the goods of the Church? And yet must I be condemned for an heretyke, for
speaking against it. Alas, do you think, that God will suffer this violence,
that you do use against poor men? I will stand in ye danger, and prove how
his Godly majesty shall judge this matter beetweene you and me I dare trust
him with it.

SUre I am, that they can not by the The viij. article.
law of God, have any jurisdiction seculer, and yet they challenge both powers,
which if they have, why do they not put them both in use? For they must say,
as the Jews said, we may kill no man. This is the article, that did byte you,
for you can not be content with the office of a bishop, but you will be also
kings. How that stands with Gods law, and with your oath, I have declared
it to our noble prince. I doubt not, but he will put you to the trial of it.
Have not you this many years condemned Officicers be but bishops hangmen, God
amend it.
many a poor man, and then delivered him to the temporal power to be put to
death, which knew nothing of his cause? And if he would, ye ye should put
him to death your self, then answered ye, how you might kill no man. So yt
they were always your hangmen.

THey say they be the successors of The ix. article.
Christ and of his Apostles, but I can see them follow none, but Judas. For they
bear the purse, and have all the money. And if they had not so great
possessions, I am sure an. C. would speak against them, where now dare not
one, for loss of promotion. As for this article I will overcome you with the
witness of all the world, you may well condemn it for heresy, but it is as
true as your Pater noster. Judas sold our ma^ter but once, and you sell him as
often as he comes in your hands. But I would it were that ye could prove
me a liar, and that you followed any of the Apostles saving Judas only. Yea, I
would that ye were in certain points as good as Judas was. It had been
better for you that you had not meddled against me in these matters. For now I
am compelled to speak many things, which I would for shame of the world
never have spoken. But now that you will have it so, take it to you, and make
the best you can of it.

THere is not the greatest Pharisie The x. article.
in this Church, but I am sure I prick him with these words, and he knows
that they be true, though he say the contrary, and that do I well know. This
article did I speak because of Doctor Rydle, which on a time granted in
master Doctor Buttes house, that the Bishops were clean out of order. And
therefore I say, that I know it.

THese ordynary Bishops and prelates The xj. article.
do follow that false Prophet Balaam. For they would curse the people, but
by the provision of God, they were compelled to bless them, that is to say, to
teach them to live well, though they themselves live most mischeuously. And so
the Asses which they ride upon, that is, the common people, have their lives in
abhominaiton. This is the heinous heresy. For it speaks against the holy
fathers, which be almost as holy as Balaams Ass, that did once speak the
word of God to a good purpose: And so do they never. But I grant that I did
offend in caulling you ordinary Bishops, for I should have called you
inordinate butchers. And as for that, that I compared you to Balaam, it is your
own law. 2. quest. 7. Secuti sunt. And cap. Nos si. 2. q 7. Secuti sunt. and
cap. Nos si.
And as for your living all the world knows it. I could tell here many holy
points of Bishops living, as keeping of men's wives, and daughters, but I will
not, for I should be reckened uncharitable. But you may do them, breaking
not your holy charity.

THey set up an Idol to deceive ye The xij. article.
people withal, which is called Baall Peor, or Baall Phegor, that is
interpretated gasping, as their laws and constitutions, the which gasp and
gape to maintain their worldly honor. They cause us to do sacrifice by fair
women, that is by their carnal affections, and sweet words, so that God of
Israel is forgotten. And thus by their sweet words, and benediction they
deceive the simple. These be ye false masters that Saint Peter speaks of.
These 2. Pet. 2.
be the fountains without water, for they give no good doctrine to the
people. Where is the heresy in this? because I compare your laws to Baall?
But look whether the interpretation of the word do agree with the nature of
your laws or not? What do all your laws, but minish the authority of
Princes? and of all other Lords, and exalte yours only? Call you not that a
gasping Idol? Let this article stand till you be able to prove it heresy.

NOw they sell us, they sell the people, they sell holy orders, they sell The
xiij. article.
church halowing, there is no better merchandise in Chepeside. Will thou know
what is the price of a Church halowing? no less than xl. shillinges. They sell
pardons, and remissio^s of sins as openly as a Cow, and an Ox is sold, for
they never grant them without money. The Suffragan of Ely did ask of master
John Purgolde xl. s. and the offering, for halowing of S. Edwardes in Ca^brige:
yea and he would not do it so good chepe (quoth he) but because he had a
Goddaughter buried in the churchyard. But this may be proved by examples
enough. For bring ye forth one church in all England, that you have hallowed
without money, or without hope of money, and I will grant my conclusion false.
And as for your pardons, all the world knows your handlyng. I The popes
pardons has been the best marchaundise in England.
dare say it is the best marchaundise in the world, as you handle it.

But was it not a maruaylous blindness, and a great presumption, so cruelly to
handle me for these articles? was there no middell to have punished me for
speaking against you, but that I must needs be an heretic? I dare say,
there is not one among you so shameless, ye dare come forth now at this day, and
prove these articles heresy against me. But doubtless as long as I live, and
am not restored to my name and fame again, which you have violently taken away
from me, will I be unto you a devil, and a pestilence. I require nothing of
you, but my good name and fame, to the which I have right, and to the which you
ought of your charity restore me, though I never required you. I think you
have punished me enough, for speaking of a foolish word or twain against
you.

Will thou know what their benedictions The xiiij. article.
is worth? They had rather geeue thee then benedictions, then one halfepeny. Is
not this a sore heresy? You ride through streets, and towns, blessing man
and stone, but you never geeue halfepenye to man, nor child.

Now is come a pardon, whereby The xv. article.
they say that they have power to send an hundredth souls to heaven. And if
they may so do without any further respect, then may they likewise send an
other 100. to hell. For it follows in the text, Quodcunque ligaueris, that is,
what so ever thou byndest. Is not this a sore heresye, to say that you may not
rule this matter at your judgment. But this is a marvelous text, Quodcunque
ligaueris, for it binds in hell, and loses in heaven, and opens men's
purses, and cofers in earth, it deposes Princes, it interditeth lands, it
loses a man out of his coote: yea and often times it loses a man from his
wife, yea and the horse out of the carte. And all is done by this text
Quodcunque ligaueris. Is not this a merueilous text, that has so great a
power? I know not such an other in all the Bible.

IT is abominable to hear how The xvj. article.
they preach, and teach, that they may absolve a poena and a culpa, which I am
sure is impossible, as they understand it. Make of this what you can, and look
of your own scholasticall doctors, The which learneth boldlye that the keys
of the church has none auctorite over sin, nor yet over eternal pain. But
all only has auctorite to change everlasting pain unto a temporal pain:
and that the pope may change, and take away at his pleasure. And among all
temporal pains, you reken purgatory ye greattest. Over the which yt pope has
full power. This is your own doctrine. Look in Alexander de Hales, in
Alexander Duns, Bonauenture in iiij. sent.
Duns, and in Bonauenture, in the 4. book of the sentences. Now if you will
condemn me, then must you fyrist condemn this your own doctrine.

WHat is the cause that they forbid us that we should not discuss The xvij.
article.
how great their power is? but because that they would make all me^ fools,
and hold us in ignorance? Your own scholemen say, the popes power is so
great, that no man can, nor may discuss it. Also your law commands. That
no man be so hardy, The Pope may not be conptrolled of any man.
as to ask ye pope, Lord why do you so? But put the case that this were a
lie, yet is it far from heresy. Yet my Lords say, that I shall be an
heretyke, And why say I? Because we will have it so, say they. Yea and thou
be not so content, you shall be burnt. Mary I thank you heartily my Lords.
Pro bona vestra informacione.

THey have a law most abominable, and contrary to Gods law The xviij.
article.
and charity, to excommunicate the people. 4. times in a year, that is to
say, those men that raise the rent of an house: that must you understand, if it
beelong not to the church. For if it beelong unto ye church, thou may raise
it in every month ons, and no man shall curse thee. Also they curse them that
be not buried in their parish church, ye must be understood, if that they
be rich men, for if they be poor, they may be buried among the friars. The
Bishop of Bath said, there was no such manner to curse men. And all ye world
knows the contrary. More over I red these articles in the book of the
general curse, that belongs to saint Benets church in Cambrige and there did
I mark it with mine own hand, and yet the bishop was not ashamed to deny it.
And why? Because I must be an heretyke, there is no remedy, the holy fathers
has so determined it.

THey have myters with glystering The xix. article.
precious stones, they have gloves for catching cold in ye midst of their
ceremonies. They have rings, and ouches, and other ceremonies, so many ye
there is in a manner now nothing else in the church, but all iewyshe manners.
will you make this heresy? because I speak against your damnable and pompous
myters? I think such ornaments were to be condemned even among heathen men,
I will not say among christean men. But this No man may speak against the
pomp of Prelates.
dare I say, that there was never no God among heathen men, that ever delighted
in such ornaments: And yet you will serve the God of heaven by the^. And your
poor brother, whom Christ has redeemed with his precious blood dies in
prison, and openly in the streate and hangs him self for necessity, and yet
will you not bestow on him so much as one of your precious stones. Tell me of
one bishop that ever brake his myter to the helping of a poor man? was there
never man in necessitye in England? but all ye world may see what you be.
These things be sensible enough.

THese myters I can not tell from The xx. article.
whence they do come, except they take them from the jews bishops. and if they
take them from ye Jews, then let them also take their sacrifices, and their
oblations from them, and offer calves, and lambs, as they did, and then have
we nothing to do with them, for we be christen men, and no Jews. I pray you
tell me where Bishops myters, comes from the Jews.
ye find but one prick in holy scripture of your myters? Our master did
institute bishops, And S. Paul sets out what is their office, and also what
is their orname^t. and yet speaks never a word of your myters. But I dare
boldelye say, ye if you be put to ye trial, you shall be feign to ru^ne to
the old law. But can I be an heretyke, if I condemned clearly your myters,
and said they were of the devil? when you prove them to be of Christ's
institution, then will I be an heretyke. Is not that Enough? I pray you let
me so long be taken for a christean man. And if you be not content with
this, truly then do ye me wrong.

THese myters with 2. horns I cannot The xxi. article.
tell what they should signifye, except it be the horns of the false prophet,
of whom It is spoken, with 3. King.
these horns shall you blow before thee all Syria. And so did he mock their
ringes, and all their ornaments, and ecclesiastical ceremonies. It will com
Bishops use vain and foolish ceremonies.
to my saying, that you be bishops of the old law, for you have nothing to
defend your rings, your ornaments, and your ceremonies, but very tyranny.
Wherefore to mayntaine these, depose you kings, and princes interdite lands
and burn man, wife, and child. And when you have all done, you have defended
but a deuelysh token of pride. The doctors, that would favor your proud
tokens, and expound them to the best, have declared that the two horns of your
myters did sygnify the new and the old testament, that is, how you should be
learned in them both.

Now I saw, that this exposition did not agree with that thing (for no man can
be less learned in them the^ you be, I speak of a great many.) Wherefore me
thought it was but a vain exposition, and therefore I compared What the two
horns of the myter means.
them to the two horns of the false Prophet, because (as you know) this false
Prophet, said unto the king, that he should with these two horns blow before
him all Syria. And yet he lied, for the king was the first man that was
slain. So likewise you say unto kings, if they follow your counsel, and
mayntaine your authority, and be ruled after you, The^ shall they overcome all
their enemies: As sin, death, and hell, and yet (Saluo ordine vestro) you
lie, for you have no word of God for you. Wherefore you must be false Prophets.

Here have I compared with a similitude your myters to the two horns, and you
to false Prophets, what if this be false? what if I can not prove it? yet can
you make me none heretic. For then must you make those men heretics, that
have compared the forkes of your myters to the new, and to the old Testamentes,
and you to the true Apostles, for they have made a greater lie then I have
done, and they are never able to prove it. And as for me, I will prove my
saying true (if ye will stand to Scripture) or else will I be taken for an
heretic.

THey have baculum pastoralem to The xxij. article.
take sheep with, but it is not like a shepheardes hook, for it is intricate
and manifold crooked, and turns always in, so that it may be called a mase,
for it has neither beginning nor endyng, and it is more like to knock swine
and woules in the head with, then to take sheep. They have also pyllers, and
pollaxes, and other ceremonies, which no doubt, be but tryfles, and things
of naught.

I pray you what is the cause that you call your staff a shepheardes staff?
you help no man with it? you comfort no man? you lift up no man with it? but
you have stricken down kings, and kingdoms with it, and knocked in the head
Dukes and Earls with it. Call you this a shepheardes staff? There is a space
in the shepheardes The meaning of the Bishops crosier staff.
staff, for the foot to come out again, but your staff turns, and wyndeth
always inward, and never outward, signifying that what soever he be that
comes within your danger, that he shall never come out again. This
exposition your deeds do declare, let the^ be examined, that you have had to
do with. And let us see how they have escaped your shepheardes hook. But
these be the articles, for the which I must needs be an heretic.
Nevertheless all the world may see how shamefully, that I have erred against
your holynesses in saying the truth.

My Lord Cardinal reasoned with me in this article, all the other he passed
over, saving this, and the sixte article. Here did he ask, if I thought it
good and reasonable, that he should lay down his pyllers and pollaxes, and
coin them? Here is the heresy that is so abominable. I made him answer,
Cardinal Wolsey lyked well his pyllers and pollaxes.
that I thought it well done. Then said he, how think you, were it better for
me? (being in the honor and dignity that I am) to coin my pyllers, and
pollaxes, and to give the money to. v. or vj. beggars? then for to mayntaine
the common wealth by them as I do? Do you not reckon (quoth he) the common
wealth better then five or six beggars? To this I did answer, that I
reckened it more to the honor of God, and to the salnation of his soul, and
also to the comfort of his poor brethren, that they were coined, and given in
alms. And as for the common wealth did not hang of them, for as his grace
knew, the common wealth was before Where be they now.
his grace, and must be when his grace is gone, and the pyllers and pollaxes
came with him, and should also go away with him. Notwithstanding if the common
wealth were in such a condition, that it had need of them, then might his
grace so long use them, or any other thing in their stead, so long as the
common wealth needed them. Notwithstanding I said, thus much did I not say, in
my Sermon against them, but all only I damned in my Sermon the gorgious pomp
and pride of all exterior ornaments.

Then he said, well, you say very well. But as well as it was said, I am sure
that these words made me an heretic, for if these words had not been
therein, mine adversaries durst never have showed their faces against me. But
now they knew well that I could never be indifferently heard. For if I had got
the victory, the^ must all the Bishops, and my Lord Cardinal, have laid down
all their gorgious ornaments. For the which they had rather burn xx. such
heretics, as I am, as all ye world knows. But God is mighty, and of me has
he showed his power, for I dare say, they never intented thing more in their
lives, the^ they did to destroy me, and yet God of his mercy has saved me,
against all their violence, unto his godly wisdom is the cause all only
known.

The Bishop of London that was Tunstall Bishop of London had intelligence where
D. Barnes was become.
then called Tunstall, after my departing out of prison, said unto a
substa^ciall man, that I was not dead (for I dare say his conscience did not
reckon me such an heretic, that I would have killed my self, as the voice
went, but yet would he have done it gladly of his charity) but I was (said
he) in Amsterdame, where I had never been in my life (as God knows, nor yet
in the country this x. years) and certain men did there speak with me (said
he) and he fained certain words, that they should say to me, and I to them,
and added thereunto, that my Lord Cardinal would have me again, or it should
cost him a great sum of money, how much I do not clearly remember. I have
marvel that my Lord is not ashamed, thus shamefully, and thus Lordly to lie,
all though he might do it by authority.

And where my Lord Cardinal, and he would spend so much money to have me
again, I have great marvel of it. What can they make of I am now here what
say to you me.
me? I am a simple poor wreatch, and worth no man's money in the world
(saving theirs) not the tenth penny, that they will give for me. And to burn
me, or to destroy me, can not so greatly profit them. For when I am dead,
the Sun, and the Moon, the stars, and the element, water and fire, yea and
also stones, shall defend this cause against them, rather than the verity
should perish. But if they be so charitable to do good Good counsel given
to the Bishops.
works, and to spend their money so well, they have prisoners and poor men
enough in the land, let them bestow their money of them. And as for me, I do
promise them here by this present writing, and by the faith that I owe to
Christ Jesus, and by that fidelity that I owe to my prince, that if they will
be bound to our noble Prince, after the manner of his law, and after good
conscience, and right, that they shall do me no violence, nor wrong, but
disc^sse and dispute these articles, and all other that I have written, after
the holy word of God, and by Christ's holy scripture with me. Then will I (as
soon as I may know it) present my self unto our most noble prince, there
offering my self to his grace, that I will either prove these things by Gods
word against you all, or else I will suffer at his graces pleasure. Whom the
father of heaven preserve in honor. Amen. And if you refuse this condition,
then say that you are neither good, nor charitable. For I dare say you can
desire no more of a Christen man.

Priests do mumble, and rore out their Dyriges, and Masses in the The xxiij.
article.
Church and churchyardes, for their founders, curious to speak their words
distinctly. But I ensure them that their prayers shall do them no good, but
only acceptatio diuina. As for this article, the Bishops did not make much of,
for they perceived that it was gathered without any sentence. For my saying
was, that men should make their prayers in such a faith, and with such a
devotion, that God might accept them, and not so idly, and without all
devotion babble, and say their dyriges, alonely of vondage and of custom, and
not of devotion. I brought the laying of the Apostle for me, which says: Let
your peticions, and prayers appear before God. And also he that asks, let
him Phil. 4. Iaco. 1.
ask in faith, nothing doubting.

THere is no prayer acceptable to The xxiiij. article.
God, except it be fetched from the fire of the altar. This article was also
gathered without any sentence, for my adversaries did not greatly care what
they made of such articles as pertayned to learning, and edifiing. And
therefore they never erred so much as they did in them. For in those articles
that were against the Bishops, they did great diligence, and in a part of them
gathered they my very true sentences, and mine own words. though in those
things they left out uncharitably, those words that made for my declaration,
and also for the probation of my saying, the which I have also here left out,
all The articles as evil as they were laid of mine adversaries.
only adding the articles as thye laid them against me, that all men may see
yt worst that they had against me. For all men may think that they will
neither lay the best, nor yet the truth against me. But this article did I
thus preach: that men should not in their peticio^ and prayers, put to their
good works, nor their good deeds, and their merits: As O Lord I do fast, I
do pray, I am no theife, I am in charity with all the world, and for them
defire God to be merciful unto them. But they should desire the father of
heaven to be merciful unto them, alonely for Christ's merits. For they were
ye things whereby both we, and our prayers are accepted in the sight of the
father. And John. 14.
to prove this I brought certain Scriptures. As this: whatsoever ye shall
ask the father in my name, he shall give it you. And also the figure of ye
old law, where there was no sacrifice done, but with ye fire that was taken
from the altar. Now did I say, that Christ is our altar. But this mine
adversaries understood not. But I maruayle what this article does among the
other heretical articles? I think they do not reckon it heresy.

He did not pray for the three estates The xxv. article.
of holy Church, neither made he his prayers in ye beginning of his sermon,
according to the old custom, but at the last end, and for the true knowledge
of all Christen men, making no prayer to our Lady, nor for the souls in
gurgatory, nor for grace expedient. If the Bishops had had any indifferency in
them, or any charity, they would have been ashamed that such articles
should have been brought before the^. What is this to the purpose of heresy,
that I did not pray for the three estates of holy Church? And yet they grant,
that I prayde for all true Christian me^, and that men might come to the true
knowledge. Is not all the church contained in this? But they be uncharitable
men, without all consideration, they be so blinded in their worldly honor.
That I did not pray to our Lady, nor for the souls in purgatory, what is that
to heresy? for then were the Apostles heretykes, for they did not pray in their
sermons to our Liberties of holy Church may in wise be impugned.
Lady, nor yet to ye souls in purgatory. And as for praying for grace
expedient, that is not the preacher bound to do openly. But me thinks by
these articles, that God gave me a great grace, that I durst so boldelye
reprove their abominable living not fearing the danger that should come
thereof, but this I leave to other men's judgment. And I dare boldelye say, ye
if I had spoken tentymes as much against ye auctorite of our noble prince and
against all his noble dukes, and Lords, and had taken all power, both
spiritual and temporal from them, and given it to our idle bishops, then had
I been a faithful christen man, for I had defended ye liberties of holy
church. But god send them his grace, and space for to convert.

Amen.
The whole disputation between the Bishops and Doctor Barnes.
NOw most honorable, and gracious Prince, here have I showed your grace the
articles, that mine adversaries uncharitably, has laid against me. In the
which though a great many of my words, and sayings were. Yet nevertheless
there was left out all those things, that did make for my declaration, and for
probations of my words, and also for mollifying, and temperatyng of those
things, that seemed to be somewhat hardly spoken, against the Bishops. The
which things were to long to recite unto your noble grace. But as God is my
judge, and also my conscience, and all my words, and deeds, and all manner of
my living, and conversation, I did never intend, to speak against the
Bishops, or else any other man, further then their living, and conversation were
against the blessed word of God, and the holy doctrine of Christ's Church. For
the truth is, there was no great clerk in the Church of All the ancient and
learned fathers cry out upon the pride and lewd living of the Bishops.
God this. CCCC. years, that wrote any thing, but he complained vehemently
against the living of the spirituality. Let their books be brought forth, to
prove whether my saying be truth or not. Alas is it not a pituous case, yea and
also against all law and conscience, that I poor man shall be thus violently
cast away, for speaking against these vices, that been damned by almighty
God? and by all his holy creatures? yea and the Bishops them selves, and all
the world must grant that they do live as evil, yea and rather worse, then
I did speak? Oh Lord God, where is love to virtue? where is the shamefastnes
that Christen men ought to have? where is Justice? That I shall be thus
shamefully cast away, for speaking of that thing, that every Christen man is
bound to speak? They do so live, and I being a preacher of the verity, must
be condemned, for speaking against it.

But most gracious and mighty Prince, God has set your grace in the same
honor, and dignity, that you by Gods ordinance, ought to defend those men,
that are oppressed wrongfully. Wherefore humbly, and meekely, and with all
lowlynes, and reverence, I beseech your grace to minister unto me gracious
justice, and let me be heard indifferently, whether that I can justify my
cause, with learning or not. If I can not justify it, your grace is a minister
of justice, I An earnest petition made by Doctor Barnes.
will refuse no manner of pain that shall be due for my tra^sgressio^. Wherefore
ones again, with all meekenes, and lowlynes, in the way of charity, and in
Christ's name, and for his sweet blood sake, that he has shed for your
grace, yea and also by ye virtue of your authority, that the heavenly God has
delivered you, I do require, and desire of your grace audience, and justice. I
and all my pare^tes be your natural subjects borne, and a great many of us
has dyed in your graces quarrel and yet is there none of us, but are ready to
do your grace that service, with our bodies, and blood that shall become true
subjects to do, to their noble prince. Wherefore thyrdely, in my name, and in
all our names (for all they are rebuked in me) with all meekenes and reverence,
I beeseche your grace of gracious audience and of favorable justice. This thing
I trust your grace will not deny me Nor yet take any displeasure with me your
poor subject, for thus requiring. For I have none other prince, nor Lord to
seek unto here on earth, but unto your grace only. Nor can I come to any
charitable end with mine adversaries. Wherefore I am compelled by extreme
violence, thus to complain unto your grace, for my name, and fame, and
estemacion, and all things that belong to an honest poor man in this world,
is taken wrongfully from me hereby, and have been by ye space of. 9. or 10.
years (which is no small time) compelled to live in misery, and obloquy.
Wherefore most gracious prince, lamentably I cry, and call unto your grace, for
gracious audience, and indifferent justice. It were to long a process to
troble your grace with, to tell all the uncharitable hand lyng, that the
Cardynall, and the bishops appointed by him, did use with me. But I will make
unto your grace a short sum of it, as near as I can call now to remembrance.

In the year of our Lord. 1525. yt. 24. day of December, did I make 1525.
a sermon, at the request of the parish in S. Edwardes church in Cambrige out
of the which sermon did mine adversaries gather these articles: which when I
knew, I offered my self to preach again the sunday following. And to declare
my self, and my meaning clearly. But Doctor Rydley, and Doctor Preston,
chaplens, and kynsmen to yt bishop of London found the means, yt the
Vicechau^celour did Doct. Batnes inhibited of preaching.
inhibet me to preach. But I could never know any reasonable cause why, but
that alonely he said, it should be for my profyt to hold my peace. And
with this I was so content. Till at the last, that these foresaid doctors with
one master Tyrell gathered in in writing certain articles, and presented them
to the vicechauncelour, which sent for me, and asked me, what I said to those
articles. I answered, that they were none of mine, But certain words, and
sentences there were in them, that I had spoken, but that was left out, yt
should make for my declaration. Wherefore I said they were none of mine, And
that I would be reported by the audience. To this he said, that I should
take heed what I denied, for if they brouht wytnes against me, the^ must I
needs dye. I answered, that the witness should be false, for I never spoke
them. Then said he, I could not prove a negative. I answered, that I would
prove yt witness false, what so ever he were. He said, whether The Popish law
is tyrannous.
they were true or false, I must suffer for it, if witness come in against me,
for that was the law, I said, how yt was a piteous case, And by that law they
might condemn our M. Christ. He said, how yt I should remember me what I
did, for the matter was so dangerous, and so heinous in the law, that I might
have no counsel. Then I answered, and said, well, let god help, which
knows all things. This was in the university schools, the doors shut fast,
no man being with in on my part, but I alone, But of my adversaries part, was
there doctor Rydly, doctor watson, doctor Preston, and a doctor of law,
whose name I have forgotten, their was also one master Fooke, and master Tyrel
which was appointed among them, to be the presenter of these articles.

Now the Vicechauncelour when he could have no more of me, in communication
beetweene us, be asked me, what I would do, I answered, he should go his
way, and set him down, and hear their complaint, And I would make such an
answer as God should put in my mind. He required me instantly, not to cast
my self away, So he went and set him down, and I was called before him. As
soon as I came, then stood forth M. Tyrell, and presented a roll, in the
which were certain articles (as he Doctor Barnes is accused of contention,
sedition and heresy.
said) gathered out of my sermon, of yt which some of them, said he, were
contentious, some were sedicious, some were sklaunderous, and some were
heretical. When he had thus spoken, Then said I to him, Good M. Tyrell, will
you present any of these articles as heresye? At this word spoke yt
vicechauncelour to me, good master doctor, let that pass. Will you be
content to submyt your self? Then said I where so ever I have spoken against
Gods word, or against the exposition of holy doctors, I will be content to
be reformed, and to submyt my self. But with this was not doctor Rydlye, nor
doctor watson content, except I should add unto it, If I had offended the
laws of the church. But at that I stopped, and said, it was to large, for I
knew not, what they meant by the laws of the church, nor I was no doctor of
law. Wherefore I judged it sufficient for me, to be reported by Gods word,
and by the exposicion of holy doctors. For that was my faculty. The^ the
Vicechauncellour rekened, that it was sufficient for me. But we could not
agree in a great space, in this thing. Wherefore I said I would agree to all
manner of laws, yt were not gaynst Gods word, nor S. Agustine nor S. Hierome,
nor yet against none of the four doctors. So did it rest yt day, at this
point, and no more was handeled. For in this time was the whole body of yt
university gathered together, and knocked at the school doors, and said,
they would hear the examination, seeing the matter was manifest. And these few
persons should not take auctorite on them only to here, and to determine such
causes. Than the Vicechauncelour sent the bedell to the door, requiring them
to be content, but they were the more moved, and knocked sorer. So rose the
Vicechauncelour, and went him self to the door, and gave them as good and as
fair words as he could. But the conclusion was, they would not depart,
except they might hear this matter judged, and as they said, it apertained to
learning. And they were the body of the university. So yt Vicechauncelour came
back again unto The body of the University stirred up.
us all, and said, we must give over this matter for the university is in a
rumor, and so departed we a sunder.

The^ within two or three days after, was I cauled into Clare hall, to yt
Vicechauncelours chamber, where were also the foresaid doctors, gathered
against me. There did they entreat me with good words for to be content to
be ordered after master Vicechauncelours council, I did require, that master
Vicechauncelour would indifferently hear me, and mine adversaries together,
And then if I had said any thing against learning, I would be ordered at
master Vicechau^celours commandment. The^ said they, that it was done for my
profyt, that master Vicechau^celour did not sit in judgment. For (as they
said) they were all my friends, and would be loathe that my matter should be
heard in judgment. For if there came any witness against me (as they were sure
there would) the^ were I but lost. I answered, what witness soever should come
to prove those articles as they were laid against me, I would prove them
false. For I had preached openly, and many learned men were at my sermon, and I
doubted not, but they would testify the truth for both parties. But then
answer was Here ye may note the course of yt Popes law.
made me, that if three witnesses came against me, then would three and twenty
not help me, for that was yt course of the law. Then said I: This is a
pitious case, yt a man shall not be reported indifferently by his audience,
seeing it was in the University. But by 2. or 3. false witnesses. Wherefore I
would abide the danger and let mine adversaries do their uttermost. If I
shall thus dye, I must be content (said I) I am no better then our master
Christ. Then was there many words used, and many dangerous ways showed me,
to have withdrawn me from this purpose, but I did stand fast in it. So they
required me to go back into a chamber, and they communed together secretly
alone. And at yt last they sent unto me the Vicechauncelour, which entreated
me very sore, to be content with their ordinance. For by his conscience he
could not perceive, but they were all my friends, and intended to save both my
name and fame, which they could not do (the law was so dangerous) onles I
would follow their counsel. Then asked I M. Vicechau^celour, what they would
that I should do. For truly (said I) these articles were falsely, and
uncharitably laid unto me He answered, that there should be no ieoperdy A
subtle. crafty, and popish Chauncelour.
in ye matter, and therefore I should be contented to grant the^. But unto yt
I would not agree in any wise. Wherefore I desired him to depart again unto
the^, and I would come, and make them a reasonable answer, So came I in, making
this protestation first.

Right worshipful masters, I trust you be all my frend^^, and have so A
protestation.
much charity in you, that you will not cast me away, onles you perceive a
great fault, and obstinacy in me, the which I trust you shall not find, for I
did never intend, to speak, nor yet to boe, against Christ's holy doctrine.
Notwithstanding, seeing that yt law is so dangerous, as M. Vicechauncelour,
and you have told me: Therefore I had rather put my self unto your charity,
then to stand to yt danger of the law. And for this purpose two of these
articles that be laid unto me thus I answer.

These articles as they do here stand, were never mine nor I never D. Barnes
answer to the articles alleged against him.
intended to speak them, as they be here written. But nevertheless I do
grant, yt here be many of my words and also a great many of my se^te^ces ye I
did speak. Wherefore I do submit my self unto you, desiring you charitably to
deal with me, and not to take my words to yt worst sense. Then made they me
to be sworn, to stand to ye Vicechauncelours determination. At that I
stopped a great while, but at ye last I granted to abide his determination, if
it were not against learning and charity. And upon this the Vicechauncelour
assoyled me, as they said Ab exco^municacione iuris. Now had Note here the
crafti^ and willy Foxes.
they there standing unknown unto me, a notary, which did make an instrament
of all my agreementes. For I did not know, but yt they dealt with me as
friends, and as private persons. And this instrument made by the notary, was
afterward presented unto the court, for witness against me, when I was brought
before the bishops. And as we were thus talking in yt Vicechauncelours
chamber, The University gathered together, so that ye body of yt University
was there. And then sent they up certain masters, and bachelours of divinity
to yt Vicechauncelour, requiring him that they might be admytted to here the
examination of me, in as muth as they had heard me preach. Answer was made
again, that there was no such matter in hand, but that they did deal with
me frendlye, to devise an end most to my profit. By the reason of the which
congregation, we were compelled to depart a sonder, as for that time. And so
rested ye matter still, the space of a month. In the which time, doctor
watson, and doctor Preston, at the agreement of the Vicechauncelour, went and
wrote a reuocation, and made it of every article by it self, making me in the
reuocation to grant yt articles, as they were laid against me. Addyng also
Note here the most false and ^euilishe practice of the popish clergy.
to every article, that because some men had so understood me, therefore I
should revoke the article, as in the first article, where I had said, after
the mind of S. Hierome, yt all days were of like virtue. They added, ye
certain men did take me, ye I would have no holy days. And therefore I must
revoke that article as heresye.

Item where I had spoken in myns articles against the gorgious pomp, and pride
of spiritual ornaments. They did ad^e, yt certain men did take out of my
saying, that I would have no hallowed chalices, nor vestimentes, nor yet any
ornameutes in yt church, And therefore I must revoke that article, as heresy.
And so in every one of my articles where they could expound a word to an
evil sentence or else of malice, make any mischeuous, or sedicious saying, that
laid they to me, and would have me revoke it, as though it had been my
saying, and meaning. So there was never an article, but that was either
heretical, sedicious, contentious, blasphemous or else, pijs auribus offensinus.

Moreover, I had in yt same place a good friend, the which wrote the same
reuocation privily, as fast for me as he did wright it for doctor Preston.
The which man is yet alive. Now when I had this thing in writing, I cauled
into my chamber, an eight, or ten, of yt best learned men, yt were God to
help his true preachers styrreth up some good men.
in Cambryge, the which be yet alive, as far as I know, saving master George
Stafforde, and master Bylney. Of all these I asked their counsel, what they
thought best to do, seeing this reuocation was so uncharitably made, and
things falsely laid unto my charge, which were not in mine articles, nor yet
could be charitably taken out of them. They also concluded, that it was
neither right nor conscience, that I should agree to this reuocation. Wherefore
afterward when the Vicechauncelour called me again before doctor Rydley,
doctor watson, doctor Preston and master Tyrell, and delivered me this
reuocation in his chamber, which I should read openly yt sunday following in S.
Edwardes church, and should say neither more nor less, then was therein O
cruel and mercylesse Papists.
written. Yea and should also promise, that if I were afterward called forth by
any higher power spiritual, to be content, and suffer all pain, and
punishment, that he or they should lay unto me, Then would I not agree in no
wise to this determination, nor consent to these conditions. For they were
neither agreeable to learning nor yet standing with charity.

There were certain articles condemned for heresy, that were as true as S.
John's Gospel. And charity would not, that I should be blamed for that thing,
that I never spoke, nor thought, but alonely malicious persons did take out of
my sayings false meaninges. Wherefore here was a great tragedy among the^.
For some said, that I was perjured, by yt reason I was sworn to abide the
determination of yt Vicechauncelour. And the other part rekened, that my oath
bound me not, by the reason that it was so uncharitably made, the which was
not their promise to do: Yea ye Vicechauncelour him self, thought it to
extreme. So ye after many words ye the congregation of them was dissolved, and
I should make an answer within eight days, what I would do Now in the mean
season, did master Tyrell ride to London, and found ye means (by the reason
that he could not obtain his mind in the University, for I said I would
appaele from the vicechauncelour, to ye whole body of the University) that the
Cardinal sent down doctor Capon, and a sergeant of arms, called Gybso^,
which did arest me in the University, for to Barnes arested by a Sergeaunt of
arms.
appear before your graces counsel. So was I brought Up to London, ye Twesday
before shroue Sunday, and on the wedensday at night after was I brought before
the Cardinal in his gallery at westmynster, which take and red all my articles
quietly, till he came to the 6. There he stopped and asked me, if a bishop
might have any more Cities the^ one. I answered, yt a Bishop was instituted to
instruct, and teach the City, and therefore he might have as much underneath
him, as he were able to preach and teach to. And to that me thought S. Paul
did agree commau^dyng Timothe to set in every City a Bishop. Wherefore I knew
none other order but this.

Then said he: That in Paul's days, a City was 6. or 7. miles long, beside
the subburbes and of that whole City, was there but one Bishop. So likewise
now, a bishop had but one Cathedral see, and all the resedue of the country,
were as subburbes unto it. To this I said nothing, for he would hear me no
more, but returned and read forth ye articles, till that he came to the xxij.
articles, where he found his pyllers, Cardinal greatly delighted and esteemed
his crosses and pollaxes.
and his pollaxes. And there he stopped, and had a great disputation with me
of them, as I have written before in my articles. So at ye last we came so
far, that I said, how these articles were uncharitably gathered out of my
Sermonde. Than he said, you are defamed of heresy. I answered, and said: I
trust there is no good man that knows me, which will suspect me. He said,
do not you know that there is a rumor, how that you be brought before us for
heresy? I answered, that rumor is scattered by mine adversaries of malice,
and not of any occasion that I have given. He said, I believe that to be true,
but how will you purge your self: I answered, I will be bound to bring unto
your grace xx. honest men, and well learned, of good name and fame, that shall
depose for me, how that I am not worthy of this infamy. Then he said, can
you bring me vi. or x. doctors of divinity, that will swear for you, that
you are neither guilty, nor yet worthy to be suspected? I answered, that it
was not possible to bring so many Doctors for me, seeing there were no more
but two at my Sermonde, and they belonged both to Bishops. Wherefore I supposed
they would not testify with me: But I would bring as many honest men, as
should be required, and they should be as well learned, and better then I,
for to testify with me. But he said, that would not help, for they must
be my peers, after ye form of the law. I said, ye was impossible. Then said
he, you must be burned. I answered, that I trusted Nothing else.
to have more grace, and favor at his hand. He said, he was sworn to
maintain the laws of y^ church, and therefore he must follow ye form of the
law. Wherefore I should take deliberation with my self, whether I would
stand to the course of the law, or else submit my self to his grace.

Now because I had once submitted my self to the Vicechauncelour, and I was
thereby circunuented: Therefore, I thought I would now not be so hasty in
submitting my self: And therefore I answered, that I would submit my self to
his grace, in any thing that could be proved against me, that I had spoken,
contrary to learning. He said, that this was no submission. And I would grant
no more. So after much communication, he concluded with me, and said, how
that I was but a fool, and could not perceive, how good he was unto me.
Wherefore seeing that I would be reported by my deeds, therefore he had
signed xv. or xvi. Doctoures (said he) the which should ye next day hear
me. And so the next day, which was on the Thurseday before Festigam Sunday,
was I brought into the Chapterhouse of Westminster, The manner of the
examination at Westminster.
where sat ye Bishop of Bathe, as principal judge, and the Bishop of saint
Ass, the Abbot of Westminster, the Abbot of Burye, Doctor Quarton, Doctor
Allen, Doctor Stephen then secretary, with many more, which I knew not. Then
said the Bishop of Bathe: Sir you are defamed of heresy: but I denied the
same. He said, ye do see what a multitude of people here is gathered to
hear your examination, which must rise of some fame? I said, that I knew no
cause of that gathering, for I knew never a man there, nor brought any man
with me, saving a child of xiij. years.

Than said he, Did you never hear of any man, that you were accused of
heresy? Than said I, Men may say their pleasures, I can not let them, but it
is no matter to me as long as I am faultles.

Then said he, we do believe that you are faultles, but yet you must purge
your self, and declare your innocence. I answered, to that I was content, and
would be reported by all men that ever knew me, or heard me. Well said
he, that is well said. Now said he, be there certain articles delivered
unto us, against you, what say you to them? My desire was to know mine
accusers. Nay said Here ye may note the crafty iugglyng of the Papists.
he, we proceed after an other form of the law, wherefore, what say you to
these articles? I answered, that they were uncharitably gathered against me,
wherefore I did deliver certain articles into the court, subscribed with mine
own hand. As soon as they had them, than had they what they would, for I
was now come in further danger, then I wist of, for now must I needs purge
my self after their request, or else revoke all things that they had laid
against me, as though they had been mine, or else I must needs dye, after
their law. The which thing I than neither knew, nor suspected, And this The
more innocent the sooner trapped and condemned among the Papists.
has been the cause, that all manner of men, whatsoever they were that came
before them, were they never so good, nor innocent, must needs be heretykes,
if they were not good unto them, the which they were seldom, as their deeds
has declared.

But to come to our purpose, they enquired diverse questions of me, nothing
perteyning unto mine articles: As whether a man might swear or not? And
whether my Lord Cardinal were mine ordinarye judge or not, with other like
captious interogations, at the last they came to my first article, and inquyred
of me, if all days were alyke. I said, after the mind of S. Hierome, that
all days were equal. Then asked they me, if we should keep any holy
days? I said, yes. And in this matter we had a great disputation, till at
the last my Lord of Rochester came. And he asked me if this commandment,
Sabatum sanctifices, were a ceremonial, or a moral precepte? I answered, that
it was a ceremonial, alleging for me S. Augustine. Tha^ Epist. c. xix
said he, that I was not learned. But always when they had asked of me a
question, and I had assoyled it, so that they neither would, nor could
abiecte any thing against me, than was I commanded always to stand a part,
And they laid their heads together, till they had invented an other captious
question. Than was I called again, and mine answer given, I was commanded
back again. Thus they continued with me three days, in the which space their
Notary wrote a reuocation of all my articles, before the time that mine
answer was heard. And on the third day after noone, about iij. of ye clock,
was there a great long roll offered unto me for to read word by word as it
there stood, and commandment was given me by ye Bishop of Bath* that I should
not speak one word before the people, more or less, the^ was written in the
roll, for if I did, he would handle me well enough. So I required first to
see what was written in the roll, or I would grant unto it. Answer was
made, that if I would read it as it was written, well and good, if not, I
should stand to the ieoperdy. So I desired them to know, if they had condemned
any of my articles for heresy.

They said, yea. I asked the^ which it was. They said they would not tell me
more, then was written. I answered, Alas my Lords, ye truth is, that to my
judgment I have spoken nothing, but that stands with S. Augustine, with S.
Hierome, and with other Doctors of holy Church. Wherefore if it shall chance
me thus to be condemned, and not to be taught: wherein, I can not tell what I
should preach in time to come. The Bishop of Bathe answered, that I should
take no care for that, for as for preaching he would provide for me. But I
should alonly answer, if I would read this roll, or not. I desired that
Doctor Barnes forbidden preaching.
they would first point with their finger (if they would not speak it) which
article they had condemned for heresy, and I would be bound to prove it true
by S. Augustine, or else by S. Hierome, or I would be taken for an heretic.
To this said the Bishop of Bathe, that if S. Augustine, and S. Hierome were
here, they should stand to the determination of the Church. Unto whom I said,
that the Church had so determined of S. Augustine, and S. Hierome, that if any
other church determined against them, I would suspect it. Well says he, If
you will stand unto them, do. We are content, alonely tell us whether you will
read this roll or not.

Then said I. My Lords, I beseech you in the way of charity, and for Christ's
sake, deal charitablye with me, and do me no wrong. For S. Paul says, that
you have power given, to edifiyng, and not to destruction. Very well, said the
Bishop of Bath, ye need not to fear. Here be Note here the tyranny of the
Papists.
to many witnesses, that we should oppress you wrongfully. But said he, tell
us whether you will read this roll or not? This is the third time, and the
last. Then said I. I will not grant to it, except I may first see it. Do as
it shall please you. At this they sat all still, wone looking on the other.
Then the Bishop of Bath commanded me to depart aside. So took they their
counsel togithers. And at the last I was called again, and this was said to
me. Sir ye shall have a man, that shall read it unto you before. Well said I. I
am content. And so one of their Notaries, a lay man, was assigned unto me, and
we departed a little aside, and there he began to read. The year of our Lord,
such a day of the month, was one Doct. Barnes conuented before the bishops in
Westminster, for certain articles, which were gathered out of a Sermonde, that
he preached in Cambridge, of the which, some of them be sclaunderous, some
be erroneous, some be contentious, some be seditious, some be foolish, and
some be heretical. When that he came to this word heretical. I asked him,
which of them were heretical? He answered me again, ye have heard what my
Lords says. I can make you no answer.

Alas said I, shall I be thus condemned for an heretic, and can not tell
what is mine heresy? Then said he, it belongs not to me, speak unto them.
Well said I. Read no more. So went. I again before the Bishops. And ^ell down
on my knees, and desired them for the better passion of Christ, that they would
show unto me, which article they condemned for heresy, and then if I would
not be taught, they should handle me after the form of law. But to this the
Bishop of Bath au^swered, and said, I should chose whether I would read ye
roll, or else be burned: ye one of both I should do. The^ said I, Jesus have
mercy on me, I will surely not read it. That was the lest.
And so I delivered it to them again.

Then the other Doctors cried upon me, the one here, the other there, that I
should remember my self, and not to cast my self away after this manner.
For to read the roll, said they, was but a small thing, and I was never the
worse man. And I should see that my Lord Cardinal should be good, and
gracious unto me, and they would all speak for me, so that I supposed in very
deed, that they would have required no more of Grace with out deseruyng.
me, but for to have read the roll before ye face of the world, that I should
not seem to have the victory against them all, which thing I did not greatly
regard. But in very deed, and if I had known, that there had been so
mischievous poison, tyranny, and cruelnes, in them, as I found afterward. I
would never have read it, to have dyed for it. But God brings all things to
pass at his pleasure.

Now upon this opinion that I had in them, and by the reason of their good
words and pituous, that they spoke unto me. I granted to read the roolle.
But than when I would have read it, the Bishop of Bathe said, it was to
late. so was there a great disputation between them, upon the matter: Till
that Doctor Quarton said, my Lord it is not to late, for it is all in one
session, and in the time of one judgment. But the Bishop of Bathe (our Lord
forgeeue him) sought all ye means ye he could, and used all manner of cruelnes
to have destroyed me. Nevertheless, at ye last he delivered me y^ roole for
to read. The^ was all ye people y^ stood there, called to hear me. For in ye
other iij. days, was there no man suffered to hear one word that I spoke. So
after their commandment that was given me, I red it, adding nothing to it,
nor saying one word, that might make for mine excuse, supposing that I should
have found the Bishops the better.

After this, I was commanded to subscribe to it, and to make a cross on Note
here what crossing and tossing y^ Papists use.
it. Then was I commanded to go kneel down before the Bishop of Bathe, and
to require absolution of him, but he would not assoyle me, except I would
first swear, that I would fulfill the penance, that he should enjoin to
me. So did I swear, not yet suspectinge, but the^e men had had some cromme of
charity within them. But when I had sworn, then enjoined he me, that I
should return that night again to prison. And the next day, which was
Fastingam Sunday, I should do open penance at Paul's. And that the world
should think that I was a marvelous heinous heretyke, the Cardinal came the
next day with all ye pomp and pride, that he could make to Paul's church, and
all to bring me poor soul out of consayte, And moreover were there
commanded to come all ye bishops, that were at London, and all the abbots
dwelling in London, that did wear miters, in so much that the prior of S. Mary
spittell, and an other moncke, which I think was of Tower hill, were there
also in their myters.

And to set the matter more forth, and that the world should perfectly know and
perceive, that the spiritual fathers had determined my matter substancially,
The bishop of Rochester must preach there the same day, and all his The
glori^us assembly of the papists.
sermon was against Lutherians as though they had co^uicted me for one: The
which of truth, and before God, was as far from those things as any man could
be, saving that I was no tyra^t, nor no persecutour of Gods word. And all
this gorgyous fasing with myters and crostaues, abbotts, and priors were done,
but to blind the people, and to outface me. God amend all things that is
amysse. I had been well content to have suffered all these things, so I might
have come to a charitable end. But I must return again after this to prison,
and there remain, till my Lord Cardinals farther pleasure. The which pleasure,
I did abide first and last* 2. years, and three quarters and yet could never
be at any point with the^. For I sent unto y^ bishop of London that was then,
certain worshipful men The Cardinal had put the matter to him.
of the Cyty of London, whose names be these. Master Lambert, which has
been Mayor, M. Raynold, which has been shreue, M. Palmer, M. Petyt, M.
Jones, and M. Pernell. And desired these men in the way of charity, to go to
the Bishop of London, and to desire him to be good and gracious unto me. And
if I had offended, I would be glad to make amends, as much as he should
reasonably require of me. Desiring him to show the^, what he would of his
charity require me to do, and they for to be bound unto him, ye I would
keep it.

This they did. But what answer ye they had of him, they be men alive for the
most part, they can tell. And amongst all other, master Petit said unto the
bishop: Alas my Lord it is a petuous case. If a man come in the danger of
your law, there is no remedy to help him out. Yes sayd^ the bishop. What is
that said master Petyt? This is a young man, and has good friends, which would
be right loathe to have him cast away. wherefore if there be any remedy,
devise you it, and we will be bound for him. At this the bishop was astonyed,
and said at the last, that he would speak to my Lord Cardinal for me. Then
these me^ offered him to go with him and to be bound for me. He said it
should not need: But nevertheless he spoke so unto them, or they departed, God
save me from such speaking.
that when they came home, there was not one of them, that durst give me so
much bread and meat as he durst give his dog, nor yet speak one word to me.
Immediatelye after this, the bishop found ye means, that I was sent to
northa^pton, there to remain as in a perpetual prison.

Thus most gracious prince have they handled me your poor Orator. I beseech
your highness, to be good and gracious unto me, and judge, if this be
charitable dealyng, thus to condemn me for an heretyke and not to show me
the point wherefore. But even with a violent tyranny, to compeil me to do,
and confess what they will, or else to be put to death. And if there be any
of them yet, ye will come forth, and prove any of these articles heresye, I
will not refuse to suffer any pain, that your grace shall judge me worthy.
Thus our Lord Jesus Christ preserve your noble grace evermore

Amen.
Only faith justifies before God.
NOw, if your grace do not take upon you, to hear the disputation, and the
probation of this article out of the ground of the holy Scripture, my Lords
the Bishops will condemn it, before they read it, as their manner is to do with
all things, that pleases them not, and which they understand not: and then
cry they, heresy, heresy, an heretic, an heretic, he ought not to be
heard, for his matters be condemned by the Church, and by his holy fathers,
and by all long customs, and by all manner of laws.

Unto whom, with your graces favor, I make this answer. I would know of
them, if all these things, that they have reckened, can overcome Christ, and
his holy word, or set the holy ghost to schole? And if they can not, why
should not I then be herds that do require it in the name of Christ? and
also bring for me his holy word, and the holy fathers, which have understand
Gods word as I do? Therefore though they will not hear me, yet must they
needs hear them. In holy Scripture, Christ is nothing else, but a Savior, a
redeemer, a iustifier, and a perfect peace maker, between God, and man. This
testimony did ye angel give of him in these words. He shall save his people
from their sins. And also S. Paul, Christ is Math. 1. 1. Cor. 2.
made our righteousness, our satisfaction, and our redemption. Moreover Esaias. 53.
the Prophet witnesses the same, saying: For the wretchedness of my people,
have I stricken him. So that here have we Christ with his properties.

Now, if we will truly confess Christ, then must we grant with our hearts,
that Christ is all our justice, all our redemption, Christ is all in all.
all our wisdom, all our holiness, all alonely the purchaser of grace, alonly
ye peace maker between God and man. Briefly all goodness that we have, ye it
is of him, by him, and for his sake only. And that we have need of nothing
toward our salvation, but of him only, and we desire no other salvation,
nor no other satisfaction, nor any help of any other creature, either heavenly
or earthly, but of him only, for as Saint Peter Acts. 4.
says, there is no other name given unto men, wherein they must be saved. And
also S. Paul says, by him Acts. 13.
are all that believe justified from all things. Moreover S. John witnesses
1. John. 2.
the same, in these words. He it is, that has obtained grace for our sins.
And in an other place. He sent 1. John 4.
his son to make agreement, for our sins.

Now my Lords, here have you Christ, and his very nature full, and whole. And
he ye denies any thing, or any part of these things, or takes any part of
them, and applies them, or gives ye glory of the^ to any other person, then
to Christ only, the same man robs Christ of his honor, and denies Christ,
and is very Antichrist. Wherefore my Lords, first what say you to this? and
unto the propertyes of Christ? If you grant them, the^ are we at a point. For
they prove that faith in Jesus Christ, only justifies before God. Secondarily,
if you deny if (as I am sure you will, for you had lever deny your Creed,
the^ grant it.)

How can you the^ avoid, but that you be the very Antichrists? of who^ S.
John speaks? For now have we tried your spirits, that they be not 1. John.
4.
of God, for you deny Christ. That is, you deny the very nature, and the
property of Christ. You grant ye name, but you deny the virtue. You grant
that he descended from heaven, but you deny the profit thereof. For he
descended for our health, this deny you, and yet it is your Creed. You
grant, that he was borne, but you deny the purpose. You grant, that The
Papists deniyng only faith to justify deny the nature of Christ.
he is rissen from death but you deny the profit thereof for he rose to
justify us. You grant, that he is a Savior, but you deny, that he is
alonely yt savior. I pray you wherefore was he borne? to justify us in part?
to redeem us in part? to do satisfaction for part of our sins? so ye we
must set a payr of old shoes, a lompe of bread, and cheese, or a lousie gray
coat to make satisfaction, for yt other part? Say what you will, if you give
not all, and fully, and alonely to one Christ, the^ deny you Christ, and the
holy ghost. And S. John does declare you to be contrary to Christ. This may
also be proved by a plain Scripture of the holy ghost, which is this. No man
in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the book,
or to look on ye book, till the lamb came, unto whom the seniours spoke, on
this manner. Thou Apoc. 5.
art worthy to take yt book, and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast
killed, and have redeemed us by thy blood.

How say you to this my Lords? In heaven was there none found, neither by the
angels, nor yet by the Christ only has wrought our redemption.
seniours worthy to open the book, but Christ only. And will you find, that
they could not find? will you set an helper to Christ, who^ they set alone?
But I pray you tell us what be shall be. All the world knows, that they he
good works. But now, from whence come your good works? whether from heaven?
or out of the earth? or from under the earth? If they were in any of these
places, where were they when the angels, and the seniours sought them? Have
you found them? whom they could not find? but let this pass. I pray you,
what will you lay for your good works? or by what title will you bring them
in, to join them with the la^be in openyng of the book? The seniours have
laid for them, that the la^be alonely was worthy to open the book, because he
was slain, and redeemed them with his precious blood. Now what cause lay you
for your good works? The la^be has alonely dyed for us? The lamb has
alonely shed his blood for us? The lamb has alonly redeemed us? These things
has Christ is our only redemer and iustifier.
he done alone? Now if these be sufficient? then has he alone made
satisfaction, and is alonely worthy to be our redeemer, and iustifier.

Moreover, they that be in heaven confess, that this lamb is alonely worthy
to redeem them. Be your works better then theirs? or ca^ your works help
them? If they can? then is not the lamb alonely worthy to redeem them.
Moreover, the seniours fall down before the lamb, geuyng him alonely praise.
And shall your good works stand up by the lamb? Then be they better then
the seniours. But let us prove this thing by open Scriptures. S. Paul took so
great labors to prove this article, as he never took in any other, and all
because he would make it plain, and stop the mouths of the agaynesayers.
But all this will not help them, that have not the spirit of God.
Nevertheless, we will by Gods favor, do the best we can to confound the
crooked enemies of Christ's blood, and though we can not make them his
friends, yet at the lest we will so handle them, that they shall be ashamed
openly so to speak against him, as they have done long time, and so will we
handle them (by Gods help) that all the world shall know, that they glory in
Christ's name, and by him be they also so high promoted in this world, that
they can not be higher, And yet deserve they of Christ, worst of all men.

But let us go to our purpose. S. Paul says: All men be sinners, and want
the glory of God, but they are justified freely by his grace, thorough Roma. 3.
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. What is this that all men have sinned,
yea and are justified freely? How shall a sinner do good works? How can he
deserve to be justified? what call you freely? if there be any deserving
less or more, then is it not freely. What call you by his grace? if it be any
part of works, then it is not of grace. For as Saint Paul says: Then grace
were not grace. Here Roma. 11.
can be no evasion, the words be so plain. If you bring in any help of
works, then for so much is not our redemption freely, nor yet is it of grace,
as concerning the part that comes of works, but partly of works, and then
do you destroy all Saint Paul and his whole disputation. For he Faith with
out works justifies.
contendeth against works, and clearly excludes works in justification, and
brings in grace only. Now, that that is excluded in the whole by
contention, can not be brought in, in part to the cause. This is open in his
words, where he says: Where is now thy rejoicing? It is excluded. By what
law? by the law of works? Nay, but by the law of faith. We do judge
therefore, that a man is justified by faith, without yt works of the law.
Hear you not, that the gloriation of works is excluded? and Roma. 3.
yet will you boaste your works? Hear you not plainly S. Paul's sentence,
that judges clearly with faith, and against all works? How can this be
avoided?

Is it not clear? What can be answer to it? Is not this Paul's proposition,
that he took to prove, faith only justifies? It were but lost labor for
Paul to prove that works did help to justification, For that the Jews did
grant, and required no more, but that works might not be clearly excluded.
They were Christened, and content to receive Christ for their savior, but not
only, and alonely. This was the contentation. In so much that they gloryed
against the Gentiles, which had no manner of works, and for that despised them,
as people unworthy to be justified.

But paraduenture here will be A crafty and subtle evasion.
said, that Paul condemns the works of the old law, but not the works
of the new law. Are you now satisfied in your conscience? Think you, that
you have well assoyled S. Paul's argument? Think you, that this is sufficient
to avoid Saint Paul, that has taken so great labor to prove this cause?
Think you, that you shall be thus discharged before God? If you do, then go
boldly into the strait judgment of God with this evasion, and doubt you not
but there shall you find S. Paul as stiffly and as strongly against you, and
your new works, as ever he was against the Jews, and their old works: And
if he did condemn the works of the law, that were instituted by the mouth of
God, and the best works that ever were? Think you that those works that you
have invented, shall be there allowed?

Briefly, what works can you All good works are contained in the law of God
do, or excogitate (that be good) which be not in the old law? and of the
old law? Ergo, he speaks of all manner of works, for the law includes
all works that ever God instituted. The highest, and the best, and most of
perfection of all works be, Opera decalogi, the works of the ten
Commandments. And these be the works of the old law, and can not
justify, after your own saying. Now what works have you of the now law,
other then these? or better then these? Our master Christ shows, that in
fulfilling ij. of these Commandments, be all works included. What works
then be of the new law, that were not commanded in the old? Paraduenture
you will say: All those works that Christ speaks of in the v. of Math. be
of the new law, and not of the old. For Christ says, I say unto you: He
that calls his brother fool, or that looks on a woman to desire her, and
such like, does offend. These seem to be works of Christ, and not of Moses.
Ergo, there be works of the new law, that were not commanded in the old,
and against the^ disputes not S. Paul, say ye.

To this I answer that our master Christ does there reprove yt false
interpretation, that the Scribes and Pharysies did set to the law, but he
teaches no new works, nor is no geuer of any new law. For Saint John
says: The law is given thorough John. 1.
Moses, but grace and verity came by Jesus Christ. He is the geeuer of grace
and mercy, as all the prophets testifies, and not an other Moses. And
therefore to purchase us favor, he dyed on the cross, and so Christ suffered
for our sins.
did not Moses: But he commands us to do this, and do that. But Christ
says, hang thou on my doing, and believe thou, that I have done for thee, for
thee, and not for me.

Now to our purpose, Christ I say does interpret, and declare the old law
against the Scribes and Pharyses, which learned, that the law was fulfilled
and content with outward works, and that was their justification. This false
doctrine does our master Christ reprove: And says, that the law does
require a pure and a clean heart, and will have his works fulfilled out of the
heart, and not alonely with hand, and seete, and toothe, and nail, as the
Pharyses says, and teaches. So that our master Christ teaches no new
works, but alonely expresses the virtue of the old law. And thus does holy
Doctors declare this v. chapter of Math. and specially S. Augustine. Wherefore
out of that place ca^ not be August. in ser. Domini de monte. Exodus xx. and
Leuit. xix.
proved, that there be certain works of the new law, that were ueuer
commanded in the old.

Moreover, look in the old law whether these things be forbidden, or
commanded, and you shall find that the words of the law, and Christ's
exposition does agree. So that our master teaches no new thing, nor yet any
new works. But now grant, that there be certain works of the new law,
which be not of the old: yet have you not, nor ca^ not prove that those
shall justify? For there can be no more goodness in works, then were in
works of the old law, for they were to Gods honor, What goodness is in good
works.
and to the profit of our neighbor. What goodness can works have more? And yet
you grant, that they can not justify. How then shall your new works
justify? Blessed Saint Paul disputes against them that were Christened, and
had both works Galat. 2.
of the old law, and also of the new. And yet concludes he, that Christ
alonely was their iustifier. Mark his argument, if righteousness comes of the
law, then is Christ dead in vain: As he would say: if the law help to
justify (for that was the opinion of the Jews) then is not Christ alonely
your iustifier. If he be not your iustifier alonely, then is be dead in
vain. How will S. Paul prove this consequent? On this manner: Either Christ
does this thing alone, or else he is dead in, vain, for he will have no
helper. This must needs be the meaning of his argument there.

Now will I take this argument, of S. Paul, and likewise dispute against your
new works. If new works do help to justify, then is Christ dead in
vain. But Christ is not dead in vain. Ergo new works do not help to
justify. The first part is Paul's, The second you grant. Therefore the third
must ^^edes follow But let us see how S. Paul proves this preposition by an
example, not of the old law as though he disputed alonely against the works
of the old law, But by that holy and excellent Patriarch Abraham, who^ no
manner of works could iustifye, but faith only. Think you yt S. Paul does
speak here of the works of the old Romans 4.
law? nay doubtless. For how could Abraham do yt works of law, and there was
no law given. 400. and 30. years after? wherefore S. Paul constrayneth
Galat. 3.
you to conclude, that no manner of good works, (though they be so good as
Abraham's works) can help to iustificacion.

Note also S. Paul's argument. Abraham was instified so many years before yt
law was given. Ergo (says he) the law does not justify. So like wise
dispute I against your new works. Men were sufficiently, and perfectly
justified alonely by faith, before any new works were given, or preached. Ergo,
the works of yt new law does not justify of necessity. The anticedent I
prove thus. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and John Baptist, and all the holy prophets
were perfectly justified, before any new works (as you take new works) were
spoken of. Ergo, men were sufficiently justified, alonely by faith. If Saint
Paul's argument conclude, so must mine also. Wherefore say what you can, Here
stands holy S. Paul stiffly, and strongly for me, and against you and says:
That we be freely, and alonely justified by faith, without all manner of works.
But let us see what S. Ambrose says to this text. They are justified freely,
for they doing nothing, Ambro. ad Romans 3.
nor nothing deserving, alonely by faith are justified by the gift of God. etc.
Here you not, ye men working nothing at all, nor nothing deseruyng, are
justified by faith only? yea and freely? you were wont to cry for Sola, sola,
sola, only, only, only. Here have you him, and to help him you have also
gratis, that is to say, freely, and also dono Dei, that is to say the gift of
God, and Nihill operantes, that is as much as working nothing at all. If these
words, do not exclude works, and allow faith only, I can not tell what words
will do it? grant these words, and I will be content.

I will also bring you Origyne on this same text, whose words be these. Orig.
ad To. lib. iij. cap. iij.
Paul says, that the justification of faith is alonely sufficient. So that if
a man do believe only, he is justified, though there be no works done of
him at all. By faith was the thief Faith only and alone justifies.
justified, without the works of the law. For our Lord did not ask him what
he had done? nor did look for any works of him? but did accept him all
only, for confessing of Christ. It follows. Wherefore a man is iustied by
faith, Unto whom, as concerning justification the works of ye law help
nothing. etc. What say you to Origin? that says how men be justified, though
they do no good works at all, for works do help nothing to justification,
but faith only? Be not these plain words? Grant these words, and we will
ask no more of you. Here have you also, Sola, sola, sola. So ye you need not
cry no more for Sola. Also Origin brings an open example of the thief, that
no man can deny. Who can have less good works then a thief? which is neither
good before God nor man, So yt all ye world may see, that this is no new
opinion, seeing that the scripture, and also holy doctors does teach it. Also
S. Paul in the 9. chapter brings in the Gentyle, Roma. 9.
which knows nothing of God, nor has done any good works, but contrary
blasphemed God and his name, and has always lived in Idolatrye, and been an
utter enemy unto al goodness.

He brings in also the Jew full of good works of the law which has also
great zeal unto God, and to his works, yea and of that Paul bears him
witness. Briefelye, he brings in for him such a Jew, that no man can
complain of, but is full of good works. Yea take all the best of the Jews
together, (for it were madness of Paul to speak of the damnable Roma. 10.
Jews, that were open wretches and damned by the judgment of the law) with
all their good works, and yet S. Paul does exclude them, and repelleth them
clearly from iustifycation, with all their good zeal, and with all their good
works, and concludes with plain words, that the gentyl, which is full of
damnable words, and had neither zeal, nor love unto goodness, is justified by
faith only.

These be S. Paul's words: we Roma. 9.
say, that the Gentiles, which followed not righteousness, have obtained
righteousness. I mean ye righteousness, which comes of faith. But I sraell,
which follows the law of righteousness, could not attain unto righteousness.
Wherefore? Because he sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of
the law. Be not these plain words? That the Gentiles, which followed no
righteousness nor had any mind thereunto, are justified freely by faith? Is not
here Sola fides, only faith? Moreover, the Jew We can never attain to
salvation but by faith in Christ.
is reproved with all zeal, with all his love, with all his study, and with
all his good works. Is not this a merueylous thing? yes verily, And so
merueilous, that you shall never understand it, without you believe. But
peradventure here shall be said, that the good woorks of the Jews did not
profit the^, because they had no faith: But if they had had faith, then would
they have helped to their justification.

To this I make answer, Troth it is, good works did not profit the Jews,
for lack of faith. But this is false, That works should have helped to
justification, if they had had faith. For S. Paul proves clearly that good
works help nothing to justification, nor evil works let not the
justification, yt comes by faith. And this he proved by the example of the
Gentle, which had no good works, but all damnable works, and yet is
justified by faith. Moreover, the Jew had yt zeal of God, and all manner of
good works with all things that the world ca^ devise, yea and also S. Paul
speaks of the Jews yt were Christened, and all this could not help.
Wherefore no manner of works, whether they be in faith, or out of faith, can
help to iustifye. Nevertheless works has their glory, and reward. But the
glory, and praise of iustificacion, belongs to Christ only. Also S. Paul
proves plainly in these words, that works have no place Roma. 4.
in justification: To him that works is the reward not given of favor, but
of duetye: To him that works not, but believes on him, that justifies Faith
is accounted for righteousness.
the wicked man, is faith counted for righteousness.

How think you by these words? be they not openly against all works? Says
he not, yt justification is imputed unto him yt works not but alonly
believes in him, ye justifies ye wicked man? I pray you what good works does
the wicked man? Mark also how he says, that righteousness is imputed unto
him. Ergo, it is not deserved. For that that is deserved, is not imputed of
favor, but it must be given of duty. How think you? Is not this Sola fides,
only faith? You know that there be but works, and faith that do justify?
And S. Paul excludes works clearly. Ergo, faith alone remains. But
peradventure you will say, ye works with faith do justify. Nevertheless of
meekenes, and lowlynes, and avoiding of all boast of goodness, you will give all
yt glory to faith, as unto yt principal thing, and without the which, no works
can help.

Notwithstanding works be good, and help to justification, though of
meekenes you will not know it. Is not this damnable hypocrisy? yea and that
with God? which were intolerable, if it were with men. But how ca^ you prove
by Scripture, that works are worthy of any glory of justification? Is not
this open lyeng on faith to give all to him, and yet (as you say) he is not
worthy of all? for works be worthy of part. If faith be not worthy alone,
confess it openly, and gene works his praise, and faith her praise, and say
not one thing with your mouth, and think an other in your heart. For God
searches the priuities of hearts. Who has required of you such a meekenes?
But I pray you how can works help to justification less or more? when they
be neither done, nor yet thought of? Who is justified, but a wicked man? which
thinks nothing of good works. But these meek lies, deserve none answer.
Wherefore let us hear what holy Doctors say, on this text. To him that
works not. etc.

Saint Ambrose says on this manner: Ambrosi,
It was so decreed of God, that after ye law, the grace of God should require
unto salvation, alonely faith. Which thing he proves by the example of the
prophet, saying: Blessed is that man to whom God does impute justification,
without works. He says, that they be blessed, of whom God has determined
without labor, without all manner of observation, alonely by faith, that they
shall be justified before God. Blessed are they whose sins be forgiven.
Clearly they are blessed, unto whom without labor, or without any work, their
iniquitios be remitted, and their sins be covered, and no manner of works
required of them, but alonely that they should believe. etc.

Be not these words plain? God has decreed, that he shall require nothing
to justification, but faith: And he is blessed, to whom God imputes
justification, without all manner of works, without all manner of observations.
Also their sins be covered, Sola fides iustificat.
and no manner of works of penau^cered of them, but alonely to believe. Here
have you Sola fides, and Tantum fides, and here can you not say, that S.
Ambrose speaks alonely of works of the law, but of all manner of works, of
all manner of observations, yea and also of penance. Peradventure it will D.
Wetherall.
be said, as a great doctor said once to me, that S. Ambrose did understand
it of young children, that were newly baptized: them their faith should save
alonely without works. How think you? is not this a likely answer for a
great Doctor of Divinity? for a great Duns man? for so great a preacher? Are
not S. Paul, and S. Ambrose well avoided? and clerkely? But I made him this
answer, that this Epistle was written of S. Paul to the Romans, which were
men, and not children, and also the words of Scripture, speak of the man, and
not of the child. And S. Ambrose says, blessed is that man.

But at this answer, he was not a little moved, and swear, by the blessed
God, let Ambrose, and Augustine, say what they will, he would never believe,
but that works did help to justification. This was a Lordly word of a
Prelate, and of a pyller of Christ's Church. But what medlyng is with such mad
men. But yet peradventure you will say, how that I take a piece of the Doctor,
as much as makes for my purpose. Notwithstanding he says otherwise in an
other place, which I do not bring. What is that to me? yet is not my Doctor
thus avoided. For you ca^ not deny, but this is his saying, and upon this
place of Scripture, and this does agree with Scripture, or else he does
expound Scripture evil. Wherefore you must answer to the saying of the
Doctor in this place, for this is the place that is laid against you, and this
is ye place, whereby other places must be expounded. And if you dare deny him
in this place, then will I deny him in all other places, by that same
authority: then be the holy doctors clearly gone. Nevertheless, holy
Scripture stands openly against you, which if you deny, then have I a cause
to suspect you. Wherefore take heed what you do. But yet peradventure will ye
say, that I understand not S. Ambrose, nor holy Doctors, as my Lord of
Rochester said how I understood not Tertullian, he had none other evasion to
save his honor with. But this is not enough, so to say, but you must prove it,
and other me^ must judge it, between you and me.

Here have I translated a great many of their sayings into English, let other
men judge, whether I understand them or not. Go ye to the Latin. and let us see
what other sense you ca^ take out. But my Lords, remember that our God is
alive, whose cause we defend, before whom I dare well say, you are already
confounded in your conscience, wherefore doubt you not, but that terrible
vengeance han geth over you, if you repent not, which when it comes,
comes, sharply. How are ye able to defend a thing, that you ca^ not prove
openly by holy scripture? Say what you will, your conscience will murmour, and
grudge, and will never be satisfied with men's dreams, nor yet with tyranny.
Think you that your laws, and your inuentio^s can be a sufficient rule for
Christen men to live by? and to save their conscience thereby? Think you, that
your cause is sufficiently proved, when you have compelled poor men by
violence to grant it? Then may we destroy all Scriptures, and receive alonely
your tyranny.

But my Lords this matter is not righted by your judgment, but by our master
Christ, and his blessed word: before whose strayte judgment you shall be
judged, and that straytly. For when all your grace, all your honor, all your
dignity, all your pomp, and pride, briefly all that your hearts do now
rejoice in, shall lie in the dust, then shall you be called to a strayte
rekening: It is no light game, nor no childs play. Mark it well, for it
lies on your neck. But what needs me to loose many words, for if you be
half so full of grace, as you say you be of good works, then will you reckon
it better then I can move you. But again to our purpose. S. Paul proves the
justification of faith only, in these words. No man is justified Gallat. 2.
by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, and we do believe
in Jesus Christ, that we may be justified, by the faith of Christ, and not by
the works of the law?

Mark how he says, that no man is justified by the works of the law, no not
S. Peter? How think you? does not S. Paul exclude works? and brings in
alonely faith? yea and that the works of the law, which were the best works
in the world, and he believes to be justified only by the faith of Jesus
Christ and not by works, and that proves he in these Abacuc. 2.
words of the Prophet: A righteous man lives by faith. Here you not? how a
righteous man lives by faith? What call you living by faith? If he live any
part by works, then lives he not by faith, but partly by works. The^ is S.
Paul's probation imperfect. But let us see how your Doctors Athanasius. Galat.
3.
do expound this text.

Now does he plainly show, that says alonely has the virtue in him The
righteous man lives by faith and not by works
to justify, and brings Abacuk saying: Of faith (and not of the law) shall a
righteous man live. He adds, well before God, for before man peradventure they
shall be reckened righteous, that stick to the law, but not before God. etc.
Here have you Sola, only. And also that this holy justification is before God,
and after his judgment, and not after men's judgments. Wherefore glory as much
as you ca^ of your good works. They can not alonely justify you, but also
they be of no valor, but damnable and very sin, if there be no faith. So
far are they from helping to justification. This Aug. in prolo. Psalm. 31.
does S. Augustine witness in these words. Those same works that be done
before faith, though they seem unto men laudable, yet are they but vain, and I
do judge them, as great strength, and as swift running out of the way.
Wherefore let no man count his good works before faith, where as faith is not,
there is no good work, the intention makes a good work, but faith does guide
thee inte^tion. etc. Here S. Augustine condemns all Good works without faith
are but sin.
your good works before faith, and says that they be nothing worth, but vain
and things out of the way. How can such things help to justification?

Mark also how that your good intention (whereupon you boast, that you do so
many good works by) can not help you, for he is blind, and knows not what
to do (though he stand well in his own conceit) with out faith, which is his
guide. So that all things before faith, are but very blindness. But as soon as
faith comes, he does both justify, and also makes the works good, which
were before sin But let us see what Saint Barnarde says of good works. I do
abhor (says he) whatsoever thing is of me. Except paradue^ture Barnar.
super. Can. ser. lxvq.
that that be mine which God has made me his. By grace has he justified me
freely, and by that has he delivered me from the bondage of sin. Thou have
not chose^ me, (says Christ) but I have chosen thee, nor I found any merits
in thee, that might move me to chose thee, but I prevented all thy merits.
Wherefore thus by faith have I married thee unto me, and not by the works of
the law.

I have married the also in justice, but not in the justice of the law, but in
the justice which is of faith. Now this remains, that thou do judge a
right judgment between thee and me, Give thou judgment, wherein that I have
married thee, where it is open, that thy merits did not come between, but my
pleasure, and will, etc. S. Barnarde does despise all his good works and
takes him only to grace, but you stycke partly to your good works, and not
only to grace. Had S. Barnarde no good works to stycke to? Mark that. S.
Barnarde is Gods child freely by grace, which can not be, if works do help
less or more. Was he not a christened man? Had he no works of the new law,
Works of the new law.
as you call them? I think yes. And yet he says, ye there was no merits,
nor any goodness, but that we were freely chosen. Wherefore he provoked you, and
all such as you be to judge righteously between God and you, the which has
prevented all your goodness and that of his own will, and of his own pleasure.
How can he find any goodness, that preuenteth all goodness? So that here have
you clearly, that good works of ye law, or moral good works (as you feign)
do nothing help to justification before God, for they be prevented of
justification.

This is also well proved by Saint. Augustines saying. Wherefore these things
considered, and declared after Aug. despiri. and lit. c^* xij.
the strength, that it has pleased God to give us, we do gather, that a man
can not be justified, by the precepts of good living, that is, not by the
law of works, but by ye law of faith, not by the letter, but by the spirit,
not by merits of works, but by free grace. No man can be justified by ye
law of works, but by the law of faith in Christ's blood.
etc. Here you this? not by merits of works, but by free grace? what call you
free grace? but without al things, saving gra^e? what call you not of works,
but y^ works help nothing. For if works did help, then would he not say,
not of works, but not of works only, but part of works, and part of faith,
but he excludes works fully and only. Again the same thing, that
purchases us remission of our sins, does also purchase justification. For
justification is nothing but remission of sins. Now faith purchases us
remission, Ergo, by faith we are justified.

Now that faith does purchase remission of sins, it is well proved by this
article of our faith, Credo remissionem peccatorum, I believe remission of
sins, Now if I have not this remission for faith, then faith deceives me,
for I do believe only, because I would have remission of sins. What
needs me to believe remission of sins, if I may deserve it by works? Also
our master Christ declares openly, ye no manner of works what so ever they
be, can iustifye before God. These be his words: when Luke. 17.
you have done all things, that be commanded you, yet say, that we are
unprofitable servants, If you be unprofitable, then be you not justified.
And if you can not be justified, when you have done all things, how will you
be justified, When you do in a manner nothing? and specially of those things,
that be commanded you wherefore this is plain, ye our works can not help
us to justification. For when we have done all things yet we are unprofitable.
But let us prove this by an open example. I put this case my Lords (unto you I
speak) that our noble prince would call you all before him, and say. My
Lords, so it is, that it has pleased us to call you unto the spiritual
dignity of Bishops, and to make you of our counsel, and Lords of our Realm,
and also of our parlame^t. Now would we know of you which of you all has
deserved it, or reckeneth him self worthy by his deserving, les or more of
this dignity? What will you say to this? What will you answer to the Kings
grace? Is there one among you all, that dare be so bold as to say to the
kings grace, that he has not given it unto him freely, but that he has done
the king so faithful service that he was bound to give it unto him? Yea, and
that of his deserving? If there were one that were so proud, as to say this,
think you that ye kings grace would not lay to his charge, how that he had
not done half his duty, but were rather bound, to do ten times as much
more, and yet the Kings grace were not bound to give him a bysshopricke, for
he had done but his duetye, and not all that.

Now if your good works, and all your faithful service, be not able to
deserve a byshopryke, of the kings grace, How will you be able by your
works, to deserve heaven, and justification Good works can not deserve
remission of sin.
before the king of all kings? When you have answered to this, before the
kings grace, then come and dispute with God, the justification of your works,
and yet shall they be far unlike. Wherefore I conclud of these scriptures,
and of these doctors, that the faith, that we have in Christ Jesus, and his
blessed blood, does only, and sufficiently justify us before God without
the help of any works.

And though ye all scripture be no thing else but a holle probacion of this
article (that is alonely a perfect comme^dation, and a praise of Christ, and of
his blessed merits, that he has deserved for us) yet will I pass over to
bring in any more places. For they ye are not co^te^t with these scriptures,
will not be satisfied, nor yet content to give al only glory to God, though I
brought in all the new testament. Yea Christ him self could not satisfy
them, if he were here, no nor yet though heaven, and earth and all creatures
therein, were nothing else, but probations of this article, it would not help.
Wherefore I let such infidels pass, and leave them to the judgment of God,
alonely certifieng them of this one thing, that is infallible, how the day
shall come, that it shall repent them, yea, and that sorer then I can either
write, or think, that they did not believe the lest prick of this holy
article. But unto our purpose. The very true way of justification is The manner
of justification.
this. First comes God, for the love of Christ Jesus, alonely of his mere
mercy, and gives us freely the gift of faith, whereby we do believe God, and
his holy word, and stick fast unto the promises of God, and believe, that
though heaven, and earth, and all that is in them should perish, and come to
naught, yet God shall be found true in his promises, for this faythes sake:
be we the elect children of God.

This is not such a faith, as men Fides historica.
dream, when they believe that there is one God, and believe that he is
eternal, believe also that he made the world of naught, yea, and believe
that the Gospel is true, and all thing that God speaks must be true, and
fulfilled, with other such things. This I say, is not the faith that we be
justified by, for devils and infidels have this faith, ^and also we may
attain to these things by strength of reason: But the faith that shall
justify us, must be of an other manner of strength, for it must come from
heaven, and not from the strength of reason. It must also make me believe,
Fides iustificans.
that God the maker of heaven and earth, is not alonely a father, but also my
father: yea, and that through the favor that Christ has purchased me, from
the which favor, neither heaven, nor earth, tribulation, nor persecution,
death, nor hell, can divide me. But to this stick I Roma. 8.
fast, that he is not alonely my father, but also a merciful father, yea, and
that unto me merciful, and so merciful, that he will not impute my sins
unto me, though they be never so great, so long as I hang on the blessed
blood of Christ Jesus, and sin not of malice, but of frailty, and of no
pleasure

He is also a lyberall father, yea, and that unto me liberal, which will not
alonely promise me all things, but also geeue them me, whether they be
necessary to the body or to ye soul. He is also not alonely lyberall, but
mighty to perform all things, that he promyseth unto me. Briefly, this
faith makes me to hang clearly of God, and of his blessed promyses made in
Christ, and in his sweet and precious blood, and not to fear death, nor any
affliction, nor persecution: nor tribulation: but to despise all these things:
and not alonely these, but to despise also mine own life for Christ's sake.

Finally, of a fleshely beast, it makes The fruits of faith.
me a spiritual man: of a damnable child, it makes me a heavenly son: of
a servant of the devil, it makes me a free man of Gods, both delivered from
the law, from sin, from death, from the devil, and from all myserie that
might hurt me. My Lords, this is the faith that does justify, and that we
do preach. And because it is given from heaven into our hearts by the spirit
of God, therefore, it can be no idle thing: But it must needs do all manner of
things, ye be to the honor of God, and also to the profit of our neighbor:
In so much, that at all times necessary, it must needs work well, and also
bring forth all good works that may be to the profit and helping of any man.
But these works be not done, to justify the man, but a just man must needs
do them. Not unto his profit, but alonely to other men's profits, even as our
master Christ, suffered hunger, and thyrste, and persecution, and took great
labors in preaching of his word, yea, and also suffered death. All these
things, I say, did he not to further or to profit himself, but for our
merits, and for our profit. So likewise does a just man his works. And as a
good tree in time of the year, brings An example how faith brings forth
good works.
forth good Apples, not to make him good, for he is good before, nor yet this
apple is not to his profit, but unto other men's, notwithstanding, ye good
nature that is in him, must needs bring it forth. So likewise, the just man
must needs do good works, not by them to be justified, but alonely in them
to serve his brother: for he has no need of them, as concerning his
justification.

Wherefore now here have you the very true cause of justification, that is,
faith alonely: And also the very true way and manner of doing good works: And
how that no man can do good works, but a justified man, as our master Christ
says: Either Math. 7.
make the tree good, and then his fruit good, or else the tree evil, and his
fruit evil: for a good tree must needs bring forth good fruit, and a badde,
evil fruit. But now let me answer to the Scriptures, and to the reasons
that they bring to prove that works do justify. First comes the fleshly
and dampnable reason, and she Solutions and arguments to the Scriptures.
says: If we be justified alonely by faith, what need we to do any good
works? what need we to crucify, or mortify our flesh? for all these will
not profit us, and we shall be saved though we do none of the^ all. Thus
did blind reason dispute with Saint Paul, when that he had proved that Roma.
6.
God of his mercy, had delivered us freely from the damnable bondage of the law.

Anon he judged that he might do what he would, for he was no longer under
the law. To this S. Paul au^swereth, y^ if we obey unto y^ works of sin,
then are we the servants of sin, and if we obey to the works of justice,
then are we the servants of justice. So that if we truly have that same
faith, that justifies us, we shall desire to do none other works but those,
that belong to justification, not that the works do justify, but that we
must needs do these works, as the very true fruits of justification, and not
as the cause of justification. Good works are the fruits of true faith.
And therefore those men, that will do no good works, because they be
justified only by faith, be not the children of God, nor the children of
iustificafition. For the living spirit of God is none author of ilnes, nor of
sin, but he cries in our hearts, Abbapater. And of that, is this a sure,
and an evident token, for if they were the very true children of God, they
would be the gladder to do good works, because that they are justified
freely. Therefore should they also be moved freely to works, if it were for no
other purpose, nor profit, but alonely to do ye will of their merciful God,
ye has so freely justified the^, and also to profit their neighbor, who^
they are bound to serve of very true charity.

Take an example, here is a thief, that is condemned by right, and the law A
very good example.
to be hanged, whom the kings grace of his mercy, does freely deliver from the
gallows, and gives him his pardon. Now this thief, thus delivered, will not
keep him self a true man, nor do those works, that belong to a true man to
do, but falls again to stelyng, because the king pardoned him so freely,
and reckeneth that the king is so merciful, that he will ha^g no thieves, but
deliver them all of his mercy, without their deserving. Now how think you? will
ye king be merciful unto this thief, when he comes again to ye gallows?
Nay truly, for he was not delivered for that cause, but for to keep him
self a true man.

Then comes my Lord of Rochester, and he says, that faith does begin a
justification in us, but works do perform it, and make it perfect. I will
recite his own words. Per fidem initiari dicitur iusticia solum, non ^^ti. 2.
autem consummari, nam consummata in sticia non aliter quam ex operibus natis,
and in lucem editis acquir^ potest, opera consummate iustificant. Fides primum
in choat. etc. What Christened man would think, that a Bishop would The Bishop
of Rochesters vain distinction.
thus trifle, and play with Gods holy word? Gods word is so plain, that no
man can avoid it, how that faith justifies alonely, and now comes my Lord
of Rochester, with a little, and a ^ayne distinction, invented of his own
brain, without authority of Scripture, and will clearly, avoid all
Scriptures, and all the whole disputation of S. Paul. But my Lord, say to me
of your conscience, how do you reckon to avoid the vengeance of God, since
you thus trifle, and despise Gods holy word? Think you, that this vain
distinction, will be allowed before Jesus Christ? for whose glory we do
co^te^de and strive? before whom, we do handle this matter?

I do think verily, that your own conscience does sore accuse you, for thus
blasphemyng the holy word of God. Wherefore my Lord, for Christ's sake
remember, that you be aged, and shall not long tarry here, and these vain
distinctio^s that you have invented to the pleasure of men, and to the great
peruertyng of Gods holy word, shall be to your everlasting damnation. And at
the lest ways, if you fear not ye terrible vengeance of God, remember the
shame of ye world, and think not, that all men be so mad, and so unlearned,
as for to be deceived by this triflyng distinction, seeing that the word of
God is so plain against it. Does not S. Paul say, that Ephe. 2.
our justification is alonely of faith? and not of works? How can you avoid
this same? Non ex operibus? Not of works? if that works do make
justification perfect, then are not Saint Paul's words true? Also S. Paul
says, that we be the children of God, by faith. And if we be the children,
we are also the heirs.

Now what imperfection find you in children? and in heirs? Christian me^
desire no more but this, and all this have they by faith only. And will you
say, that faith does but begin a justification: Beside that, you know well,
that S. Paul does prove in all the whole Epistles to the Romans, and also to
the Galathians, that faith does justify, yea, and that by contention against
works. Now how can you bring in works to make justification perfect? And S.
Paul has excluded them?

Moreover, why did not the Jews, against whose works S. Paul disputes? bring
in this distinction for the^? Briefly, what will you say to all the Doctors,
that I have here recited? which say, that Sola fides, only faith, does
justify. But doubtless, if it were not to satisfy other men, this distinction
were not worthy an answer. An other damnable reason is made, that is an open,
and a plain lie, which is this. Thou say that works do not justify, nor
yet help to justification, but faith only. Ergo, thou destroyest all good
works, and wilt that no man shall work well, but alonely believe.

I answer, if there were any shame Good works are to be done although they
justify not.
in men, they might well be ashamed of these open lies.

Tell me one, that is learned, that ever did say, or teach, that men should do
no good works? Many there be, that say, works do not justify, as S. Paul,
and all his scholars, but no man denies good works. But I marvel not at
them, for they do but the works of their father, which was a liar, and a
murderer from the beginning. I pray you, what co^sequent is this, after your
own Logike? works do not justify, Ergo, we need not to do them, but
despise them, for they be of no valor. Take a like consequent. You say, that
the kings grace does not justify, Ergo, you despise him? Ergo, he is no
longer king? Also the Sun, and Moon do not justify, Ergo, you destroy
them? But such a damnable lie, must S Paul needs suffer, when he had proved,
that faith only did justify. Then came your ouerthwarte fathers, and said,
Ergo, thou destroyest the law, for thou teach, that it justifies not. God
forbid, says S. Paul, for we do learn the Roma. 3.
very way to fulfill the law, that is, faith, whereby the law alonely is
fulfilled, and without the which, all the works of the law, be but sin. So
do we likewise teach the very true way, whereby all good works must be done.
As first, a man by faith to be justified, and then a just man, must needs do
good works, which before were but sin, and now be all good, yea, his
eating, drinkyng, and sleeping, are good.

But beside all these, have they certain scriptures. First of S. James, whose
words be these. Will thou Iam. 2.
understand, O thou vain man, that faith without deeds, is dead? Was not
Abraham our father justified of his deeds? When he offered his son Isaac on
the altar? Likewise was not Rahab the harlot justified, when she received the
messengers? and sent them out an other way. S. Augustine does declare in diverse
places, yt blessed S. Paul, and S. James, seemed for Aug. 83. quest. c. 76.
to be contrary in this matter, And therefore S. Agustine willing to save the
estimacion of this epistle, does declare, how that S. Paul does speak of
works, that go before faith, and S. James speaks of works, that follow
faith, And yet S. Agustine will not be compelled by the words of this
epistle, to grant, ye any works do justify, by the reason, that Saint
Paul's worde^ be so appartly, and vehemently to the contrary. Wherefore seeing
that there shows a controversy here in two places of ye scripture, it
stands with all reason, and learning, that the same place, which seems for
to be feeblest, and also darkest, should be expounded, and declared, by that
part of scripture, that is clerest, and most of autorite. Now is this of truth,
that the authority of S. Paul has always in the church of God, been more
of estimacion, and strength, then ever was this epistle, (though that this
epistle has been received) and especially in this cause, yt we now here speak
of. For in all the scripture is not this article of iustifycation so plainly,
and plenteouslye handled, as it is by blessed S. Paul, this must every learned
man grant.

Wherefore it stands with reason and lerning, that this saying of Saint James
must needs be reduced, and brought unto blessed S. Paul's meaning, and not S.
Paul unto S. James saying.

Now therefore in as much, that both blessed S. Paul, and also Saint James
meaning is, that good works should be done, and they ye be christian men,
should not be idle, and do no good, because that they are the children of
grace, but that they should rather in their living express outwardlye their
goodness, received of grace: and as blessed S. Paul says, To give Roma, 6.
their members to be servants unto righteousness, as they were before
servants unto uncleanness. For this cause (I say) S. James saying must needs
be understood, for to be written against those men, that bosted them
selves, of an idle, and vain opinion, that they thought the^ selves to have,
which they reckened to be a good faith. Now S. James to prove that this faith
was but an idle thing, and of none effect, does declare it clearly, by ye, that
it brought forth in time and place convenient, no good works. And therefore he
cauleth it a dead faith.

He brings in also a naked brother, Faith that brings forth fruit is the
faith that justifies, and yet the fruit does not justify.
the which has need of clothing, unto these men, yt boasted their faith, which
has no compassion of his necessity. Wherefore he concludes, ye that they
have no true faith. And therefore he says unto them, show unto me thy faith
without works, and I shall show unto thee of works, my faith.

Hear is it plain, that S. James would no more, but that that faith is a dead
faith, and of no valor ye has no works. For works should declare and show
the outward faith, and works should be an outward declaration, and a
testimony of ye inward justification, received of faith, not ye works can or
may take away our sin, or else be any satisfaction, for any part of sin,
for that belongs all only to Christ. As blessed S. John 1. John. 2.
says, and also S. Paul, he has appeared once for all, to put sin to flight
by the offering up of him self. And that this is S. James meaning, it is Hebr.
9.
declared by that that follows. Thou see (says he) that faith wrought in
Abraham's deeds and through ye deeds was his faith made perfect.

Mark how faith wrought in his deeds? That is, his faith, because it was a
living faith, brought forth and wrought out, ye high work of oblation. Also
his faith was perfect through his deeds. That is his faith was declared, and
had a great testimonye before all the world, ye it was a living, and a perfect,
and a right shapen faith that Abraham had. So yt his inward faith declared him
before God, and his faith justifies before God, and good words declare our
justification to yt world.
outward works before the world to be good, and justified. And thus was his
faith made perfect before God and man. Now unto this, do we all agree that yt
faith alonely justifies before God, which in time and place does work well,
yea it is a living thing of God, which can not be dead, nor idle in man. But
yet for all that, we do give to faith, and to Christ's blood, that glory, that
belongs to them only, that is to say, justification, remission of sins,
satisfieng of Gods wrath, taking away of everlasting vengeance, purchasing of
mercy, fulfillyng of the law, with all other like things. The glory of these,
I say, belongs to Christ only, and we are pertakers of them by faith, in
Christ's blood only. For it is no work, that receives the promise made in
Christ's blood, but faith only.

Take an example. God says to Abraham, In thy seed shall I bless all people.
Now can Abraham's works do nothing to receiuyng of this blessing, nor yet can
they make him hang on that seed, but he believes God, and sticks fast by
faith to that promise, and thinks, that God shall be true, though he be a
liar, and so is he partaker of the blessing made in yt seed. Note also, that
this blessing is promised in Abraham's seed, and not to Abraham's works. Ergo,
Abraham is blessed, because he hangs on the seed, and not on his works.
Also blessed S. Paul does drive a sore argument Gala. 3.
against works, in as much as Scripture says, in semine, non in seminibus
quasi in multis, sed in vno.

Now if works do help less or more to justification, then must needs the
promise be made, and pertain to many, and not to one only, ye which were
sore against blessed S. Paul. Wherefore I conclude, that the glory and praise
of justification belongs only to faith in Christ's blood, and not to works
in any wise. Notwithstanding we do also laud, and praise good works, and do
teach diligently to do good works, in as much as God their maker has
commanded them: yea, and also to profit their neighbors by their good
works: and furthermore, that other men, which blasphemeth the verity, might
be moved through their virtuous living, and conversation, to the holy religion
of Christ.

For these causes, and other more, I say, do I teach good me^ to live well, and
virtuously: yea, and also we teach The reward of good works is not remission
of sins.
that good works shall have a reward of God as scripture testifies, but not
remission of sins, nor yet iustication for their reward. Wherefore this
saying of S. James must needs be verified against the^, that boasted them
selves of vain faith, that was indeed but an idle opinion, and no true faith,
for it did work thorough charity. And therefore S. James disputes well
against them, that this faith was but a dead faith, and co^^ not help them no
more then it helps the devil. So that this thing of S. James makes nothing
against me, but rather with me.

Also you have an other Scripture for you, which is this. Before God, they are
not justified which hear the Roma. 2.
law, but they which do the law shall be justified. Of this text you glory
and cry opera, opera, works works. But if ye would consider the mind of S.
Paul, you should well perceive that he means not, how works might deserve
justification, for then could he not have concluded this against the Jews,
for they did the works of the law to the uttermost, and yet were they not
justified. Wherefore S. Paul means by the hearers of the law, all them that
do the outward works of the law, for fear, or for reward, or of
hypocrisy, or else by them to be justified. The doers caulleth he them that
do the works of the law, after the intent of ye law, and as the law
commands them, that is, in the true faith of Christ Jesus, which is the very
end of ye law, and the fulfilling of the law (as Saint Paul says) to all
them that believe. Wherefore all men be but hearers only of the law, till
the time that that they have the faith of Christ Jesus, which is imputed unto
them for justice. And the works of the law be no cause of justification, but
alonely an outward testimony and witness that the law is fulfilled inwardly in
their conscience before God, and fulfilled that it has no accusation against
them, for Christ has made satisfaction for them, of the which they be
partakers by their faith. And so the law must be content to admit all these
men, to be fulfillers and doers of ye law.

And now, that you shall not say, that this is my dream, here be S.
Augustines words. The doers of the law shall be justified. So must it be
August. de spiri. and lit.
understood, that we may know that they ca^ none otherwise be the doers of
the law, except they be first justified, not that justification belongs
unto doers, but that justification does preceede all manner of doings. etc.

Hear you not that justification is first given, that men might be able to
do the works of the law? This is also the exposition of your gloss. I have
marvel you study it no better.

Also you have an other Scripture, Glosa.
and that is this. Cornelius a Ge^tile, did great alms, and prayed unto God
always: Unto whom the Angel spoke on this manner: Thy prayer, and thy alms
are come up into remembrance in the presence of God. Of Acts. 10.
this text you gather, that his good works, did help to justify him. I
answer: The holy ghost has openly declared himself there. For he says,
that this Cornelius was a devout man, and one that feared God. How could this
be, without ye God had taught him inwardely by faith? Yea, how could he know
God, and that devoutly, but by faith? Ergo, he was justified before God by his
faith, The man that is justified before God (...) not be idle but must doc
good.
but ye world knew not his justification. And therefore yt holy ghost does
declare his inward justification, when he says, that he was devout, and
feared God: And also does show openly the fruits of his justification, when he
says, that he did alms. Moreover, you have there that the holy Ghost fell on
them before they were baptized in water, the which declares openly, that they
were justified before God.

This is well declared also in your own law, whose words be these:
Cornelius Ce^turio, being yet a Heathen man, was made clean by ye gift of ij.
Quest. (...) Non omnes Episcopo.
the holy ghost. Here have you plainly yt he was justified by yt gift of yt
holy ghost, before all good works. For he was an heathen man. An other
scripture ye have, which is this. If I have all faith, so yt I may tra^spose
mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing. Of this gather you, that faith
without charity can not justify. I answer. This can you not gather of S.
Paul, for it is open that he speaks not of this thing, whereby that men may
be justified, but alonely he teaches how they that be justified, must work
with charity. It is also plain, that he speaks not of faith, that does
justify inwardly, but of that faith that does work outwardely. The which is
caulled a gift of the holy Ghost: As yt gift of tounges, the gift of
prophesies, the gift of healing, the gift of interpretation, as it is open in
the chapter before. Now is this faith not given to justify, but alonely to do
miracles, wonders, and signs by. And therefore says Paul: If I had all
faith, so that I could move mountains.

Also it is open, that certain men shall say unto Christ: Behold, we have
done miracles, and cast out devils Math. 7.
in thy name: And yet he shall say to them, truly, I know you not. So that
this faith is a gift of God, that justifies not, no more then the gift of
science, or prophesies. And sometime is it in the Church, and sometime not, and
it is never of necessity there to be. But the faith that we speak of, which
does beeleeue the promises of God, and sticks fast to the blood of Christ,
has none other virtue but to justify, and must needs justify, wheresoever
he is, and he sticks so fast to Gods word, that he looks for no
miracles. This faith is never out of the Church, for it is the life of the
Church, and it is that faith that our master Christ John. 17.
prayde for, that it might never fail. And therefore S. Paul, when he
describes this faith, he caulleth it a faith that works by charity, not
that it justifies by charity. For as he says there plainly, it is neither
circumcision, nor yet uncircumcision, Gala. 5.
that is of any valor in Christ Jesus, but faith. Here does he plainly
exclude from justification, the highest work of the law, circumcision, and
sets faith alone: not the gift of faith, that does miracles, but the gift
of faith, that works by charity. And that ye shall not think this to be a
dream, here bring I you Athanasius saying, whose words be these.

There are two manner of saythes, one is justifying, as that, of the which Atha.
ad Romans
is spoken, Thy faith has saved thee. An other is cauled the gift of God,
whereby miracles be done. Of the which it is written: if you have faith, as a
grain of mustard seed. etc. So that here have you plain, that faith does
justify only, and perfectly, before all manner of works, that is, faith is
given of God freely into our souls Faith that justifies us is given us freely
of God.
unto the which faith, justification is all only promised, and is all only
imputed, and rekened of God. Nevertheless, this faith in time, and place
convenient, is of that strength, that he must needs work by charity, not
for to be justified thereby, for if he were not before justified, it were not
possible that he could have charity. For after your own school men, an
Infidel ca^ not have charity: but ye justified man, he is a free servant
unto God, for the love ye he has unto him. The which love seeks not in God,
his own profit, nor his own aduau^tage, for then were he wicked, but seeks
alonely the will of God, and the profit of other men, and works neither for
love of heaven, nor yet for fear of hell. For he knows well, that heaven
with all the joys thereof, is prepared from the beginning of the world, not by
him, but by his father. And it must needs follow, as contrariwyse the Infidel,
and the wicked man, does not work his wicked deeds because he would have
hell or everlasting dampnation to his reward, but he would rather the
contrary. Notwithstanding, hell and everlasting dampnation, must needs follow
his wicked deeds. Finally, a righteous man, is a free servant of Gods, and
works not as an, hyerelyng. For if it were possible that there were no
heaven, yet would he do no less good, for his respect is to the maker of
the world, and the Lord of all rewards.

There is also an other argument, and that is this. Faith is a work: but
works does not justify, Ergo, faith does not justify. Answer: Truth it is,
that we do not mean, how that faith for his own dignity, and for his own
perfection, does justify us. But the Scripture does say, that faith alonely
justifies, because that it is that thing alonely, whereby I do hang of
Christ. And by my faith alonely, am I partaker of ye merits and mercy
purchased by Christ's blood, and faith it is alonely, that receive the
promyses made in Faith only justifies because by faith we attain the
benefit of Christ's death which only justifies us.
Christ. Wherefore we say with blessed S. Paul, that faith only justifies
imputative: that is, all ye merits and goodness, grace, and favor, and all
that is in Christ, to our salvation, is imputed and reckoned unto us, because
we hang and believe of him, and he can deceive no man that does believe in
him. And our justice is not (as the school men teaches) a formal justice,
which is by fulfillyng of the law, deserved of us, for then our justification
were not of grace, and of mercy, but of deserving, and of duty. But it is a
justice that is reckened and imputed unto us, for ye faith in Christ Jesus, and
it is not of our deseruyng, but clearly, and fully of mercy imputed unto us.

Now most honorable, and gracious Prince, I have declared unto your highness,
what faith it is, that does justify us before God, and also brought for my
sentence, not alonely the blessed word of God, the which were sufficient in
this cause, but the exposition of holy Doctors, that your grace might see,
that I am not moved to this opinion of a light cause, nor that this doctrine of
mine is so new, as men has It is no new doctrine that is now taught.
noted it. Moreover, I have declared unto your grace, how that I would have
good works done, and would not have a Christen man's life to be an idle thing,
or else a life of uncleanness: but I would have them to be changed into all
virtue, and goodness, and to live in good works, after the commandment and
will of God. So that your grace may well perceive, that mine adversaries has
not reported truly on me, when they have said, how that I would, that men
should neither fast, nor pray, nor give alms, nor yet be penitent for their
sins. I have never said it, nor yet taught no like sentence, I take God to
record, my works, and my deeds, and all my writings, that ever I wrote, or
made. Wherefore I doubt not, if it please your grace, graciously to here me, but
that I will prove them untrue in this cause, and many other mo. This does
almighty God know to be true. Who ever preserve your most royal majesty, in
honor, and goodness.

Amen.
What the Church is: and who be thereof: and whereby men may know her.
THe name of the holy church, have those me^ of long time usurped
presumptuouslye and The Pope and his Church agrees no more with the manners of
holy Church, then darkness and light.
with out all shame, they were the greatest enemies that holy church could have
in earth. For they did no more agree with the manners of holy church, then darkness
and light, then God and yt devil. For where holy church hard no man but Christ
only: They would hear all manner of men saving Christ, and never hear him,
except it wear to to their profit or glory.

Where as holy church was ruled in this world, they would rule all the world,
and where as holy church would be holy by Christ only, they would be holy by
their own help.

And where as holy church was always despised, and persecuted of the world,
They would be honored of yt The Pope is a persecutor of holy Church.
world and persecuters of all men.

And where as holy church was inwardly decked with spiritual virtues, they
would be outwardly shinyng in spiritual array. And where as holy church would
be chaste in spryte they would with their mouths vow chastity, and spend all
their lives in whore dome.

And where as holy church did always show meekenes in the world, they would
be so proud, yt heart could devise no more.

Breifely whatsoever thing ye was How far the Pope does differ with his
Church from the true holy Church.
agreeable with the church, of that had they never a crumme, but allonely by
violence usurped the name of holy church, So that if a man had had a crown or
a long goune and a white smock over his gown, the^ was there no remedy but he
must needs be of the church, yea and holy church her self. So ye if a Barber
had made a Bull a crown, and a Tailor Jack napes a long gown, and brought an
Ass forth in The foul and great abuse of the Pope in taking upon him, that
he and his were ye holy Church.
a white rochet, the^ no man might dout but ye there were holy church, and
every man must fall down to receive clean remission a poena and a oulpa,
toties quoties, for there came the successors of Peter and Paul: and they
that have the despensatio^ of Christ's blood, and the merits of holy saints,
and ye suffrages of holy church to distribute, and the key bearers of heaven
and hell. Who can deny but this is truth?

It is to open to need an probation, for we see it daily before our eyes. So
that if a man will compare our M Christ yt is ye very head of holy church unto
these Prelates (that call them selves his viccars) he shall find but small
agreement, between the person and the vicar: and he that will consider. S.
Peter and S. Paul, withal other Apostels shall think, that either they were
none of holy Church, or else our prelals: for they agree in nothing. Yea and he
may recke^ that S. Peter and S. Paul were stark fools and right mad men that
lived so despectuous a life. What need me to make many words, or to tell
their names that I speak of, There is no doubt but that galde horse will
beewray him self. But shortly, if the devil would come in his own person
disguised, tell me how it were impossible that he could be more contrary to
Christ and his apostels, then those men that call the^ selves ye holy church:
yea take away the name of the church, and set in her steed the name of the
devil, and how will you then know a bishop from the devil? By their works?
nay trewly What difference is between a Bishop and the devil.
for they be all one: And yet will you be the heads of Christ's church, yea
the holy church her self: not so ye wicked, not so.

Wherefore that this blessed spouse of Christ may be known from thee open and
abominable whores and harlotes, therefore will I (by gods grace) set out what
holy Church is and where by men shall know her,

This word Ecclesia both in ye new testament and the old, is taken ofte^tymes
for the whole congregation and and the whole multitude of yt people both good
and bad, as it is in the book of Numeri? Why have you brought Nume. 20.
the congregation or Church of God into wilderness.

Also in an other place, The king 3. King. 8.
turned his face and blessed the whole congregation or Church of Israel, and
all the Church of Israel stood. Likewise in the new testament Saint Paul to
the Corinthians, I have sent 1. Cor. 4.
unto you Tymothy the which shall learn you my ways, ye be in Christ Jesus,
as I do learn every where in all congregations.

Also in an other place: do you despise 1. Cor. 11.
the congregation of God? and shame the^ that have not? In all these places and
in many more, is it open that this greek word Ecclesia is taken for the whole
congregation both of good and bad. Wherefore this is not ye church that we will
greatly speak of: for in this church are Jews and Sarasens Murderers, and
Thieves, Baudes, and Harlots, though we know them not.

But there is an other holy Church of the which S. Paul speaks: you Ephe. 5.
men love your your wives, as Christ has loved the Church, and has given him
self for her, that he might sanctify her, and cleanse her in the fountain of
water through the word of life, to make her to him self a glorious The holy
Church truly defined.
Church without spot or wrincle, or any such thing, but that she might be holy
and without blame. Here have you the very true Church of Christ, that is so
pure and so clean without spotte.

But whereby is she pure and clean: not by her own merits nor by her own
might, not by exterior array, not by gold nor silver, nor yet by precious
stones, neither by myters nor crosestaues, nor by pillars nor pollaxes. But
whereby then? by Christ only which has given him self for that intent that
he would make her clean and therefore says S. Paul: He gave him self that
he might sanctify The true holy church is that which is sanctified and made
holy by Christ.
her, that he might cleanse her, and make her to him self a glorious Church.

Also in an other place: you are washed, you are sanctified, you are justified
in the name of Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of God. See my Lords, how the
Church is washed by Christ 1. Cor. 1.
and by his holy spirit, and not by your blessings, not by your spiritual
ornaments, nor by your spiritual holy water, for these things cannot help
the holy Church: for she is holy in spirit and not in outward hypocrisy: she
is also cleansed by Christ's blessed blood, and not by outward disguisinges.

This does S. Augustine well prove, saying, Of Christ is the church made fair?
first was she filthy in sins, afterward by pardon and by grace was
Augustinus de verbis domini ser. so.
she made fair etc. Here S. Augustine says yt Christ has made his Church
fair, and that by his grace and his pardon, and not by your pardons, nor by
your grace. For this Church, stands by Christ's election, and not by yours.
And if Christ have not washed you and chosen you then be you none of this
Church, though you ride with a thousand spiritual horses, and have all the
spiritual tokens on earth. For and if ye son of God have delivered you, the^
John. 6.
are you truly delivered. Ye can not make by all your power and holiness that
we shall always find good ale or wine where there hangs out a green sign:
and will you with your spiritual signs and tokens make the Church of God to
follow you, or by them assign out where the Church shall be? Nay, nay, my
Lords, it will not be: but they that believe ye Christ The faithful beleuers
in Christ's merits, are yt right holy church of God.
has washed them from their sins, and stick fast unto his merits, and to
the promise made to them in him only, they be the Church of God, and so pure
and so clean that it shall not be lawful, no not for Peter, to say that they
be unclean: but whether they be Jew or Greek, king or subject, carter or
Cardinal, butcher or Bishop, tancardbearer or cannelrater, free or bound,
Friar or fiddler, Monk or miller: if they believe in Christ's word, and stick
fast to his blessed promises, and trust only in the merits of his blessed
blood, they be the holy Church of God, yea and the very true church before God.
And you with all your spiritual tokens, and with all your exterior cleannes,
remain in your filthynes of sin: from the which all your blessings, all your
pardons, all your spirituallitie, all your holiness, can not cleanse you, nor
bring you into this Church. Boast, crake, blast, bless, curse till your holy
eyes start out of your head, it will not help you, for Christ chooses his
church, at his judgment and not at yours. The holy ghost is free, and
inspireth where he will, he will neither be bound, to God is not to be
ruled by any state or degree of person.
Pope nor Cardinal, Archbishop nor Bishop, Abbot nor Prior, Deacon nor
Archdeacon, Parson nor Vicare, Nun nor Friar.

Briefly come all the whole rabble of you together that call your selves ye
holy Church, and exclude all other: yea and take sun, moon, and stars to
help you with all the friends you have in heaven and earth: and yet shall you
not be of holy church, except that you have yt spirit of Christ, and be
washed in his blessed blood. For ye holy Church of Christ is nothing else but
that congregation, that is sanctified in spirit, redeemed with Christ's blood,
and sticks fast and sure alonely to the promises that he made therein.

So that the Church is a spiritual The holy Church which is yt true church of
God is to ye world invisible.
thing, and no exterior thing, but invisible from carnal eyes (I say not that
they be invisible that be of the Church, but that holy Church in her self is
invisible) as faith is, and her pureness and cleanes is before Christ only, and
not before the world, for the world has no judgment nor knowledge of her:
but all her honor and cleanes is before Christ sure and fast. And if there
appear any of her goodness unto the world, of that she makes no reckenyng,
nor thinks her self any thing thing the better, that the world judges well
of her: for all her trust is in Christ only. She suffers the world to rage
and blaspheme both against her and against Christ her maker. She stands fast
and believes sted fastly, that, that shall have a shameful end, and
everlasting damnation to reward. Briefly, her meditations and her thoughts
are heavenly, and all that she does is spiritual. For she can not err, she
cleaves so fast to the word of God that is the verity.

And for this cause S. Paul calls The true holy church is the pillar and
ground of truth.
her the pillar and ground of truth, not that she is so sure of, and in her
own strength, but that she sticks so fast to the living God, and to his
blessed word, that is the very true Church, that is scattered through all the
world, and is neither bound to person by the reason of dignity, nor yet to
any place by the reason of feigned holiness, but she is a free thing through all
the world, as S. Augustine does witness in these words. The holy Church are
we, but I do August. ser. (...). de tempore.
not say, as one should say, we that be here alonely, that hear me now, but
as many as be here faithful Christened me^ in this Church, that is to say, in
this City, as many as be in this region, as many as be beyond the sea, as
many as be in all the world (for from the rising of the sun, till the going
down, is the name of God praised) so is the holy Church our mother. etc.

Here have you plainly, that the The holy Church is the congregation of
faithful men where soever they be in the world.
holy Church is the congregation of faithful men, wheresoever they be in the
world. And neither the Pope, nor yet his Cardinals be more this Church or
of this Church then the poorest man in earth. For this church stands alonely
in the spiritual faith of Christ Jesus, and not in dignities nor honors of
the world, as Liranus does declare in these words. Lyra in mat. ca. 19.
The Church does not stand in men by reason of spiritual power, or secular
dignities: For many Princes and many Popes, and other inferior persons have
swerned from the faith. Wherefore that Church does stand in those persons in
whom is the true knowledge and confession of faith, and of verity. etc.

O my Lords, what will you say to Lyra? I have great maruayle that you burn
him not. It is hye time to condemn him for an heretic, for he speaks
against your law xxiiij. q. 1. Quodcunque. Where as your gloss declares that
God suffers not, the church of Rome for to err. And Lyra says plainly that
many popes have erred, and also that the Church stands not in dignity, but
in confession of Christ and of his blessed verity.

But now here will be objected that I feign such a Church, as our Logitions
do intentionem secundam, that is a thing yt is no where. Where shall a man
find a Church that is so pure and so clean that has neither spot nor
wrinckle in her, and that is without all sin, seeing that all men must of
truth say, forgeeue us our trespass? And if any man say (be he never so
righteous) that he has no Math. 6. 1. John. 1.
sin, the^ is he a liar, and there is no verity in him. To this I answer,
Ephe. 5.
that this holy Church has sin in her yet is she pure and clean. Mark S.
Paul's words: Christ has given himself for her, that he might make her
glorious. So that the cleannes of The holy Church how it is made pure and
clean without spotte or wrinkle.
this holy church is the mercy of God toward her through Christ: for whose sake,
he lays nothing to her charge: yea and if any other person would, he is
ready to geeue her his cleanes, and to let her by faith claim of right his
pureness for her own. For between them, all is common, as between man and
wife. So that if the Church look on her own merits and of her own works,
she is full of sin, and must needs say, demitte mihi debita. The which she
needed not to say if she had none.

But if she refer her self unto the merits of her blessed husband Christ
Jesus, and to the cleanes that she has in his blood, the^ is she without
spotte. For by the reason that she sticks by faith so fast unto her husband
Christ, and does abide in confession of her sin, and requires mercy for
them, therefore is there nothing laid to her charge, but all thing is forgeeuen
her. And therefore says S. Paul, there is no damnation unto them that be in
Christ Jesus. And that this may be the playner, I will bring you S. Augustines
words, the Augustinus de verbis Apostoli. s. (...).
which was vexed of the Donatistes with this same reason that is laid against
me, his words be these. The whole Church says, forgeeue us our sins,
wherefore she has spots and wrinckles, but by knowledging of them, her
wrinckles be extended and stretched out, by knowledging, her spots are
washed away.

The church abides in prayer that she might be cle^sed by knowledging of her
sins. As long as we live hereso stands it, and when we shall depart out
of this body, all such things be forgeeuen to every man, wherefore The church
of God is the treasures of God without spotte or wrinkle.
by this mean y^ church of God, is in the treasures of God, without spotte and
wrinckles: and therefore here do we not live without sin, but we shall
pass from hence without sin. etc. Here have you clearly that the church of
God is cleansed and purified by Christ for knowledgyng of her sins, and not by
her own pureness. Wherefore such a church there must needs be, though that ye
carnal eye can not see her, nor fleshly reason can judge of her. Wherefore we
believe this article by faith, that holy church is a communion or fellow ship of
holy men, and know it not by seeing or feelyng, as we do the fellowship of
Drapers or mercers, for then were it none article of the faith.

And it is plain, that all your exterior That which is of faith can neither
be seen nor felt.
signs, with all your holy ornaments, as your holy myters, your holy
crossestaues, your holy pyllers, polaxis, your holy red gloves, your holy
ouches, and your holy rings, your holy anointed fingers, your holy
vestmentes, your holy challices, and your holy golden shows, yea, and take
also to help you S. Thomas of Canterburyes holy show, with all the holy
boots of holy Monks, and all these together can not make one crumme of
holiness in you, nor help you one prick forward, that you may be within this
church. For if these things could help, then were it no mastery to make an
Ass to be of the church of God.

But our holy mother the Church The true holiness that is of our right holy
mother the Church.
has an other holiness, that comes from God the father thorough the sweet
blood of his blessed son Jesus Christ, in whom is all her confidence and
trust. Unto whom she sticks only by sted fast faith, by whose pureness she
is also pure in that, that she does confess her uncleanness, for she believes
steadfastly that she has an advocate for her sin to ye father of heaven,
which is Christ Jesus, and he is the satisfaction for her sins: and 1. John
2.
he of his mercy and not of her merits has chosen her for to be his, and
because she is his, therefore must she be clean so long as she abides in him.

This is well declared in S. John John. 15.
where our master Christ is compared to the vine and all the members of holy
Church to the branches, that as the branches, can bring forth no fruit of
them selves, so ca^ holy church of her self bring forth no goodness except
she remain in Christ by persite faith.

This is well proved by your own law whose words be these, therefore is the
Church holy, because she believes righteously in God. etc. Here you De con. D.
D. 4. c. prima igitur.
not the cause wherefore the Church is holy? because she believes righteously
in God, that is she believes in nothing but in him, and she believes nor
hears no word but his, as our master Christ bears witness, my sheep
hear my voice, and an other man's voice do they not know. Also in an other
place, he that is of God hears the words of God. How comes this, that ye
Church of God has so sure a judgment, that she knows the voice of Christ
from other voices, and can not err in her judgment? Because that Christ has
chosen her, and because she is learned of God as our master Christ says, and
because she has (as S. John says) the inward 1. John. 2.
oyntme^t of God, y^ teaches his all manner of verity, so that she can not
err. But why can she not err? because she may do what she will? Because
that all thing that she does, is well done? because she may make new rules and
new laws at her pleasure? Because she may invent a new service of God that
is not in Scripture at her will? Nay nay my Lords. For she is but a woman and
must be ruled by her husband, yea she is but a sheep and must hear ye voice
of her shepherd, and so long as she does, so long ca^ she not err because the
voice of her shepherd can not be false.

This may be proved by your own De p^ne. Dis. 2. Si in glossa. 24. q. 1. Arecta
and in Glossa.
law whose words be these, ye whole Church can not err. Also in an other
place, the congregation of faithful men must needs be, which also can not
err. etc. These words be plain what Church it is that can not err: The
faithful congregation can not err.
that is the congregation of faithful men that be gathered in Christ's name,
which have Christ's spirit, which have the holy oyntement of God, which
abide fast by Christ's word, and hear no other ma^s voice but his. Now my
Lords gather you all together with all the laws that you ca^ make, and all
the holiness, that you can devise and cry, the Church, the Church, and the
Councels, the Councels that were lawfully gathered in the power of the holy
ghost (all this may you say and yet lie) and if you have not in deed the holy
ghost with in you, and if you do hear any other voice then Christ's, then are
you not of the Church, but of the devil, and theenes and murderers as Christ
says. For you come into the fold of Christ without him, you bring not his
voice, but you come with your own voice, with your own statutes, with your
own word, and your own mandamus, The voice of murderers and thieves.
mandamus, precipimus, precipimus, excommunicamus, excommunicamus.

These be the voices of murderers and Thieves, and not of Christ, therefore
you can not but err, for you be not taught of God, you have not the holy
ointment, you have not the word of God for you, you hear not the voice of the
true shepherd, therefore must you needs err in all your counsels. This is an
other manner of rule then my Lord of Rochester does assign to examine your
counsels by, A rule that Rochester teaches to know the difference between y^
Pope and Council.
for he says, where that the Pope and the counsel does not agree all in one,
there will he suspect the counsel not to be right.

Who did ever hear such a rule of a Christean man? yea and of a bishop? yea
and of a doctor of Divinity, where has he learned this Divinity? to reckon a
counsel to be true, because ye the Pope and so many men do agree in one, yea
and that such men as have so often times erred in their councils, as he does
declare him self rekening The Council erreth if the Pope agree not to their
do. ynges.
the counsel of Constantinople that had. 330. Bishops and yet did err, and
he knew no other cause, but be, cause the Pope did not agree to them. Is not
this a reasonable cause? ca^ not the Pope err? let him read his own law.
Distinctio. 19. Anastasius, and Popes have erred.
Distinctio. 40. Si Papa and also. 24. q 1. Arecta in the gloss, and there
shall he find that the Pope has erred. Wherefore then should the matter
stand in his judgment? Now how Popes condemned for heretics.
will he by this rule save the counsels of constance, and of Basell where in
both counsels, the Popes were condemned for heretykes? As the same counsels
make mention, also that the councels have erred, that granted he himself,
but peradventure he will say, that they were not full Councels.

Now is it well amended, what distinction is (as conscernyng the verity in a
counsel that has a thousand bishops and in an other that has fyve thousand,
can the multitude help to the verity? Then had the Turk the verity and we
the falsed, then had the Prophet Micheas the worsse part for 3. King. 2. 3.
King. 18.
he was alone against. iiij. hundred so was ye verytie by ye Prophets of Ball,
and not by Elyas, for they were four hundred and fyftye and he was but one
man. Briefly Christ's flock is always The little flock is ye flock of
Christ.
ye smallest number in this world but yet it is the best, not the smallest
number makes Christ's flock, but that Christ's Church stands neither by the
greatest number nor yet by the smallest, nor by the judgment or numbering of
man, but by the calling and eleccion of God. Wherefore let my Lord bring forth
what counsel that he will, and if they have not the word of God, I will not
all only say they may err, but also that they do err in very deed. And
that will I prove by the greatest lawyer that they have called Panormitanus
whose words De electio. c. significa.
be these, that Councels may err as they have erred, as concerning that
contract of matrimony, inter raptorem and raptam, and the saying of Saint
Hierome was afterward preferred a The Council of Meldelci did err.
boue the statute of the counsel as it is proved. 36. q. 2. Tria, for in
things concerning the faith is the saying of a private person to be preferred
before the saying of the pope, if he have better reasons and scriptures of the
new, and of the old testament for him then the Pope: nor it can not help, to
say that the counsel can not err, because that Christ did pray for his Church
ye her faith should not fail. For I answer to this, that though ye general
counsel do represent ye whole universal church: nevertheless in very deed
there is not ye very universal church, but representative. For the universal A
general Council is, not the universal Church.
church stands in ye election of all faith full men: and all faithful me^ of
y^ world make that universal Church, whose head and spouse is Christ Jesus,
and the Pope is but the vicar of Christ and not the very head of the Church,
this is the Church that can not err. etc.

Here it is open that the counsel may err, and that a private person having
scriptures for him is to be heard before the Pope and also ye counsel, having
no scriptures for them, you have also what is the very true Church which can
not err, which thing can not be veryfyed of your counsels for they be
neither without error, nor yet the holy Church, but that they do represe^t
the Church as a legate represents a kings person: but of that follows not
that he is ye king, or has as much power as the king, or is above. The king
or that he may rule the king, this may also be proved by. S. Augustine whose
words Augustinus de bap li. 2. c. 3 contra Donatistas.
be these, those counselles that be gathered in every Province must without
doubt give place to the authority of the full counsels which be gathered of
all Christendom: and also those full counsels often times must be amended by the
full counsels that come after: if any thing be opened by any experience that
was a fore shut, and if any thing be known that was hydden. And this may be
done without any Councels have erred and many err.
shadow of supersticious pride, without any boasted Arrogance, with out any
contention of malicious envy, but with holy meekenes, with holy peace and with
Christen charity. etc.

Here it is plain that your full counsels may be amended and reformed: ye
which thing need not, if they could not err: yea and if they did not err in
deed. Moreover you must needs grant that there is a rule where by your
counsels must be exammined; and where by sentence must be given which of your
councels be true and which false, by the which rule if your counsels be not
ordered, they must needs err and be false, and of the devil. Wherefore
gather all your counsels together, and yet of them can you not make holy church.

But peradventure there may be many in your counsels good and perfect men and
of holy Church: but they and you together make not the universal holy church
that can not err: neither have you any anctoritie over The holy scriptures are
the judges of the Councels doings
holy Church, further then the holy scripture of God: but as soon as you
forsake Christ and his holy word, so soon are you the congregation of the
devil, and thieves and murderers: and yet for all this, there must needs be
an holy church of Christ in earth, that is neither bound to Jerusalem nor to
Constantinople, nor yet to Rome, as though she were like unto the Ass and the
fool.

But now will there be objected, that our Master Christ commands, Math. 10.
if my brother offend me, that I should complain to the church. Now is this
church that I have set out spiritual, and no man knows her but God only,
she is also scattered through out the world, wherefore how can a man complain
to that church? I answer, our M. Christ does plainly speak of a man that
has wrong, the which must needs be a particular and a certain man: and
therefore likewise he bids There are particular Churches to whom we may
complain.
him complain not to the universal church, but to the particular church.

Now this particular church, if she be of God, and a true member of the
universal church, she will judge righteously after Christ's word, and after
the probations brought before her. Nevertheless, ofte^tymes comes it to
pass, y^ this particular church does fully and wholly err, and judges
unright, and excommunicateth him that is blessed of god, as it is open in your
own law, whose words be these: ofte^tymes he that is cast out is within,
24. q. 3. Si. quis et c. cu^ aliquis.
and he that is within is kept without. etc.

Here have you plainly ye the particular church may err. Wherefore that
church that can not err is all only the universal church which is caulled the
communion and the fellowship The communion and fellowship of Saints is the
universal Church.
of Saints, the which addition was made by holy fathers (for in Ciprians time
was there no mention of it) by all likelyhode to declare the presumption of
certain men, and of certain congregations that reckened themselves to be
holy church. Wherefore my Lords see well to it, least the holy Ghost have
pricked you with this addition, for you have always made your self holy
church, yea and that without any holiness. Now have I declared unto you, what is
holy church, that is, the congregation of faithful men thorowout all ye world:
and whereby she is holy, that is, by Christ's holiness and by Christ's blood:
and also what is the cause that she can not err: because that she keeps her
self so fast to the word of God, which is a perfect and a true rule.

Now must we declare by what signs and tokens, that we may know How a man may
know the church.
that in this place or in that place there be certain members of this holy
church. For though she be in her self spiritual* and can not be perfitely
known, by our exterior senses, yet nevertheless we may have certain tokens,
of her spiritual presence, whereby we may reckon that in this place and in
that place be certain of her members. As by a natural example, An example
teaching how ye true church may be known.
though the soul of man in her self be spiritual and invisible: yet may we
have sure tokens of her presence, as hearing mouyng, speaking, smellyng, with
such other. So likewise, where the word of God is truly and perfitely preached
without the damnable dreams of men, and where it is well of the hearers
received, and also where we see good works that do openly agree with the
doctrine of the Gospel, these be good and sure tokens whereby we may judge,
that there be some men of holy Church.

As to the first, whereas the Gospel is truly preached it must needs light
in some men's hearts, as the prophet witnesses, my word, shall not return
again to me frustrate, but it Esaias. 55.
shall do all thing that I will, and it shall prosper, in those things, unto
the which I did send it.

Also S. Paul says, faith comes by hearing, and hearing comes by Roma. 10.
the word of God: and therefore it is open in holy Scripture that when Peter
Acts. 10.
spoke the words of God, the holy ghost fell down on them all. Wherefore it is
open that Gods word can never be preached in vain, but some men must needs
receive it, and thereby be made of holy Church, though that men do not know
them neither by their names nor yet by their faces, for this word is received
into their hearts.

The second token is, that the receivers of this word do work well
thereafter as S. Paul declares of 1 Thessalonians 2.
his hearers: when you received of us the word wherewith God was preached, you
received it not as the word of men, but even (as it was in deed) the word of
God, which works in you that believe. So that if men do Good works are the
fruit of good faith.
work after the word of God, it is a good token that there be men of the
Church, though that we (hypocrisy is so subtle and so secret) may be
oftentimes deceived by these outward works, but nevertheless charity judges
well of all things that have a good outward show, and be not openly against
the word of God. But it is Charity may be deceived, but faith can never be
deceived.
no ieoperdy though charity be deceived, for it is open to all ieoperdies:
but faith is never deceived.

Now to our purpose, that where the word of God is preached truly, it is a
good and a perfect token that there be some me^ of Christ's church. This may
be proved by Chrisostomes words: they that be in Judea let the^ flee up
into the mountains, that is to say they that be in Christendom, let them
give the^ selves to Scriptures. Wherefore commands he that all Christened
men in that time should fly unto Scriptures, for in that time in the which
heresies have crept into the Church, there can be no true probation of
Christendom, nor no other refuge unto Christen men, willing to know the
verity of faith, but ye Scriptures of God. Before by many ways was it showed
which was the Church of Christ, and which was the congregation of Gentiles: but
now there is no other way to them that will know which is the very true
Church of Christ, but alonely by scriptures. By works first was the church of
Christ known when the conversation of Christen men, either of all or of many
were holy, the which holiness had not the wicked men, but now Christen men, be
as evil or worsse then heretics or Gentiles, yea and greater continency is
found among them, then among Christen men.

Wherefore he that will know which is ye very church of christ, how A saying
of Chrysostom.
shall he know it but by Scriptures only. Wherefore our Lord considering that
so great confusion of things should come in the latter days, therefore
commands he that Christen men which be in Christendom willing to reserve
the stedfastnes of true faith, should fly unto no other thing but unto
Scriptures, for if they have respect unto other things they shall be
sclaundered and shall perish, not understanding which is the true Church. etc.

These words need no exposition they be plain enough: they do also exclude
all manner of learning saving holy scripture. Wherefore see how you can with
honesty save your holy laws, and defend them against Chrysostom sends us
to scriptures to learn which is the holy Church, and not unto them that call
themselves ye holy church.
Chrysostom. Moreover if Chrysostom complain of the incontenency that was in
his days, how would he complain if he now lived and saw the baudry and
fornication, that is in the Church? And also he sends men to scriptures that
will know the holy Church, and not unto ye holy Church for in the Church were
heresies, but not in scripture.

Also. S. Paul witneseth the same Ephe. 2.
saying, you are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, hear
have you plainly that the very true Church is grounded, yea and The holy
Church is builte and founded upon the Apostles and Prophets.
founded of holy scripture, and therefore wheresoever that the word of God is
preached, that is a good token that there be some men of Christ's Church. But
now as to the fruits and works of this Church, she does all only fetch out
her manner of living and all her good works out of ye holy word of God, and she
fayneth not, nor dreameth any other new holiness, or new invented works that be
not in scripture, but she is content with Christ's learning and believes, that
Christ has sufficiently taught her all manner of good works that be to the
honor of our heavenly father. Therefore inuenteth she no other way to heaven
but follows Christ only, in suffering oppressions, and persecutions,
blaspheminges, and al other things that may be laid unto her, which as S.
Agustine says she learned of our M. Christ. Our holy mother yt church
Augustinus.
throughout all the world scattered far and long, in her true head Christ Jesus
taught, has learned not to fear The true Church is a sufferer, and no
persecutor.
the contumelys of the Cross nor yet of death: but more and more is she
strengthed not in resisting but in suffering. etc.

Now my Lords compare your self to this rule of S. Agustine, and let us see
how you can bring your self into the Church? or else to prove your self to be
holy? The Church suffers persecutions (for as S. Paul says, they that will
live devoutly in Christ 2. Tim. 3.
must suffer persecution) and you with stand all things and suffer nothing.
You oppress every man, and you will be oppressed of no man. You persecute
every man, and no man may speak a word against you, no though it be never so
true. You cast every man in prison, and no man may touch you, but he shall be
cursed. You compel every man to say as you say, and you will not once say as
Christ says. And as for your holiness all the world knows what it is: for
it stands in clothing and in decking, in watching and sleeping, in The Popes
church are persecutors but no sufferers.
eating and drinking this meat or ye meat, this drink or that drink, in
pattering and mumbling these Psalms or those Psalms, without devotion.

Breefly all your holiness is in books Bells, Ca^dels, Challeces, oil creme The
glory of the Popes church is in trash.
water, horses, hounds, palaces, and all that is mighty and glorious in the
world, there on hang you, there in glory you, there on crake you, there on
boast you, there upon build you. Is this ye natures of ye church? is this
holiness? Of whom have you learned these manners? You can not deny but these be
true, and if you would deny it, all the world is witness against you: yea and
also your own factes and deeds. Of whom have you learned this holiness? not of
Christ nor yet of his holy Church: but you have learned it of the Arians, ye
were the servants of the devil. Hilarious Hilarious cont. Arianos.
writes in these words, the Church does threaten, with banyshmentes and
prysonmentes, and she compels men to believe her, which was exciled and
cast in prison, now hangs she on the dignitye of her fellowship, the which
was consecrated, by the threateuinges of persecutors: she causes priests to
fly that was increased and by the chasing away of priests, she gloryeth that
she is loved of ye world, ye which could never be Christ's except the world
did hate her.

How think you my Lords, do not you all these things, that be laid to the
Arians charge? Your own friends, yea your own consciences must needs accuse
you of all these things, and yet will you be called Christ's children, I lay
nothing to you, but that holy Doctors lay unto you.

But let us see what S. Barnarde Barnardus super can. s. 33.
says on you: they call themselves the ministers of Christ, but they serve
Antichrist: they go gorgiously arrayed of our Lords goods, unto whom they
geeue none honor, and of these goods comes the harlottes decking Note here
the saying of Saint Barnard.
that thou see daily, the game players disguising, and kings apparel: of
this comes gold in their bridles, in their saddles, and in their spurs, so
that their spurs be bryghter the^ the aulters: of this comes their
plenteous wine presses and their full sellers, bolkyng from this unto that: of
this comes their tons of sweet wynes: of this be their bags so filled,
for such things as these be, will they be rulers of the church, as Deacons,
Archdeacons, Bishops, and Archbyshops. etc.

My Lords I had thought to have added Cardinals and Legates, Abbottes and
Pryors, to have made the company more holy, but I ourst not. How think you, of
whom does he speak when he faith Bishops and Archbyshops? what holiness does
he reprove, when he spraketh of gorgious array, of harlottes deckyng, of
game players disguising, of goulden spurs, saddelles and bridles? If there
were an C. that did use it more then you, yet must you needs grant that S.
Barnard greatly reproves the insaciable pride of the Popes Church.
he speaks of you. He passes me sore in condemning of your holy
ornaments, for he caulleth you the servants of Antichrist, and your holy
ornaments harlottes decking, and game players disguising, and he says that
you are neither the church nor of the church, but the servants of Antichrist,
how think you by S. Barnarde, it is time to condemn him, for he speaks
against holy church and all her holy ornaments, this dare I well say, that if
the best Christen man within the Realm should preach these words of Saint
Barnarde, you would not stick to condemn him for an beretike, but you were
wont to call him sweet Barnarde, but me thinks that he is sour enough in
this thing. Wherefore dispute the matter with him that you may come into the
Church, and not with me.

FINIS.
An other declaration of the Church, wherein he answers to Master More.
IN my first book I did declare how that certain men did take upon them to
be counted of holy Church, whose manners and lyuynges, did nothing agree with
holy church. But after that, comes M. More, and he lays to my charge, that
I counted all the spirituality to be naught, because he would make my name
somewhat odious unto them. But verily he does me great wrong, for it was
never my meaning, nor yet my saying. But mine intent was to declare that
neither the Pope, nor his college of Cardinals, nor yet all the Bishops in
the world, gathered together, did make holy Church, because of their names,
or else for their long gowns, or for their shaven crowns, or else anointed
fingers, nor yet for any other exterior things, that the world had in
admiration. But yet nevertheless I did grant, and also do now confess many
good men to have shaven crowns, and also long gowns. But yet for these
things, they were never the more of the church.

All the popes learning has been, xiiij. quest. i c. Quodeu^que in verbo
Reconciliat.
that he and his, has been ye church, the which can not err, and all things
that belong unto them, were called ye goods of holy church. All laws made by
them, were the laws of holy Church. They might not be conue^ted before any
temporal Prince, because they were men of holy church. They might not be
hanged for murder, because they were anointed, and of holy church.

Briefly, there be innumerable such things invented of them, to maynetayne
and to defend their holiness, and to prove that they be holy Church, the
which things I think M. More can not deny. And if he would, yet there be
a great many of books forth coming, to prove my sentence against him. And
also ye practice that has been used in ye world, will testify the same.

I think M. More, nor yet any man living, did ever know in his time, M. More
would have us to think there is none other holy church but ye Pope and his
Cardinals and Bishops etc.
that any man was judged, or taken to be of the church, but such men as I have
spoken of. And I think this name church, was never named, but it was taken
specially, and principally, for those men that had shaven crowns, and other
like tokens. Let me be reported to those men that be alive. Now, because I
saw that these things were nothing the cause of holy church, nor yet belonged
greatly to holy church, therefore I say, was I moved to declare what holy
church was, and who were thereof, and by what signs and tokens men might know
her.

Now to declare this, I brought certain places of scripture to prove, that
this word Eccleasia, was taken in scripture, for the whole congregation, both
of good, and bad. But I said, I would not greatly speak of that congregation,
for that was not it, that could not err, of the which was mine intent to
speak. And I brought for me, ye saying of S. Paul. Christ has Epes. 5.
given him self, for his Church, that he might sanctify her, and cleanse her
in the fountain of water, through the word of life, to make her to him self
a glorious church, without spot, or wrincle, or any such thing. But that she
might be holy, and without blame. To prove, that the Church was cleansed by
Christ, I brought the saying of S. Augustine for me. Of Christ is the church
made fair. First Aug. de ver bis Domini. sermon. l.
was she filthy in sins, afterward by pardon, and by grace, was she made
fair. etc.

Moreover, to prove, ye this church was made clean by Christ, and not by
names, or by clothyng, or by any other exterior thing, I brought for me ye
saying of S. John. If ye son of God have delivered you, then are you John. 6.
truly delivered. Also S. Paul. You are washed, you are sanctified, you are
1. Cor. 6.
justified, in ye name of Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of God. But unto
these things, does M. More answer, that I do not well to exclude, out of this
Church bad me^, for ye known church (says he) stands in a gathering
together of good me^ and bad: and to prove that, he brings in certain
parables of our Savior Christ.

To this I answer, that I never denied, but that there was such a
congregation of good, and bad: but I said, that that was not ye very true
church, before God, though it bear the name of the Church, and in very deed,
his own parables does declare, that our master Christ shall at length, geeue
sentence against them, that call them selves falsely of the Church. Judas was
called an Apostle, and taken so of all his company, but yet our master Christ
calls him the devil. Now if M. More will have Judas in his Now evil men be
in the church.
Church, I must be content, that he shall also betraye Christ. The very
truth is, that bad men be mixed here in the Church, and after outward
signs, be taken for members of the Church, specially if they be not
excommunicate. But the Church, which I did speak of, was not a fellowship
gathered together in a consent of exterior things, and ceremonies, as other
politic felowships be. But it is a fellowship specially gathered in What the
very true church is?
the unity of faith, having the holy ghost within them to sanctify their
spirits, which does set their trust only in the redemption promised the^, in
Christ's blessed blood.

This I say, is the very true church of God, let the world say what they will,
and let men call them selves as it pleases the^. For as S. Paul says, Roma.
(...).
he that has not the spirit of God, is none of his. Also M. Mores learning
Homo mortuus non est homo.
will grant that evil men, be the dead members of the Church: what they be
worth, let other men judge. But M. More reckons, that there is not such a
Church here in earth, that is without spot, and wrincle, as S. Paul says. For
the Church, says Ephesians. 5.
he, is here gracious, and not glorious. Truly, I have marvel, what he
means, thus to expound Saint Paul's saying: for I think he can not prove,
but that S. Paul's saying is verified of the Church, that is here militant, and
not of the church triumphaunt. But I will not at this time greatly dispute with
M. More. But, and if he were as he has been, I would say some thing more to
him, then I will do at this time. He can neither mock me, nor jest me out of
co^ceite, and if I were disposed to couple with him, nor it is not his foul,
and shameless works, and untrue sayings, that he lays to me, that could
fear me. But now, that it has pleased M. More lays many things to me wrong
fully.
God (without any help, or know ledge of me) to bring him unto this fall, I
will pray to God for him, to give him grace, that he may revoke all such
false doctrine, as he has brought into the world. For doubtless, if he abide
in the meaning, that he is now in, I do not see, how he can dye Gods
servant. Yea, his own known Church is against him, who^ (he says) men are
bound to believe, under pain of damnation. But truly, as God shall judge me,
I am sorry for his trouble, if I could help him with any lawful means, I
would do my best, so evil will bear I him.

But to proceed farther in my matter, I will not greatly speak much of the
Church, by the reason, that many other men, sense my first writing, have
declared this article, much better then I can do it. Wherefore I will all
only resite the places of holy doctors, that I have brought for me in my
first book, and the intent wherefore I aleaged them, to prove that ye Church
was afree thing, throughout all the world, and not bound either to place or to
person. I brought for me ye saying of S. Augustine, saying these words. The
holy Church are we. Aug. Sermon. 99. de tempore.
But I do not say, are we, as one should say, we that be hear all only
that hear me now, but as many as be hear faithful christean men in this
Church, ye is to say, in this City, as many as be in this region, as many as
be beyond the sea, as many as be in all the whole world (for from ye rising
of the sun, till the goinge down, is the name of God praised.) So is y^ holy
Church our mother. etc.

Also Lyra says, The Church does Lyra in Mar. ca. xix
not stand in men, by the reason of spiritual power, or seculer dignity. For
many princes, and many Popes, and other inferior persons, have swerued from
the faith. Wherefore the church does stand in those persons, in whom is the true
knowledge, and confession of faith, and of veritye. etc.

Here Lyra says as much as I do in clear words. And M. More does not, nor
yet ca^ refell him. Afterward I bring a saying of S. Augustine, to prove, that
the Church has spots, and wryncles in her: And yet by confessing of them,
and by stycking to Christ's blood, they be not imputed unto her. This is his
saying.

The whole Church prays, Lord De verbo Apost. ser. xxix.
forgive us our sins. Wherefore she has spots, and wryncles. But by
knowledging of them, her wryncles be streatched out, and by knowledging, her
spots are washed away. The Church continues in prayer, ye she might be
cleansed by knowledgeing of her sins. And as long as we here live, so stands
it. And when every man departs out of this body, all such sins are forgeuen
him, the which ought to be forgiven. For they be forgeuen by daily prayer,
and he goes hence cleansed. And the Church Anotable saying of S. Augustine.
of God, is laid up in the treasure of God, for puregolde, and by this mean
the Church of God is in the treasure of our Lord, without spotte or wrynkell.

It follows: Let us therefore pray that God may forgive us, and that we may
forgive our dettours, seeing it is said: and it shall be forgeuen unto you. We
say this daily, and daily we do this, and this thing is done daily in us. We
are not here without sin. But we shall depart hence without sin. etc. Let
every man judge, whether that this place of S. Augustine, makes for my
purpose, or not, that is to say, whether that ye Church has any spots or
wrincles in her, or not. And yet nevertheless, she has no spots nor
wrincles. For S. Augustine says, ye Church of God is in the treasury of God,
without any spotte, so that through Gods mercy, nothing is imputed unto her.
Her cleannes is not, ye she has no spots: but because, that for Christ's
sake, there is nothing laid to her charge.

M. More makes many words of ^enyall sins, and deadly sins. But to speak
after his own school men, it should be to hard for him to defend that
exposition, that he here makes of S. Augustine. But to prove that the Church
is clean, by the reason of Christ, I brought for me their own law, whose
words be these. De co^se. D. iiij. c. Igitur.
Therefore is ye Church holy, because she believes righteously in God. etc.

Furthermore, to prove that this congregation of faithful men, is the Church,
that can not err, I brought for me their own law. Whose words be these.
The holy Church can not err. etc. Also in an other place xxiiij. q. i. Ar^cta
in glosa.
The Congregation of faithful men must needs be, which also can not err.
etc. So that it is clear, first, that there must needs be a congregation of
faithful men, which be neither bound to Rome, nor to Jerusalem, uor yet to
any certain place, but it is spread abroad throughout the whole world, and
stands in the unity of faithful christen men. And that is the church, that
God suffers uot to err in those things, that belong to salvation. Wherefore
I did say in my other book, that the Popes councels were not the church, that
could not err. For, for y^ most part, those counsels did not order themselves
after Gods word. Wherefore I said, they might well err. And for that cause a
pryuate person, having scripture for him, ought to be preferred before a whole
counsel, if they had no scripture. For Gods word ought to be judge over all
counsels, and to prove this, I brought for me the saying of Panormitanus,
which says. The De electio. c Significal. 1.
counsel may err, as it has erred, concerning ye contracte of matrimony,
inter Raptorem and Raptam. And ye saying of S. Hierome, was afteaward preferred
above the statute of y^ counsel, The counsel of Weld^us did err.
as it is proved 36. quest. 2. Tria. For in these things concerning the
faith, the saying of a private person, is to be preferred before the saying of
the Pope, if he have better reasons and Scriptures of the new and old
testament for him, then the Pope has. Neither it can help to say, that the
counsel can not err, because ye Christ did pray that the faith of the church
should not fail. For I answer to this, that though the general counsel do
represent the whole universal church, yet nevertheless, in very deed, there
is not the universal church, but representative. For the universal church
stands in the election of all faithful men, throughout the whole world,
whose head and spouse is Christ Jesus. And the Pope is but the Vicar of Christ,
and not ye very head of the church. This is the Church that can not err. etc.
Here says this Doctor, that same sentence of the church, that I said. I
brought also for the same purpose, the saying of Augustine, whose words be
these. Those counsels that be gathered in Au. de Bapt. li. 2, cap. 3.
every province, must without doubt give place to the authority of the full
counsels, which be gathered of all christendom. And also those full
cou^selles oftentimes must be amended by the full counselles that come
afterward, if any thing be opened by experience, that was before shut, and
if any thing be known tha^ was before hydden. And this must be done without
any shadow of superstitious The full counsels may err.
pride, without any boasted arroga^cy, without any contention of malicious
envy, but with holy meekenes, with holy peace, and with Christen charity. etc.
Here S. Augustine says plainly, that the full counselles may err, and may be
reformed.

After this I did declare, how a man should know this church, and by what How a
man may know the church.
fignes and tokens, and said, that where as the word of God was purely and
sincerely preached, and the sacraments orderly ministered, after the blessed
ordinance of Christ: and where as me^ did patiently suffer for the verity,
and the hearers did apply their living to Christ's doctrine, and with meeknes
received the holy sacaments: These I said, were good and perfect tokens to
judge upon, that there were certain members of Christ's church. And to prove
this, I brought also S. Augustine, saying: Our holy mother The church suffers.
the church, through all the world scattered far and wide, taught in her true
head Christ, has learned not to fear the contumelies of the Cross, nor yet
of death: But more, and more, is she strengthened, not in resisting, but in
suffering. Also Chrisostomes Chris. in opere Im persecto.
words be these. They that be in Judea, let them fly up to the mountains,
that is to say, they that be in Christendom, let them geeue themselves to
scriptures. Wherefore commanded he that all christen men in that time, should
fly unto scriptures? For in that time, in the which, heresies have crepte into
the church, there can be no true probation of christendom, nor no other
refuge unto christen men, willing to know the verity of faith, but the
scriptures of God.

Before by many ways was it showed, which was ye church of God, and which was
the congregation of ye Gentiles. But now, there is none other By scriptures men
may know the verity.
way to them that will know, which is the very true Church of Christ, but
alonely by scriptures. By works, first was ye church of Christ known, when
the congregation of christen men, either of all, or of many were holy, the
which holiness had not the wicked men. But now, christen men be as evil, or
worse, then heretics or Gentiles: yea, and greater continency is found
among them, then christen men. Wherefore he that will know which is the very
church of Christ, how shall he know it but by scriptures only? And therefore
our Lord, considering that so great confusion of things should come in the
latter days, for that cause commands he, that christen men, willing to
reserve y^ stedfastnes of true faith, should flee unto none other thing, but
unto scriptures. For if they have respect unto other things, they shall be
sclaundered, and shall pearishe, not understanding, which is the true church.
etc.

Master More has no great thing in this point against me, saving, that he
says, these sayings are none of Chrisostomes, but of an other man written in
Chrisostomes name. Nevertheless, I let it pass: let other men judge between
us both. Afterward, because that I saw so great persecution used by the popes
church against all manner of sorts of good men, whom M. More caulleth
heretics, more for his pleasure then for their deseruynge: For this cause, I
say, I brought a saying of Hilarious, Hila. contra Arrianos.
to prove that they that did exercise such tyranny, were more to be compared
to the Arians, then to Christ's church: his saying is this. The church does
threaten with banyshmentes, and imprisonmentes, and she compels men to
believe her, which was exiled and cast in prison. She hangs on ye dignity
of her felowshop, the which was consecrated by the threatenings of
persecutours. She causes Priests to flee, that were increased by the chasing
away of Priests. She glories that she is loved of ye world, the which
could never be Christ's except the world did hate her. etc.

After this I brought a saying of S. Barnard, to prove, that the name of Barn.
superca^. sermon. 33.
spiritual array, and gorgious apparel ye is used in ye Popes church, did not
make ye Church. His saying is thus: They be the ministers of Christ, but they
serve Antichrist, they go gorgiously arrayed, of our Lords goods unto whom
they give no honor. And of these comes the decking of harlots, that thou
see daily, the game players disguising, and kings apparel. Of this comes
gold in their brydells, in their saddelles, and in their spurs: so that
their spures be brighter then the aulters. Of this comes their plenteous
wine presses, and their full sellers, bolking from this unto ye. Of this
comes their tu^nes of sweet wynes. Of this be their bags so filled. For
such things, as these be will they be rulers of the Church. As Deacons,
Archdeacons, Bishops, and Archbyshops. etc.

Men may make an exposition of S. Barnarde, but it will be hard to frame him to
their purpose. But for a conclusion, M. More, and I do vary, but in this
point, that he says, the very Church of God stands by them, that The true
church of Christ stands only in them that are good men.
be good, and bad, and I say, that the true church of Christ, stands in the^
only, that be good men. For the kingdom of Christ is distincted in very
deed, from the kingdom of ye devil. For evil men be doubtless the members
of the dyuell, as Paul says, Ephe. 2. Also our M. Christ says, unto the
Pharysyes: You are of your father the dyuell. Wherefore it can not stand with
no learning, that wicked men, which be the members of the devil, and be
governed by him, can be members of Christ's body, though that in this present
life, they be not yet so declared unto ye world. God send us all his grace,
y^ we may be of his holy Church, and me^bres of his blessed Son Jesus Amen.

FINIS.
What the keys of the Church be, and to whom they were given.
TO declare this matter our Schoolmen have wrapped them selves in such
doubts that they were never able to come out of the^, nor yet to satisfy the^
selves nor any good Christen man's conscience. For all ye they write is but
dreams of their own invention, and as Paul calls them the doctrines of ye
devil against 1. Tim. 4.
the holy word of God, and wringyng and wrestyng the blessed word of God to
their purpose, alonely considering how they might, by right or by wrong
stablishe the authority of miserable men, not co^sideryng the intent of the
holy ghost which intended nothing else in all places of Scripture, but to open
unto us Christ, and the loosing from our sin by him alonely. The which The
keys of ye church is the openyng of Christ, and the loosing of us from sin.
thing our dreamers, and inuenters of all subtle lies did never preserve, nor
never sought for: but by despising the holy word of God, and stickyng so fast
to their own corrupted reasons, did they fall into innumerable heresies,
dissentions and contentions, and brawlynges of words, and scoldyng like
harlots, so that none of the^ could agree with an other. Wherefore that saying
of the holy Prophet may well be verified of them.

My people have not heard my voice Psalm. 80.
and Israel has taken no heed unto me, and therefore have I let the^ pass
after the desires of their own hearts: and therefore they shall follow their own
inuentio^s. This is always the sore vengeance of God, when we will not
believe and receive alonely his word, then does he let us pass, so that we
can do nothing but err. Notwithstanding we are so blinded that we think
darkness light, and errors verity.

This is openly proved, by all our great clarkly schoolmen: and that it may
be open to all men, I will recite what they learn of the keys. Duns and all
his scholars say that these keys Sc^tus 4. sent. di. 18.
be nothing else, but an authority given to Priests whereby they give
sentence, that heaven must be opened How Du^s interprets the keys.
to this man, and shyt unto the other: so that heaven is opened and shyt at the
sentence of ye priest. This is his learning. Who could have invented such a
doctrine, but y^ devil him self? who can speak greater heresy then this is?
who can speak more openly against Christ and his holy Scripture? If the
authority of the Priest be the keys of heaven, and can open open and shyt
heaven, then need we no other thing to our salvation, but the authority of
the Priest: then can no man be saved without the authority of the Priest:
then can there no Priests be damned: For they have the keys of heaven: I
think they will not be so mad: as by their authority to shyt them selves with
the devil.

Briefly what need have we of Christ and of his holy word. For the authority
of the Priest is the keye of heaven, but let me bring their own words ye the
matter may be playner.

The keye in this purpose is taken Nicho. de orbel. di. us supra.
after the similitude of a material key which is the next instrument to shyt
and to open a door, whereby we enter into the house: So likewise, the
authority to give sentence that heaven must be opened unto this man, is
called the keye. etc. To use many words in refellyng this damnable opinion it
needs not. But against them all, I will set the authority of S. Hierome
whose words be these. I shall give thee ye keys of heaven. This Hiero. in M.
c. 16.
place, the Bishops and the Priests not understanding have vsu^ped unto them
somewhat of the Phariseis pride, so ye they think that they may condemn
innocents, and loose them that be guilty: when before God not ye sentence of
the Priest but the life of the guilty is regarded. etc. Here you have plainly
that the sentence of the The saying of S. Hierome upon the keys.
Priest is not looked on, nor able to loose a sinner before God. Mark also that
S. Hierome says you understand not this place.

Moreover I would know of you all, where you ca^ bring me one example in
Scripture, that the sentence of a Priest has loosed a sinner, or bound a
righteous man, and if it can not do this, then is there an other thing above
the sentence of a Priest.

Furthermore that your authority should be the keys of heaven, it is a
gaynst reason, and against your own learning. For Duns and also Lyra of the
same text. Qnodcunque ligaueris, Scotus 4. sen. did. 15. Quest. 1.
do plainly declare, that your key of authority may err? Now if it may
err, then is it not the right key to the lock of heaven, for the right key
can never err in his own lock. Wherefore at the most you can make it but a
picklocke which belongs to robbers and thieves only.

Moreover if this were the key, the^ should we never be in suretye whether
heaven were opened or not. First we have no promise nor no word of God, made
unto this key. And again we can not know when it opens heaven and when not:
for it may err after your own doctors. And if it chance for to err, then
are not heaven gates opened. So ye by this means we shall be always in
doubt, whether we be losed from our sin or not.

Wherefore we must seek out an other key that is the very true key to the
lock the which can not err, of the which we shall be in surety and without
all doubt. But ere we declare what this key is, we will first show the nature
and the propertye of this key.

S. Augustine says, That must be August. ser. 2. de sane.
called a key where by the hardness of our hearts are opened unto faith, and
whereby the secretnes of minds are made manifest. A key it is (says he) the
which does both open the concie^ce The nature and property of the keys of
heaven.
to yt knowledge of sin, and also includes grace, unto the wholesomnes of
everlasting mystery. etc. This is the diffynition of this key that we speak of
after, S. Augustine. Now compare your power unto this diffinitio^, and see how
they do agree.

First what can your power do (which you call your key) to remove away the
hardenes of the heart, and to bring in faith?

Again what can your key Judge of the secreatnes of man's mind?

Thirdly what can your power do to men's consciences, to make the^ to knowledge
their sin? yea where by do you know your own sin? by your power? then
have all priests a like knowledge. Finally what grace does your power include
in him, ye may bring us to everlasting Joy? Wherefore you see that this
deffinition agrees as well with your key, as Chalk and Cheese.

Therefore must we seek an other key, ye has all these properties. This is
nothing else but the holy word of God, whereby that we receive faith into our
hearts as. S. Paul says: Faith is by hearing and hearing is Roma. 10.
by the words of God. And for this cause the holy Prophet calls it a
lantern, Psalm. 118.
saying. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and it is a light unto my
paths. By this word do we receive life as the prophet says. Thy speech
Ibidem.
shall quicken me. Also the secreates of our hearts be opened by this word.

S. Paul declares saying if there 1. Cor. 14.
come one that does not believe, he is reproved by the word of all men, and
the secreates of his heart are opened. By this word also is declared unto us
grace and everlasting life. as S. Paul says, Christ has put away 2. Tim. 1.
death, and has brought life and immortality unto the light through the
Gospel.

This is the thing only where by that our conscience is losed and made free
from sin. Therefore says the holy Prophet there is much peace un Psalm. 118.
to them that love the law of God, and there is no sclau^der unto them. Much
peace is nothing else but remission of sins: yea and that without any doubt
for he that is loosed by the word of God, that is, he that has the open
word of God for him, that his sins be forgiven him, he can not be
sclau^dered: that is, there is nothing can make him to doubt: but though heaven
and hell, life and death, do threaten him, he is not offended, he is not
sclaundered, but hydeth fast, and knows surely that all these things must
perish, but the word of God bydeth All things shall perish, but y^ word of God
endures for ever.
for ever. Wherefore this is the very keye that judges the thoughts and the
intentes of the heart, as S. Paul says: By this have we also the very
knowledge of our sin, as S. Paul declares to the Romans: by this is Hebr.
4.
also declared unto us grace, and also remission Roma 3.
of our sins if we believe it.

Wherefore this must needs be the very true keye, as you may see evidently
thoroughout all Scripture, and not your boasted and craked power: for there is
no such thing, nor yet can be in man, that can loose the soul of man from
his sin.

Wherefore, it is damnable and deuillishe learning, and comes of the
presumptuous pride of man to learn, that man has a power in him, by the which
power, man's soul is bound or loosed from sin. But this is all that man
has, he is a minister, and a dispensator of the heavenly word of God, for
whose sake our sins What power it is that the Priest has.
be remitted, when we believe it, and our sins be retained when we do de
spise it. Therefore the blessed word of God is the very keye, and in that The
word of God is the true keye that opens and loses.
is all the might and power to loouse our sins, and man is but a minister and
a servant unto this word. This may be proved by our Master Christ's
words, where he says: Go your ways into all the world, and preach the
Gospel unto all creatures, and he that does believe and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that does not believe shall be damned. Math. 6.
Here may you plainly see, that the Apostles be but ministers and servants,
and have no power, but alonely ministration. The keys that they have, whereby
they must loose men and bind, is the very word of God. And therefore says our
Master Christ: he that believes shall be saved, and he that does not
believe shall be damned. By this word did the holy Apostles declare grace
thorough Christ, and learned me^ to set all their hope of salvation in Christ
only. By this word did they learn men to knowledge their sin, and to seek
for grace, and fully and wholly to hope for remission and forgeeuenes of their
sins in Christ only. Briefly, by these keys is opened all goodness, if they
be received: And all goodness is shut from us, if we receive them not. Now,
where this keye is received by faith, there is all things ^wsed: that is, all
sins be forgeeuen, and the consciences be made free. And where it comes
not in, nor is received by faith, there all things be shut and bound.

Of this manner did the holy Apostles Act. 2.
bind and loose, when they preached this holy word of God unto y^ people: As
we have an open example of S. Peter that preached this holy word, and at his
preaching ye hearers were pricked in their hearts, and asked Peter what they
might do, and he answered them, repent and be baptized every one of you, in
the name of Jesus for remission of your sins, and you shall receive the gift
of the holy Ghost, wherefore as many as received his word, were baptized.

Here you have plainly, the very true manner of loosing from sins, as The
true manner of losyng and byndyng, and of openyng and shottyng.
ye holy Apostles used it, that is, when the people believed the word that
they preached, the^ they declared how their sins were remitted for Christ's
sake, and not through any power that they had, for they were but ministers. But
the very power was in the word of God whereby they were delivered from their
sins. This is well proved by our master Christ's word, where he says unto
them, go and preach, saying. That the kingdom of heaven is at hand. What is
this the kingdom of heaven? not Math. 10.
any power that is in man, but remission of sins shall be given to them that
receive either your power or your persons: and therefore follows it. In what
house you enter, say first peace be with you, and if the house be worthy,
your peace shall come upon the same, that is to say if they reciue your word
and believe it, than shall your peace, that is the peace of the Gospel which
you bring with you give them quietness of conscience, and lose them from all
sin. But if the house be not worthy, your peace shall return to you again,
and whosoever shall not receive you, nor will hear your preaching, when you
depart out of that house, shake of the dust from your feet. I say unto you it
shall be easyer for Sodom and Gomorra in the day of Judgment then for that City.

What is this your peace shall return again? nothing else but that they shall
not be pertakers thereof, but shall remain bound in their sin And why?
because they receive not your persons or your power? nay trewlye: but because
they hear not your preaching.

It is not to be doubted, but that The hearing of the word of God and
beleuyng the same, loses us from our sins.
many men by hearing the Apostles preaching the word of God, were losed from
their sins and yet never spoke with the Apostles. Wherefore the receauyng of
the word, and not the Apostle, loses us from our sins: and for that cause
the Apostle did declare by their departing from the^ that would not believe the
word ye they remained still in their sins, for as S. Mark says, your
departing shall be a testimony against them, that is to say a token of their
condemnation.

We have also an open practice of S. Paul how he did bind the^ that did not
receive his preaching, to who^ Mark. 6.
he says these words. Your blood upon your heads. I will depart from hence
in clennes unto the Gentiles. Acts. 18.


Now have you plainly how the holy Apostle did bind and loose, and with what
keye they did it, that is by preaching of the holy word of God. And because
this thing should be dons without any error, and that no man should doubt in
it, he gave them the holy ghost, saying these words: whose sins you do
forgive shall be forgeuen, and whose sins, you do John. 20.
retain shall be retained. To these words adds S. Luke. The^ opened he,
their wit that they might under stand the Scriptures, so that where S. John
says, he gave them the holy Luke. 24.
ghost. Luke says, he opened their wit to understand Scripture.

It follows in Luke, thus, and thus, is it written that Christ must suffer
death and rise again the third day and that repentance, and remission of
sins Luke. 24.
should be preached in his name among all nations. Now where Saint John
says, whose sins you do loose shall be loosed etc. That says Luke in these
words remission of sins must be preached in his name. So that Preaching of
the word of God is losing from sin.
whose sins you do loose shall be loosed, is nothing else but that you must
preach remission of sins in my name, and as many as receive this word, you
shall loose them by this word and as many as do not receive it you shall bind
them by that same word.

That this is the sentence of these two places, it is open by that, that they
speak all of one story and of that thing that was done all in one day. This
does also S. Paul prove well where Acts. 17.
he recites the words of Luke saying, Christ must needs suffer and rise
again from death, and this Jesus is Christ. Here is it plain that s. Paul
losed men from their sins by preaching remission through Christ: so that you
have openly here the practice of the holy Apostles, how they did bind and
loose by preaching the word of God. They did bind with the word when How the
word of God byndeth and how it loses.
it was not believed. They did loose by the word when it was believed. Thus
did they by one word preach both salvation and damnation, but unto diverse men.
This virtue of the 2. Cor. 2.
word does S. Paul declare in these words, we are unto God the sweet savor
of Christ both among them that are saved, and also among them which perish. To
the one part are we the savor of death unto death, unto the other part are we
the savor of life unto life. What is this savor nothing else but the Gospel,
which is unto one savor of life, that is nothing else but loosing and remission
of sins: And unto the other, it is the savor of death unto death, that is
occasion of bynding and reteinyng in sin. This does Paul also declare in an
other place. The preaching of 1. Cor. 1.
the cross is to them that perish foolishnes. But unto us which are saved it
is the power of God. What is ye power of God? nothing else but remission and
losing from our sins. What is The word of God is remission of sin, if it
be believed when it is preached.
foolishenes: nothing else but they despise the Gospel and reckon it of no
value, and of no power. Wherefore they remain bound in their sin.

Thus is it declared that one word of God works in diverse me^, diverse
operatio^s. In ye one it works life, ye is, remission of sins: in the other
works it death, and is taken for foolishnes, that is, it declares them
bound and retained in their damnable sins: and yet in him self, he is of
one goodness and of our nature: but the diversity comes, of them that be the
receivers. This may be proved by a natural example. The dew of heaven comes
down indifferently upon all ground: but in the one it brings forth good
corn and sweet fruits: and in the other it brings forth nettles and
brombilles, that be nothing worth but to the fire. This example have you in
the epistle to the Hebrews, for this Hebr. 6.
same purpose. Likewise by one word do the holy Apostles and Christ's
ministers loose and bind: but this do they not by charmyng, coungeryng,
iugglyng, and whyslyng absolutions as you do: But by preaching the holy By
preaching of the word of God, heaven is opened and shut.
word of God which when it is believed does quiet and loose our conscience from
all sin, and offers it us through Christ only. But when it is not believed
then does it bind us and retain us in sin. So that this holy word is the
very true keye of heaven, for by it heaven is opened and shut.

This does Chrysostom well prove Chriso. in M. c. 15. De doctr. christi. li.
1. c. 15. es. 18.
in these words. The key is the word and the knowledge of Scriptures, whereby
the gate of verity is opened unto men etc. S. Augustine does also witness the
same saying. These keys has be given to the Church, that what she byndeth
in earth shall be bound in heaven, and what she loses in earth shall be
loosed in heaven, that is to say, who soever does not believe that his sins
be forgiven him in the Church, they be not forgeuen him: But he that does
believe, and auerte him self from his sins, being with in the Church by that
same faith and amendment is he made whole etc.

Here have you openly that by be, leeuing the word of God our sins be
loosed: and by unbelief be we bound in our sins. But now must we search to
whom these keys be given. They may not all only be given to Peter, for then
Paul, and the two sons of thunder had them not. Nor they may not be given,
to one more then Augustine in Joan Trac. 124.
to the other: For Christ was indifferent and they were all his Apostles and
their confession was all one. Wherefore no doubt but these keys wear given
unto all Christ's Apostles unto the whole Church, as S. Augustine does declare
openly upon John.

This may be also proved by the words of your own law which be 24. q. 1.
Quodcu^que.
these, if Peter have power all only to bind and to loose, then does it not
the Church: But if this be done in the Church, then did Peter when he
received ye keys, sygnifie holy chucrh etc. Hear have you openly that Peter
had not only the keys, but he received them in the name of the Church.
Wherefore they beelong to all Christen men. This does Origene well prove in
these words. Tu es Petrus. Origenes Super. M. Ho. 1.
etc.

These words were spoken unto Peter, unto all Apostles, unto all manner of
perfect faithful men (for all The church is builded upon the confession of all
the Apostles and of all faithful people.
they are Petrus) and in all them is builded the church of Christ, and against
none of them can the gates of hell prevail. Do thou reckon that yt keys of
heaven were all only given to Peter, and that no other Christen man did
receive them? etc.

Here is it clearly that all Christen men be Peter and all they have received
the keys of heaven, and hell can not prevail against them. S. Augustine. does
also testify the same in these words. Wherefore the church Super Joan Trac.
124. c. 21.
which is founded and grounded in Christ, of him has received in Peter the
keys of heaven, that is, to say power to bind and loose. etc.

Thus is it plain that those keys are given to ye whole church of Christ for
her faith, and they be the common treasure of the Church and beelonge no more
to one man then to an other but because that all men can not use these keys
all together (for ye would make a confusion) therofore does the Church, that is
the congregation of faithful men commyt the ministratiof these keys, that is
of preaching ye word of God, unto certain men whom they think most able and
best learned in the word of God: the which me^ thus chosen, be but ministers
of the commen treasure, and no Lords over it. For the Church Preachers, if
they abuse their preaching, may be deposed.
may depose them, ye is she may take away the open and the common mynistration
that she committed unto them, if they use it not well and then they be but as
other Christen men having no common office nor administration in the Church.

Wherefore they may neither preach nor yet minister sacraments openly but as
other Christen men may do pryuately, in their own houses, or in other places
where men be gathered, which will hear of Christ: there I say both they and
all other Christian men, may speak and learn Christ's word, and declare it
after the gift ye is given unto them of God. And they that do believe this
word thus preached by Christen men, be by the power of ye keys losed from
their sin and bound if they believe not. For all the Church and every part of
the Church have power to execute these keys, all only that the open order be
not broken, This does S. Paul declare saying, you may all interpretate 1. Cor.
14.
scriptures but see that all things see done after an order.

Now to keep an order and that nothing should be done after a confuse manner,
therefore the Church assigns certain men to be the open and the common
mynisters of this treasure the which be but all only minysters, and no
Lords. And of this common treasure and not of their private treasure as S.
Paul says let a man so recke^ us as the ministers of Christ and dispensators
of the mynystery of God. Also in an other place, what is S. Paul? what is
Appollo? but mynisters 1. Cor. 4. Item. 3.
by whom you have believed.

Also S. Peter your predecessor, 1. Pet. 5.
commands you, that you should not exercise any dominion over the The
ministers of the Church ought to be no Lords.
congregations, but give example to the flock. Be not these plain
scriptures, how you be no Lords but ministers of Christ's treasure: and you
leave the ministration and usurp authority. S. Petter, whose successors you
boast your selves to be, commands you that you should be alonely but
ministers, and keybearers of these keys. As Chrysostom proves in In M. c.
23.
these words: The keye bearers are priests, unto whom is committed the word
to teach, and to interpret Scriptures. etc.

Hear you not, how you be but keybearers, and teachers of y^ word of God.
This does S. Ambrose witness in these words: sins be forgeuen li. de Cain
et Abell.
by the word of God, whose interpreter is the Deacon. etc. Mark that sins
be forgeuen by the word of God, of the which you be but interpreters.

Where is now I pray you your Lordly power? which you call the keys of heaven,
is not Scripture, and the practice of the Apostles, and the exposition of holy
Doctors openly against you? Will you usurp a thing that is contrary to all
these? I pray you where find you in all holy Scripture, but one, that Peter or
The Bishops and clergy abuse Christ's keys.
Paul did assoyle after the manner of your keys. And yet no doubt, but they
had the keys, yea and also did use them. Wherefore it is to me great maruayle,
of whom you have learned your usage, and where you have gotten such keys. It
makes no matter to me though you cry as you are wont. Fathers, Fathers,
Counsels, Counsels, the Church, the Church. For it wilnot help you. You see
openly that I have the holy word of god, and our master Christ, which is
elder then our fathers. I have also the practice of the holy Apostles, that
understand this thing better then all your counsels.

But let us grant that you have fathers and counselles for you, That is the
next way to deceive the church of God. By whom can Christen men The false
allegyng of fathers and Councels is the next way to deceive the Church of God.
be deceived, but by such men as be of authority, and dignity of yt world?
This you know, that men can not be deceived by Horses, nor by Calves, but it
must be by men, and not by foolish me^ (for who will regard fools) but by
them that be reckoned of wisdom and of reputation in the world. And not by
one wise man (for an other wise man may be of as good reputation and wisdom
as he) but it must be by many, or else it can have no shine nor color of
excellency, yea and by such a multitude, that reason can not suspect. So that
there is never so great danger unto the church of God, as when all these
things come together. And therefore says ye holy Prophet: Blessed is that
man that follows not the counsels of wicked Psalm. 1.
men. You know that counselles ca^ be no small thing, nor no foolish: nor the
wicked men themselves do reckon it for no small thing, but for the greatest
thing, and the wysest thing, and the strongest that they can think or devise.
And no doubt but it has a fore reason, and a fore all the world a great
appearance of no small wisdom, and is so strong that every man is compelled to
receive it. Yea and also those men have authority (for as the Prophet says:
they sit in the chair, the which does both signify great learning, and and
also great authority): And yet says ye Prophet, that blessed is he that
follows not their counselles, nor sits in their chair.

Now, if these things could be judged by some reason, or else they seemed so
evil, that all the world could judge them. What need the holy Ghost to make
such a do, or to write so strongly against them? yea and to say, that blessed
is he ye hears them not? Wherefore he must needs speak of such mischief,
and of such falshod, and of such errors as have all those things for them,
that you bring for you: That is, fatherhod, wisdom, learning, authority,
multitude, and long custom. The which things be able to peruerte any man, be
he never so wise, or never so holy, if he stick not fast to the word of God
only. And therefore says the Prophet: Blessed are they whose meditation is in
the law of God.
Blessed is he whose will and meditation is night and day (that is
continually) in the law of God. Unto the which, if all your counsels, all your
fathers, all your customs, briefly, all that you bring for you, be compared,
then shall we see whether it be true, and of God or not. For of themselves
they have no truth, but be inventions of corrupted reason, and persuasions of
the devil, to peruerte the holy church of God.

But my Lords, let us go to reason: Tell me by your honor, is it reasonable
that the holy Church of God, redeemed with Christ's precious blood, and
assoyled by him from all her sins, should be now bound unto you, and to
your absolution? and that she should not be released, but through your power?
seeing that you be but ministers and servants ordained of Christ unto her
profit, and not to your honor? This will I declare by an example.

I put this case, that there be a prisoner An example.
bound fast in cheynes, over the which you have the custody and the keepyng,
after the kings commandment, now the kings grace says unto you, loose that
fellow, and let him go free out of prison under this condition, that he shall
promise to serve no Prince but me only. What, will you loose him or not? Ca^
you, or dare you keep him longer if you would? Or can you compel him to make
any other composition with you, than alonely to serve ye king? If you would
The ministration of the Church belongs to the Bishops and other ministers but
the authority of the same belongs to Christ.
keep him longer in prison, did you not run in the kings displeasure? And
if he did promise you any other composition, were he bound thereto? Nay
doubtless. Moreover, in loosing of him, what thing do you by your authority?
yea what thing do you at all, but that you are mynisters unto the kings
commandment, and a servant to the poor fellow. The ministration and
service is yours, but the authority is the kings, of the which you have never
a crumme.

Take an other example. If it please the kings grace to make any An other
example.
of you an Ambassador, and geeue you a commission, and commandment, to fetch
home into his land a banished man, unto whom the kings grace writes his
pardon, with such words and under such condition as pleases his grace. Now,
this pardon delivers he to you, for to bear and to declare unto the
banished man. Here would I know of you, what you can do for this banished man
more then is written in your commission? Also what can you do against him, in
these things that the kings grace has pardoned him? You can neither add nor
take away from the kings pardon. You can no more do but declare it unto the
party. And if he receive it, then may he as lawfully, and as freely come
into the land as you may, and you can not say by right that you have by your
authority discharged him, or given him any pardon of his banishment, but
alonely you have delivered and declared unto him the kings pardon, which when
he had received with the considerations therein, then is he discharged of his
banishment. And if he will not receive the kings pardon, then can you neither
help him into the land, nor yet discharge him of his tra^sgression: but only
you leave him, and declare unto him, yea and that by the kings words that he
is a banished man, and so shall remain till he receive the kings pardon.

So likewise ye word of God where in is pardon for all sinners is committed
unto you to preach and to declare, which if they receive by faith, they are
free and loosed from their sins, but The doctrine and true preaching of the
word of God is the pardon and remission of our sins.
if they do not they are bound (not by your auctorytie, for you be but
mynisters and servants, and can no further go then your commyssion) but by
ye auctorytie of God only. Wherefore see well to your conscience how you can
discharge your self before God that do so presu^ptuously usurp his auctorite,
of the which you have neither word nor example in scripture.

Moreover how can you prove this manner of absolution. Ego absaluo te
auctoritate mihi comissa, for to be lawful. I pray you where was there ever
any authority committed unto man to take away sin? There is no authority
The authority of the church belongs to Christ only.
committed unto man, but all only ministracio^ of the word. Now your
absolucion makes mention of authority, yea and that without the sword, and a
great many of you understood not the word. Duns says, Quod absolutio
sacerdotis, est dispositio necessitatis ad remissionem culpae. How think you,
be these fit words for a Christen man?) if your absolution be necessary,
then can not God take away sin without you, nor you without him, but God and
you together take away sin. Whether will you now? Will you ascend so hie,
will you be check mates with God? I think shortly you will also be Gods. The
Pharesies did reckon much better of God then you do, for they said, that God
only did absolve from sins, and you say I do assoyle, yea and that by
authority, so that you far pass the Pharesies. But let us see what S.
Augustine says of such me^, many sins be forgeuen thee, he Prophesied of
men that be to come. There wear Luke. 7. August. lib. Quinquaginta home
liarum. be. 23.
many men to come that would say, I forgeeue sins, I iustefie, I sanctify, I
make whole so many as I baptize. Wherefore the Jews did better understand the
remissyon of sins the^ heretykes do, for the Jews said, what man is this,
ye forgeueth sins, and the heretyke says, I forgive, I make clean, I
sanctify. etc.

These words be plain enough against you, for you say we have authority The
popes Clergy is condemned by S. Austen to be heretics.
to remyt sins. And. S. Augustine says, you be heretyckes for so saying.
You can not deny, but S. Augustine reprooueth your own absolucion, where in
you say that your absolution is requisite of necessity to remyssion of sins,
the which is nothing else, but clearly denying of christ, of his blessed blood,
and also of his holy word. But if we had grace, we might perceive that
neither you, nor your absolucion, nor yet any thing ye you do wear of God.
For all ye you do is clearly done for money and for no other cause. Reckon one
thing that you do, as concerning your ministration, but that you will have
money for it: As not so much as washing of a heap of stones.

Whereby have you gotten all your great possessions, but alonely under the
color, that you be Christ's holy bishops. For money you make whore dome as
lawful as matrimony. For Money is the Popes best merchant.
money, stolen good shall be better the^ heritage. For money, you make usury
lawful marchaundise. For money, all sins be virtue. Yea and also have great
pardon to them. For money, you sell man, wife, maid and child king, and land.
For money you make as good marchau^dise, of women's priuities, as a Goldsmith
does of gilted plate. You will reckon that this is a Shameful doyngs must be
shamefully rebuked.
shame for me to write, but it is more shame for you to do it. And if you did
not these shameful deeds, I should have none occasion to make this shameful
writing. Take you away ye cause and I will take away yt writing. Yea you are
not so content, but you sell Christ, you sell the blessed Sacrament of his flesh
and blood, you sell his holy word, you sell all other Sacraments. Briefly
you sell, all manner of thing that ever he left in earth to The Pope sells
God and all his ordinances
the comfort of man's soul, and all for money. Yea and not so content, but you
make also more laws, and more statutes, and dispense with them for money, and
all these things do you, by the authority of the keys, that both open
heaven and hell, and a man's coffer and also his pursse yea and sometime they
loss the coat from his back. Our master Christ says unto you, The Pope
will not follow nor obey to Christ's commau^deme^t, for he bids him loose.
you have received it free, give it free again, and you give nothing free. But
I know your answer. You will say that you sell not your Mass, nor
Sacraments, nor the word of God, but the labor that you have about them. O
thou devil when will thou be without an excuse, when will thou grant thy
self gilty? Tell me ye that be without shame, if you do sell but your
labor, is it not sore and an unlawful price to sell it so dear? what Bishop
can deserve by his labor a thousand pound by year: and yet some of them have
a great deal more, and labor nothing at all. How dear will The Pope sells
his ware very dear.
these men sell their labor, if they should be tankerdebearers. They would
make water dearer the^ wine. Yea tell me what labor there is with in the Realm
that is half so dear sold as their idleness is?

But you belly gods, did not Christ's Apostles take pains and labors about
the ministration of the word? and in fulfillyng of their office, more in one
day then you do in all your lives: and yet was it not lawful for them more to
receive then a living. For our master Christ said, yt work man is worthy of
his meat: so ye our Math. 10.
master would that they should receive no more but that was necessary. Also S.
Paul says our Lord did ordeine 1. Cor. 9.
that they which preach the Gospel should live on yt Gospel. Mark how he
says, they that preach yt Gospel. Now which of you all does preach ye
Gospel: not one: and yet will you enjoy Hierome.
these innumerable possessions. S. Hierome says on this same text, you must
live on the Gospel, but not be Chrisosto, ad Ti. 5.
rich, also Chrysostom says, I say boldly that the bishops and Prelates of
the Church, may have nothing but meat and drink and cloth. etc.

Hear have you plainly, that if S. Chrysostom is very straight to bishops
and the rest of the Clergy.
you did labor faithfully and truly in the Gospel, you could have but a
living there on, and no Lordly possessions, but now do you nothing in the
world, but exercise tyranny on them that would preach the Gospel, and make
laws and statutes, to destroy them, and the holy Gospel of Chri. s. 6. de
anathemate.
God, so that Chrysostom speaks well of you. Behold I see men that have no
true sense of holy scripture: yea they understand nothing at all thereof: and
to pass over many things, for I am ashamed to call the^ mad me^, triflers and
wranglers) they be such as know not what they say, nor of what thing they
speak, but all only be they mighty and bold to make laws, and to curse and
condemn those things, of yt which they know nothing at all. etc.

Be not these your works? who can say, but that these words be spoken of
you? who makes statutes and laws but you? who curses and condemns but you?
how can you lay these things from you? how can you avoid the^? so long shall
they be laid against you till you can bring in one that is gylty of them, I
think that will be long. And yet will you have these great possessions, and
be also great Lords, doing nothing therefore at al but al only play the
part of a bishop, as a Christmas game player, does of a king, and as a Popet
which springs Bishops compared to popets and stage players.
up and down and cries Peep Peep and goes his way. So do you make a
cou^tenau^ce of great holiness and of great perfection, but all ye world can
testify what you do in indeed. More over you are more bound to the Gospel,
then all other men be in ye world for thereby have you all your honor all
your riches, all your Lordly possessions, and if the gospel were not, men
would no more regard you, then they do Cobblers, and yet deserve you worst of
all men of the Gospel.

Wherefore I can no more say unto you, but the words of our Master Christ,
Woe be unto you hypocrites the which shut heaven gates before other men, and
as. S. Luke says, Math. 26. Luke. 11.
you have taken away ye key of science and neither enter in your self, nor yet
suffer other that come to enter in. A sore sentence of Christ against
vnpreachyng Prelates.
Now let me see, how all your keys, and al your power can assoyle you from
this same woe yt our M. Christ does hear lay unto you? This word of God
byndeth you to everlasting damnation: let us see if your piklocke can open this
lock then will I say that you have the keys of heaven or else not. I think
you may seek all your clegge with keys and find not one that will open this
lock.

FINIS.
Free will of man, after the fall of Adam of his natural strength, can do
nothing but sin before God.
IN this article will we not dispute, what man may do by the common influence
given him of God, over these inferior and worldelye things, as what power he
has in eating and drinking, in sleeping, and speaking, in buying and sellyng,
and in all other such natural things, that be geeuen of God indifferently to
all men, both to good and bad. But here will we search, what strength is in In
what things we have freewill, and in what none.
man, of his natural power, without the spirit of God, for to will, or to do
those things that be acceptable before God, unto the fulfilling of the will
of God: as to believe in God, to love God after his commaundeme^ts, to love
justice for it self, to take God for his father, to reckon him to be
merciful unto him, to fear God lovingly, with all other things that me^ do
call good works: this is the thing that we will search to know. Now, that
he can do nothing in these causes, by his free will, our master Christ
proves it in these words: He that John. 15.
abides in me, and I in him, brings forth much fruit, for without me ca^
ye do nothing: if a man abide not in me, he is cast out as a branch, and
shall burn.

Here it is open, that freewill without grace, can do nothing. I do not
speak of eating, and drinking (though that be of grace) but nothing that is
fruitful, that is meritorious, that is worthy of thank, that is acceptable
The fruits of freewill. Freewill without gods grace can do nothing that is
good.
before God. For he that has not Christ in him, is cast out, this is the
first fruit of freewill: than wythereth he, that is the second fruit, this
wythering helps him nothing to goodness, he must wither, let him do the
best: than is he gathered, and cast in the fire, this is the third fruit.
What can be in the fire do? nothing but burn. He can not lie there as a
thing indifferent, but he must needs burn, and he ca^ not come out of yt
fire by his own strength: let him intend as much as he can, his intention
can Bona intentio.
not help him, nor yet further him. So that all the might of freewil, when he
is left alone, is nothing else, but first to be cast out: and second to
wyther, so decays he: thyrdly, to be cast into the fire. All this is wors,
and wors. Finally, he burns, this is worst of all, for here is he past
help, so that this is the strength, that freewill has, to bring him self to
utter destruction.

Now, where will our Duns men, bring in their Bonum conatum? they are so long
in bryngyng of it in, that freewill is brought to the fire, and there can he
neither save him self from burning, nor yet help him self out. But to this
my Lord of Rochester answers in a certain place, that freewill can do no
good meritorious, sed tame^ non omnino facit nihil. What is this to say, but
nihil? If he do no good, yt is meritorious, nor worthy of thank before God,
I pray you, what does he, but nihil? Our disputation is, what goodness that he
can do, without grace, and you grant, that he can do no goodness, and yet you
say, that he can do somethyng. But let us see how S. Augustine understands
this text of S. John. Lest any man should suppose, Super Ioannem tract. lxxi.
that the branch of him self could bring forth, at the lest ways, a little
fruit, therefore says he, nor with out me, can you do a little, but without me
can you do nothing, therefore whether it be little, or much, without him, can
it not be done, without who^ is nothing done. One of two things, must the
branch needs do, either abide in the vine, or else burn in the fire, if it
be not in the vine, then is it in the fire. etc.

My Lord, where will you bring in here, your somethyng, that freewill does?
Saint Augustine says, without grace, ca^ freewil do neither little, nor much:
for if she be not in Christ, she burns in the fire. Call you that somewhat?
Where be now M. Dunsis Du^ces doctrine overthrown.
me^, with their bonum conatum, bonum studium, and applicationem ad bonum. Here
must they needs lie in the fire, with all their good inte^tes, with their good
preparations, and their holy dispositions. Also S. Paul, we are not 2. Cor. 3.
sufficient, to think any thing of our selves, but our sufficiency, is of
God. What is this? that we are not able to think any thing of our selves? what
can be a smaller thing, the^ to think? and yet this small thing can we not
do. It is also open, that Saint Paul We of our selves as of our selves can
not do^ so much as think a good thought.
means not of the thinkyng, that comes by natural power, for yt God does
not let, but lets it proceed, after his first ordinance, as we have open
experience in infidels. But here he speaks of such a thinkyng, as is
acceptable, and thankful before God, and therefore follows it, God has made
us worthy ministers of ye new Testament. Here is it open, that he speaks of
that thinking, that is a singular, and a special gift of God, and not of the
common gift of nature, for that were nothing, to the ministratio^ of the
Gospel.

But let us see what S. Barnarde Barnarde lib. arbit.
says, of this text. What shall we say? is this alonely all the merit of
freewill, that he does alonely consent? yea doubtless. Not that, the same
consent, in the which is all his merit, is not of God, when that we can
neither think (the which is less, then to consent) any thing of our selves,
as though we were sufficient of our selves. These words be not mine, but the
Apostles, the which gives unto God, and not to his freewil, all manner of
things, that can be good, that is to say, to think, to will or to perform.
etc. Here you not, that all things, that can be good S. Barnarde gives to
God? Now, what strength has freewill, he can neither think good, nor well,
nor yet perform it? what remains? I know nothing, but either it is included
in thinking, in willing, or in performyng, and all these be given to God. Also
our master Christ says, Math. 7.
Shall men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of bromble bushes? An evil tree,
can bring forth no good fruit. What means our master, when he says, that
grapes be not gathered of thorns? nothing else, but that ye fruit must be
like the manner of the tree. And therefore says he, an evil tree, can not
bring forth good fruit. Now, can you not deny, but that freewill without
grace, is an evil tree, Ergo, his fruit must needs be evil, he may well
bring forth fruit, but it shall not be good. Is not all freewils power
declared in these words, he can not? I pray you, what means our master
Christ in these words, he can not? Christ said, he can not, and will you
say, he can? Also our master says. You adders birds, how can you Math 12.
speak good things, seeing that you be evil. Had not these men freewill?
and yet says our master, they could Man's freewill without Gods grace can do
nothing that is good.
not speak good things. You reckon it but a small power, to speak good, and
yet as small as it is, freewill can not do it, he may well speak, but it
shall not be good. For how should he speak good, that is evil of him self?
how should he do good, that knows no good? but is the very enemy of
goodness, yea and as much as ^yeth in him, he would there were no goodness.

You have also a common principle, there is nothing loved, and desired, but
that, that is known. Now how should freewill flee from sin, and desire
goodness, and he knows not, which is very sin, and which not? As S. Paul
says: by the law, is the knowledge of sin, so blind as freewil, Roma* 3.
that he knows not sin, to be sin, nor virtue, to be virtue, but
judges that thing to be good, that is evil, and that thing, that is evil,
to be good, for he is lost, and has no true judgment. As S. Augustine
says, In Enche. (...). ^9.
what goodness can he do, that is lost, except that he be delivered from his
misery? Can he do good by his freewill? God forbid, for man evil using his
freewill, did both loose him self, and also his freewill, and as man being
alive, does kill him self, and when he has killed him self, he ca^ not make
him self alive again. So likewise, when we do sin by freewill, and sin
has Man by vs^ig of his freewill evil did lose both himself and his freewill.
the victory, then is freewil clean lost, for of whom a man is overcome, unto
him must he be servant. Doubtless, this sentence is of Peter the Apostle, the
which, seeing that it is true. I pray you what manner of freedom can a bond
servant have? except it be, when it pleases him to sin. etc.

What can be said to this? does he not clearly say, that man has lost his
freewil by sin? and can no more do unto goodness, then a dead man can do, to
make him self alive again? yea, he can do nothing, but delight in sin.
Call you that a freedom? Call you that bonum conatu^? Call you that a
preparyng to grace? S. Augustine De ^erbis apost* ser. 11.
does declare, what goodness, that freewill deserves, without grace saying. O
cursed freewill, without God, we have experience, what freewill ca^ do without
God, therefore are we miserable, because we have experience, what freewill is
able to do, without God. Behold, man was made good, and by his freewil, was
he made an evil man. When shall an evil man by his freewill, forsakyng God
make a man good, he being good, could not keep him self good, and now, that
he is evil, shall he make him self good? when that he was good, he kept
not him self good, and now, that he is evil, shall he say, I make my self
good? etc.

Here is the very strength of freewill, Man's freewill ca^ do nothing but sin.
by his strength, are we made miserable, and that does experience learn. And
yet we boaste freewill? S. Augustine calls it cursed freewil, and will we
call it blessed freewill? Is not this a goodly freedom, and great power to
bring us to this everlasting misery? This is our bonum conatum, and facere
qoud in ce est, and preparare se ad graciam, with other dampnable dreams, that
we have, whose conclusions are nothing else, but to bring us to dampnation. You
see S. Augustines words be so plain that no man can avoid them Also S. Paul
says: Roma. 8.
The wisdom of the flesh, is enemy to God, it is not subject unto ye law,
nor ca^ be, for they that serve yt flesh, can not please God. And he that
has not the spirit of Christ, the same man is none of his: for the self
spirit bears witness to our spirit, that we be the children of God. Here
have you Ma^s fleshly wisdom is enemy to God.
plainly, that the wisdom of yt flesh, is the very enemy against God. It ca^
not be said, but by wisdom he understands the best thing that is in man,
for better the^ wisdom, ca^ there nothing be: and yet that is enemy to God,
for it is but flesh, and all that is in man without the spirit of God. And
that S. Paul declares, when he saych: he that has not the spirit of
Christ, the same man is not Christ's. Here is plain, that will, reason,
wisdom, heart, or whatsoever thing y^ is in man (without the spirit of God) is
but flesh, and can not be obedient. He says not, he will not, but he can
not, he has no might, he has no power, let him intend his best, do all yt
lies in him, with all his might, and all his power, and yet can it not please
God, for it is but all flesh.

But here M. Duns will make a distinction, and say, that flesh is taken Duns.
here for fleshely desires only, and voluptuousnes, and not for the desires of
the soul, nor for the election of yt will. I would know, what part of man it
is that desires? or that coueteth this voluptuousnes? It is not the bones, nor
the sinowes, nor the flesh that hangs thereon, but it is the highest part
of man, the very soul of man, he is the ground and auctor of all
conscupisence: take away him, and there remains no voluptuousnes. Therefore
S. Paul declares him, and his operation, when he caulleth it the wisdom of
the flesh. But I would gladly know what he understands by unclean
desires, and by voluptuousnes? If he understand, evil cogitations, as
aduoutry, fornications, manslaughter, theft, covetousness, deceit, uncleanness,
blasphemy, pride, and foolishnes. If he call these volupousnes, these be they
that come from the heart of man, and be chosen by the election of the will, as
our M. Christ does clearly declare Mark. vij. Yea, and that from the very
Mark. 7.
bottom of the heart. Can they invent any other uncleanly desires the^ these?
And these come not from the bones, nor from the sinowes, but from the very
ground of the heart, and these be all his desires, and other has he none of
him self. Wherefore these dreamers dream, they wot not what, and speak, that
they understand not. For all that is in man, heart, soul, flesh, and bone.
etc. with all their works, is but flesh, except the spirit of God be
there. Every man has a soul, but by that is he not Christ's, for the^
Infidels were Christ's, but the spirit of Christ, makes Roma. 8.
him Christ's, and the spirit of God geeueth witness to our spirit, that we
be the children of God. Our spirit geeueth no witness to himself, that he is
Christ's, for then were the spirit of God frustrate.

Wherefore let our spirit as well as he can, study his best, to apply
himself to goodness after the uttermost of his power: and yet is it but wisdom
of the flesh, and has no witness of God: yea, it is but an enemy, and it must
needs be sin. For S. Augustine says: He that feeds De verbis Domini
ser. xv.
without me, feeds against me. etc. Mark how he says, against me.
Wherefore all that freewill can do without grace, is but sin. Mark also,
that Paul did write unto the Freewill without grace is sin.
Jews: yea, and to the best of them, which did study to do good works: yea,
and that the best works, that were the works of the law, and yet all these
be caulleth but flesh, and declares openly, that all these good works
could not help them, and yet no doubt but that the Jews did as much as lay
in their freewyll to do, to come to the favor of God, and yet it helped not,
for all was but wisdom of the flesh, and enemy to God.

Also S. Paul says: If you mortify Roma. 8.
the deeds of the flesh, by the spirit, you shall live. You will not reckon,
that S. Paul does judge the spirit of God necessary, to kill the desires of
the flesh, that is, of the syndwes, or of the bones, or of any other thing
that is in man, beside the spirit of man, for that were but a small thing, yea
it were but frustrate to set the spirit of God to kylle these things, for the
spirit of man can kill them, yea and also rule them. For after your own
Philosophers, the spirit of man, is the ruler and the guider of all the
works, that be done by the body. Wherefore the spirit of God must be he
that shall kill the disease of our spirit, the which is the most spiritual
thing in us: and yet is it but flesh before God. For if there were any power in
him, hye, or De verbis Apost. ^ij.
low, to kill his desires, then were it but void to call the spirit of God
to help. But let us hear what S. Augustine says on this text, if you
mortify your flesh. etc. Thou will say, that can my will do, that can my
freewill do. What will? what manner of freewil? except that he guide thee,
thou fallest, except he lift thee up, thou lie still. How can thou We
can do nothing that is good without the spirit of God
then do it by thy spirit, seeing that yt Apostle says: As many as be led
by the spirit of God, be the children of God. Will thou do of thy self?
Will thou be led of thine own self to mortify the deeds of the flesh?
what will it profit thee? For if thou be not an Epicure, thou shall be a
Stoicke? Whether thou be be an Epicure, or a Stoicke, thou shalt not be
among the children of God. For they that be guided of the spirit of God, be
the children of God: not they that live after their own flesh: not they that
live after their own spirit: not they that be led of their own spirit:
but as many as be led of the spirit of God, they be the children of God.

But hear a man will say, Ergo, then are we well ruled, and we do Who are yt
children of God?
not rule. I answer. Thou both rulest, and art ruled, but then do thou
well rule, if thou be ruled of the good spirit. Utterly, if thou want the
spirit of God, thou can do no good. Thou do truly without his help, by
thy freewyll: but it is but evil done. Unto yt is thy will apt, which is
cauled free, and by evil doing, is she made a damnanable bond servant. When
I say without the help of God, thou do nothing, I understand by it no good
thing, for to do evil, thou have free will, without the help of God, though
that be no freedom. Wherefore you shall know, that so do you goodness, if
the helping spirit be your guider, the which if it be absent, you can do
no good at all. etc. Me think this saying is sufficient, if men would believe
S. Agustine. Mark how he says, without the sprite of God we lie in sin,
let our spirit do ye best he can. For they be not the children of God, yt
are guided after their own spirit but after the spirit of God. For our
spirit can do no good at all, but evil, if the spirit do not lead him.
Where is now our bonum studium? our bonus conatus and applicacio ad bonum? For
Bonus conatus verstum de congru^.
our spirit can do nothing but evil, and is of him self, but a damnable
servant. What good can a damnable servant do of him self? So that here it is
openly proved, that the free will of man, of his own strength, and of his own
power, con do nothing but sin.

But now comes the damnable Fleshly and carnal reason, reasons frowardly
and crookedly.
reason, and fleshly wisdom, and will dispute, and say: if our free will ca^
do no goodness, what need God to command so many good things? what need
God to give those commandments, that he knows well be impossible for us?
And if they be impossible, what right is in him that damneth us for that
thing, that is impossible, for us to do? I answer.

O thou blind and presumptuous and damnable reason, where have thou learned of
any other creature, to enquire a cause of thy makers will? or else to murmour,
against the ordinance of thy living God? What have thou to do to require a
cause of his acts? He has made thee without thy co^se^t and counsel, and
may he not set laws, and commandments to rule thee by, at his pleasure,
without thy counsel? thou art worthy of none answer, thou art so
presumptuous: nor there is no godly answer, that will satisfy thee.
Nevertheless, I will stop thy blaspheming mouth, by thine own wisdom, to thy
great shame.

First, this thing must thou grant As God is nothing but goodness, so can he
command nothing but that which is good.
me, that thy God is Essenciall goodness, and is nothing but goodness.
Wherefore he can command nothing but that is good, just, and righteous.
Which things, if thou do not, or be not able to do, thy maker may not let
his goodness undone, because of thy naughtines, or for thine unableness. And if
thou be not able to do those good things, that he commands thee, there
is no fault in the commander, nor yet in the commandments. Wherefore then
do thou grudge against him without a cause? But yet will thou murmr, and
say, how that he knows, how they be impossible for thee. Truth that is, he
knows it. Then will thou say, wherefore does he command them to me? O
thou presumptuous creature, it were sufficiently answered to thee, to say,
that it is his pleasure so to command. What could thou say more? what
occasion had thou to murmr? what wrong have thou?

But I will go farther. Thy maker knows that they be impossible for for
thee: he knows also thy damnable and presumptuous pride, that reckenest, how
thou can do all things that be good of thine own strength, without any
other help. And to subdue this presu^ptuous pride of thine, and to bring thee
to knowledge of thine own self, he has geeuen thee his commandments, of
the which thou can not complain, for they be both righteous and good. And
if thou complain because they be impossible for thee, then consider thy
dampnable pride, that thoughtest thy self so strong, that thou could do
all goodness.

But what wilt y^ now do? These Why God has given us his commandments to
be kept.
commandments be geeuen, and can not, nor shall not be changed, to
satisfy thy presu^ptuous pride. Whereof will thou now complain? Gods
commandments be reasonable, they be good, they be righteous, and they be
laudable, shall all these things be destroyed, to satisfy thy pride? nay not
so. But thou shall rather remain with all thy pride, under the damnation of
these commandments. What say thou thereto? Can thou avoid this? Can
thou say but this is right? Can thou save thy self from danger? Can thou
avoid thy da^pnation, by all thy carnal wisdom? Nay verily. For he that is
thy adversary is omnipotent. Wherefore, say what thou will, so must it be,
for it is Gods ordinance, which may not be changed. But now, will thou ask
what remedy? no remedy but this only, to confess thy weakness. to confess
thy pride, to knowledge thy unableness, to grant, yt these commandments be
lawful, holy, and good, and how thou art bound to keep them, and to give
laud, and praise to God for them, and to go to thy merciful maker with this
confession, and to desire him, that he will help thee, that he will be
merciful unto thee, that he will strengthen thee, for thou art to weak, that
he will give thee his spirit: for thy spirit is to fleshly, to fulfill these
spiritual commandments, and doubt thou not, but thou shall find him both
merciful, and also gracious, for he gave thee these commandments for that
intent, secretly declaryng, both thy pride, and also thy weakness, that thou
might seek, and call unto him for help.

This does S. Augustine declare De temp. ser. lxiij.
well in these words: If man do perceive, that in the commandments, is any
thing impossible, or else to hard let him not remain in him self, but let him
run unto God, his helper the which has given his commandments for that
intent, that our desire might be styrred up, and that he might give help.
etc. Mark S. Augustine says, that the commaundeme^ts be impossible unto our
strength, but we must call to God for strength.

The Pelagians did reckon, that they had got a great victory, when they had
made this carnal reason, yt God would commau^de nothing, that was impossible.
Of this reason did they glory, and triumph, and thought, that they must needs
have some natural strength, and power to fulfill the commandments of God,
seeing that God would command nothing impossible to man. Of this same reason,
does my Lord of Rochester, and all his scholars glory unto this same day.

But let us see how S. Augustine De lib. arb. cap. xvi.
answers them. The Pelagians (says he) think, that they know a wo^derous
thing, when they say, God will not command that thing, the which he knows
is impossible for man to do. Every man knows this, but therefore does he
command certain things, that we can not do, because we might know, what
thing we ought to ask of him, Faith is Eccl. 12. Gods commandments be
impossible to our nature.
she, which by prayer, obtains that thing, that the law commands.

Briefly, he that says. If thou will, thou may keep my commandments.
In the same book, a little after says. He shall give me keeping in my mouth.
Plain it is, that we may keep the commandments, if we will, but because
our will is prepared of God, of him it must be asked, that we may so much will,
as will suffice us to do the^. Truth it is, that we will when we will, but he
makes us to will that thing, that is good. etc.

Here have you plain, that my Lord of Rochesters opinion, and the Pelagia^s,
is all one, for they both do agree, that the commandments of God, be not
impossible to our natural strength. But S. Augustine says, they be
impossible. And therefore be they given, that we should know our weakednes,
and also ask strength to fulfill them. For faith by prayer, does obtain
strength, to fulfill, the impossible commandments of the law. Here Whereof
our good will comes.
have you also, that God moves us, and causes us to be good willers, and
gives us a good will, for else we would never will, but evil.

Here is also to be noted, that yt Pelagians, and our Duns me^, agree all in
one, for they both say, that ye grace of God does help ma^s good purpose, so
that man does first intend, and purpose De co^gruo.
well. And as Duns says, disposes him self by attricio^ to receive grace,
and the^ God does helps him. But the truth is contrary, for there is no good
purpose in man, no good disposition, nor good intent, but all is against
goodness, and clean contrary against all thing that agrees with grace, until
that God of his mere mercy comes and gives grace, and changes a ma^s will
unto grace, and gives him will, to will goodness, yea, and that when he
thought nothing of goodness, but does clearly resist all goodness.

This does S. Augustine prove in De lib. arb. cap. xvi.
these words. The Pelagians say, yt they grant how that grace does help every
man's good purpose, but not y^ The Pelagians says that God gives good laws
and man may keep them of his natural strength or else the co^maundeme^ts were
frustrate.
he gives the love of virtue to him, that strives against it. This thing do
they say, as though man of him self, without the help of God, has a good
purpose, and a good mind unto virtue, by the which merit procedyng before,
he is worthy to be helped of the grace of God, that follows after. Doubtless,
that grace that follows, does help the good purpose of man, but the good
purpose should never have been, if grace had not preceded. And though that yt
good study of man, when it begins, is helped of grace, yet did it never
begin without grace. etc.

Here it is open, that the Pelagia^s grant as much of grace, as my Lord of
Rochester does, and all his Duns men, which learneth, that man may have a good
purpose, bonum studium, and a good mind, and a love to grace, of his own
natural strength. The Pelagians grant even the same. But here you see, how
Saint Augustine is clear against them. But now let us here M. Duns words. A
sinner may by the natural, and by the common influence iiij. sen. did. xiiij.
quest. ij.
of God, consider his sins, as a thing that has offended God, and as a thing
contrary to the law of God, and lets him from reward, and brings him to
pain, and by this means may he hate, and abhore his sin: this calls he
attricio^, whereby there is a disposition (says he) or a merit in a man of
congruence, to take away mortal sin, and this attrition is sufficient for a
man, that shall receive the Sacraments, and quod non ponat obicem, that is,
that he have no mortal sin actually in his will, this is sufficient, and
also a necessary way to receive grace. etc.

This is ten times worse then the Pelagians sayings, for they grant, that man
must needs have a special grace, to perform his good purpose. And M. Duns
says, that man may perform his attrition, of his natural power, yea, and
this attrition of congruence, is a disposition to take away mortal sin,
without any special grace.

I pray you M. Duns, of what congruence is it* What has attrition deserved,
that mortal sin should be taken away for his pleasure? what has he
deserved, that grace must follow him? Infidels may have this attrition (for you
grant, that it comes of natural strength) and yet shall it not follow of
congruence, that they inust receive grace, and also remission of their sins?
Also had not Judas this attrition, when he said, I have sinned? and was sorry
for his sin, and also repented him? and knew well, that he had offended God,
and also deserved pain? and was no more willing (I think) so to do, and had
all yt properties, that belongs to your attrition, and yet see how he did
deserve of congruence grace, and remission of his sins. Yea, did not this
attritio^, bring him to extreme desperation? How can a man without a special
grace, abhor his sin? It is not possible, He that has not yt grace of God
cannot abhor sin.
but he must love sin, so long as he is the enemy of God, yea he would
there were no God, to punish sin, such a pleasure has he unto sin.

This is the nature of our hearts, and that does every one of us feel, though
these men teaches the contrary, but I say to them the words of the Prophet,
redite ad cor preuaricatores, grope in your bosoms, and there find you the
mortal enemy of God, which neither cares for Gods displeasure, nor yet for his
sin. And you say that he may have a good attritio^, of his natural
strength, and if this attrition be good, then may he do good before grace,
so that we shall gather grapes of thorns, and figs of briers.

But what says S. Paul to your Roma. 18.
good attrition? He says, that all thing without faith is nothing. Is not this
man a fleshly man? and has nothing of the spirit of God (for by your own
learning, he has but the common influence) and yet shall he be sorry, that
he has offended God? Shall he abhor his sin? Shall he depose him self
of congruence to grace? S. Paul says. The flesh lusts contrary to the
spirit, and the works of the flesh, be aduoultry fornication, uncleanness,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, wrath, zeal, sedition, envying, with such other.
I pray you, how do these works agree with your attrition? Call you this
abhorryng of sin? Call you this heaviness, for offe^dyng God? Be these good
dispositions? Be these our good preparatio^s unto God? Think you, that these
works, do deserve of congruence remission of mortal sin? These be^ the best
works, that a sinner has in his heart, or else S. Paul lies. Wherefore it is
not possible, but he must have in his will, actual sin, for he ca^ will
nothing but sin. And therefore, if he receive the Sacraments with this
attrition, he receives them to his damnation. For before grace, he is an
utter enemy to God, and to all his Sacraments. Wherefore God must of his mere
mercy, mollify his heart, and give him grace to will goodness, or else he ca^
never do it, nor yet desire it. As S. Augustine does declare in these words.
De grede^i^. cap. 8.
The grace, which is given of the largenes of God, privily into men's hearts, can
not be despised of no manner of hard heart. For therefore it is given, that Grace
finds our hearts stony.
the hardness of the heart should be taken away. Wherefore when the father is
hard within, and does learn, that we must come to his son. Then takes he
away our stony heart, and gives us a fleshely heart. And by this means, he
makes us the children of promise, and the vessels of mercy, which he has
prepared to glory. But wherefore does he not learn all men to come to Christ?
Because that those, that he learneth, he learneth of mercy, and those, that
he learneth not, of his judgment does he not learn them. etc. Mark, that
S. Augustine says. That there is no hardness of heart, that can resist grace.
And Duns says, that there may be an obstacle in ma^s heart. S. Augustine
says, that grace finds the heart in hardness, and obstinacy. And Du^s says,
that there is a mollifieng, that precedeth grace, which he calls attrition.
S. Augustine says, Meritum de congruo.
when the father learneth us within, then takes he away our slony hearts. And
Duns says, that we can do it by the common natural influence, that is, we can
dispose our selves of co^gruence. Mark also, how all men, be not taught to
come to Christ, but alonely they, yt be taught, of mercy be taught: and if it
be of mercy, then it is not of congruence by attrition.

Briefly, a greater heresy, more contrary to Christ, and his blessed word,
ca^ no man learn, and yet must he be taken for a great clarke, and a subtle
Doctor, because he pleases the flesh. But shortly, have I openly proved by
invincible Scriptures, and by Doctors of great authority, that freewill of
his natural strength, with out a special grace, can do nothing, but abide in
sin. Feign, invent, excogitate, and dream, as many holy purposes as we can,
as many subtle distinctions, as many good attritions, as many good
applicatio^s, and all they be but sin, till grace come: Sine fide
impossible est placere Deo
yea our sleepyng, our eating, our drynkyng, our almesses, our prayers, our
singyng, our ryngyng, our confessyng, our mumblyng, our mournyng, our wayling.
Briefly, all that we ca^ do, is but hypocrisy, and double sin before God,
till the time, that he of his mercy chooses us. For as he says. You have
not chosen me, but I have chosen you.

Now will I declare a scripture or two, that men bring to prove our conatum and
our bonum studium. The first place is this. God, from the beeginnyng did
ordain man, and left him in the hands of his own counsel, he did give him
his commandments, and his precepts, if thou will keep the commandments,
and also keep peasably faith, for ever they shall keep thee. I have set
before thee water, and fire, stretch thy hand to which thou will.

Of this place is gathered, that man may have a good intent, a good mind, to
apply him self to God of his natural power. But this can not be proved of
this text. For there is never a word of entending, of studying, or of applying
will. For if we will take the words of the text, as they sound, they rather
prove, that we may keep the Commandments of God, yea, and also believe in
God, then any other thing, the which, I am sure no man will grant. For then
how could men avoid, but that the Philosophers be saved? For no man can
deny, but that they did as much, as lay in their natural power to come to God?
Moreover the Pelagians bring this text, to prove, that man may do good of his
natural strength. Now how will we avoid them? For if we deny, that it
proves their opinion (for the which ye words sound most) then will they
deny, that it proves our conatum, and our bonum studium, of the which, the
text speaks never a word. Wherefore this text makes neither for the^, nor
yet for you. Plain it is, that the words of the text sou^de of keeping, and
of beleeueuing, if we will, and not of intending, nor of studying. Wherefore it
makes not for your purpose.

But let us go to the text, God from Eccl. 16.
the beeginning did make man. These words be open of the creation, of ye
first man. He left him in the hands of his own counsel. These words make
nothing for freewill, for hear is nothing commanded him to do, but all only
hear is signified, Man's Lordshyp over all creatures of God.
that man is made Lord over all inferior creatures, to use them, at his
pleasure, as it is open. Genesis. 2. Where that all things were brought before
Adam, to receive their names, signifying, that they were all left unto his use,
and to his will, and he was Lord over them all, and none over him. This was
his kingdom, in y^ which he did reign, and govern all things after his
commandments, but yet was it by general influence, given him first of God:
He did add his commandments, and his precepts. In these words is there
no power given unto him, but hear be given him commandments, Whereby he
must be ordered, and ruled, And not rule after his own counsel, but after
the counsel, and commandments of God. Wherefore by these Man's dominion
restreined.
commandments, was their part of his free domination, and lordship, that
he had over the inferior things taken away, as where God commanded him, that
he should not eat of ye Tree of knowledge, both of good and evil. Now was it
not free for him to use this tree after his own will, but after the
commandment of God, and what power he had, by his free will to keep this
commandment, ye effect did declare. If thou will keep ye commandments.
Here begins the doubt. But yet of these words can you not gather, that he
has power to keep them, nor yet yt he might intend to keep them. For it
follows not, if thou will, Ergo, thou may, or thou may entend, As it
follows not, if I would, Ergo, I could depose you, for you will let this
consequent.

Also you have a general rule, Condicionalis nihil ponit. Wherefore these
words, if thou will keep the commandments, gives no power, nor strength
to free will. But this all only follows of this text, if man will keep the
commandments, then they shall keep him. But now, where shall he have this
will? that is not in his power: but look of S. Augustine Aug. de lib. arb.
cap. xvi
above recited, and there shall shall you find, how man comes by this will.
Also the words of ye text be not, if thou will, thou may keep them, or
intend to keep them. Nor they be not, Man may keep them, or intend, if he
will. But if thou will keep them, then they shall keep thee. Wherefore of
these words, can you not conclude any power in man. For it follows not, when
God says, do this, hear this, hear that, keep this, keep that, if thou
will do this, if you wilt do that, That we can do these things, or can
intend to do them. For God commands us to do all good things, Ergo, we
be able of our natural strength to do them? Then were the spirit of God
frustrate, for the spirit of God is not given us, to give commandments, but
for to give us strength, to fulfill, and righteously to understand those
things, yt be commanded us.

By the commandments, is August. de verb. Apost. sent. xiij.
declared that thing, that we ought to do and also they show our weakness,
and imbecilitie, that we might learn to seek for a greater strength, and
greater help, then is in us. As Saint Augustine says, in these Wherefore
the law is given.
words. The law was given that man might find him self, and not to make
his sickness whole, but by his preaching, the sickness increased y^ the
physician might be sought. Wherefore the law threatening, and not fullfilling
that thing, that he commands, makes a man to be underneath him, but the
law is good, if a man do use it well. What is that, use the law well? By the
law, to know our sins and to seek Gods help, to help our health. etc.

Hear is it plain, that the commandments of God, give us no strength, nor
yet declare any strength to be in us, but shows us our duty, and also our
weakness, and also moves us, and causes us to seek further for strength. So
that these words, si voluris, si feceris, si audieris, si emundaueris, si vis,
with all other such, that be words of commandments, or words under a
condition, do nothing declare, but what we are bound to do, and what shall
follow, if we do them. And as the words of the law do threaten an evil
end for sin, all only for to fear euel doers, and wicked persons from
evil, so do the words of promise styre up and quicken good men's hearts, for
to do well, and also comfort the^, that they should not despair in
ad^ersities: But neither these, nor those give us any strength, to do that
that is commanded: but alonely they do declare what pains and what reward
shall follow to the breakers and the keepers of them.

An other scripture have you, where as our Master Christ says: How often
Math. 23.
would I have gathered thy children, and you would not? Here cry you, liberum
arbitrium, lib. arb. For if they had no freewyll, what need our Master Christ
to say, thou would not? First must we consider, yt there Two wills in God.
are two manner of wills in God: One is called his godly will, or his secret or
vnscrutable will, whereby that all things be made and ordered, and all things
be done. Of this will no creature has knowledge what he ought thereby to
do, or not to do, for as S. Paul says, it is inscrutable, and therefore it
is sufficient for us, to know thereof alonely, that there is an inscrutable
will. The other will in God, is called a declared, and a manifest will, the
which is declared and given to us in holy Scriptures. Gene. 2.


This will was showed unto the uttermost by our M. Christ the son of God, and
therefore is it lawful. And also, men are bound to search, and to know this
will, and for that consideration, was it manifested unto us. This will does
declare what* every man is bound to do, and what every man is bound to fly.
And by this will is offered unto every man, those things that be of
salvation: And by this will GOD will have no man damned, for he lets his
word to be preached indifferently to all men.

Now, he that will know this will, must go to our Master Christ, in whom
as S. Paul says, is all treasures of wisdom and science. So that he will
show us as much as is necessary for us to know, and as much as the father of
heaven would we should know. Now to the text, here speaks God, that is
incarnated, that was sent to will, to speak, to do, to preach, to be
familiar with us, to do miracles, yea, and also to suffer death for our
salvation.

Now, says he, I would have gathered How Christ willed to save the Jew*
thy children, that is to say, I did preach, I did labor with all diligence to
convert thee, I did miracles before thee, yea, I wept, I wailed for thy sake:
all these things did I, with all other things that might be to thy
conversion, and that belo^ged to God incarnate to do. But all these things did
not profit them. And why? Because they would not. In him was there no fault.
For there was nothing undone, that belonged to him to do, so that he was
wyllyng, and yet did it not profit Jerusalem. And why? Because they would
not. But now, why would they not? Because it was in their power to will, to
consent? and to will, not to consent? Nay truly, but because as John says:
John. 11.
They could not believe, for he had blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their
hearts. So that they must needs alonely Wherein the liberty of freewill
consists.
will, not to consent, and could no otherwise do, but not consent: and yet
were they neither constrained, nor compelled, nor wrunge to it with violence,
but freely they would not consent, and yet had they the liberty of their
freewill, that was to be against Christ, and not to be with him. For the
liberty of freewill stands not in this, that he may will this thing, and also
will the contrary thereof. But it stands in that, that all Magist. sen. in. ij.
thing that he will, or will not, is at his own will, and is not thereto
constrained, but wylleth it freely without compulsion, and yet he can not
choose, no nor will not choose, bu^ so to will, or so not to will. So that there
is a necessity immutable, but not a necessity of compulsion, or coaction.

Now is it open, that this place makes not for you, for there was no power,
nor none entente in their freewyll, to consent unto Christ, but to will the
contrary, and not to will unto him: and all was because they It was not in their
hands to change their will.
were blinded, and their hearts were hardened. And therefore of their natural
strength could they none otherwise do, but vary from Christ: no, they would,
nor destred no otherwise, but to swerve from him: that was all their will and
delight. But wherefore they were blinded, and wherefore they were hardened, that
must you inquire of the inscrutable will, that pleased him so to leave the^.
The We may not ^ee to inquisi^^ue of Gods sec^etes.
cause thereof, I am sure he ca^ tell you, if he would. I am sure it is
rightteously done, that is enough for me.

But now comes the blind and fleshlye reason, and murmureth at this, and
asks, why are we condemned for this? why does God punish us for this?
seeing we can will no otherwise? Also he blyndeth us, he makes our hearts
hard, that we can not amend us, and it lies not in our power without his
will. Now, why complayneth he of us? why lays he it to our charge? Here is
nothing done but his will: we be but instruments of his will. And if we
do not well, why geeueth he us not strength to do better? Thou dampnable
reason, who can satisfy thee? which reckonest nothing to be well done, but
that thou dooste, and that is done with thy counsel? Thynkest thou not, that
thou art good and perfect in thine own nature? and all that is in thee, is
both well and righteously made?

To this, thou will answer yea, for thou wi^t not condemn thy self, nor
any thing that is thine. But now answer me to this. What has made thee so
well? and given thee all thy righteousness? and all this goodness that thou have?
Thou must needs say God.

But what was the cause that thou art so well? so righteous? and so good made?
seeing that thou deseruest nothing? Yea* and all these things be done so
well, and so righteously, that thou can not complain, nor amend them: no,
nor yet devise which way to amend them.

Now, why do thou not murmur against God? seeing, that all things is done
without thy knowledge? and also without thy deserving? why do thou not
inquire a cause of him? why murmurest thou not, that he has made thee so
good, and so rightful? seeing thou had nothing deserved? But here will thou grant, that God did all thing for the best. Why do thou not likewise
in other things?

Furthermore, thou must needs grant, that God thy maker, and the Nothing that
God does ca^ be amended.
governor of all things, is most wise most righteous, and most merciful: and
so wise that nothing that he does, can be amended: so righteous, that there
can be no suspicion in him, of unrighteousness: so merciful is ^ee, that he
ca^ do nothing without mercy. How think thou? will thou grant these
things of thy maker? Thou must needs grant them.

Now compare unto this rule, thy Note here the wicked and sinful state of
man.
blindness that is within thee, thy induratio^, that is in thee, thy peruers
will toward goodness, and what cause have thou to complain? Thou have granted,
that he does all things righteously: Ergo, thou have no wrong. He does all
things mercyfully: Ergo, thou art in thy blyndnes, and in thy hardness, better
entreated the^ thou have deserved. Moreover, thou beleuest, that God is
righteous, that God is wise, and that God is mercyful. Now faith is of those
things, that do not appear, nor that can be proved by exterior causes.
Hold thee fast to this faith, then all thy fleshely reasons be ass^iled. For
when God saves so few men, and damneth so many, and thou know no cause why,
yet must thou believe, that he is mercyful, and righteous. Faith does not come
of exterior causes, but is the mere gift of God
This is faith, which if it could be proved by exterior causes, then were it
no need to believe it.

Now, if thou believe, that he is merciful, good, and righteous unto thee,
wherefore murmurest thou? But yet would thou know wherefore he in durateth
thee, and blyndeth thee, and gives thee no grace to amend, and unto thy
brother, that has no better deserved then thou have: yea, he has likewise
evil deserved as thou have, and yet he gives him grace, and takes away his
hardness, and gives him a will, to will all goodness. This is not indifferently
done as thou think.

First, I say to thee, thou have no cause to complain, for thou have no God
disposes his mercy to whom it pleases him.
wrong, thou have all thing, that is thine, and nothing is taken from thee,
that belongs to thee. Why do thou complain of this right? Yea, but yet
say thou, that he gives the one mercy, and gives the other none. I
answer, what is that to thee? is not his mercy his own? Is it not lawful
for him to give it to whom he will? is thy eye evil, because he is good? Take
that, that is thine, and go thy way. Math. 20.
For if it be his will to show his wrath and to make his power known, over the
vessels of wrath, ordained to Roma. 9.
damnation, and to declare the riches of his glory, unto the vessels of mercy
which he had prepared, and elected unto glory. What have thou therewith to
do? what cause have thou thereof to compain? it is the will of God, which can
not be, but well, and righteous, the which (as thou say) thou beleeuest.

Wherefore leave of thy murmuryng, God has no delight in our damnation.
and thy disputation against God, and reckon, that he is of his nature
merciful, and has no delight, nor no pleasure in thy damnation, but believe
thou steadfastly, that if he show his mercy but unto one man in all the
world, that thou shall be that same one man, and though an angel would make
thee believe, that all the world should be damned, yet stick thou fast to his
mercy, and to his justice, that justifies thee, and believe, that the sweet
blood of his blessed son, can not be shed in vain, but it must needs
justify sinners, and so many as stick fast unto it, though they be A
comfortable and wholesome doctrine.
never so blinded, and never so hardened, for it was shed alonely for them.

If thou can thus satisfy thy self, then do thou well, and thou art
doubtless out of ieoperdie. If thou will not be content, but wilt dispute, and
inquire causes of Gods inscrutable will, then will I stand by, and look on,
and see what victordome thou shall get I doubt not, but it will repent thee,
and that he will conclude with thee, on this manner. May not I do what I will?
Now here have I au^swered, to an intricable doubt, that our school men are
wrapped in, which would know, what is the cause of predestination, and of
reprobatio^. Duns being Sc^^^s. i. s. d^st. (...).
wrapped between carnal reason, and the invincible Scriptures of S. Paul,
can not tell, whether he may grant, that the will of God is alonely the cause
of election, or else any merits of man precedyng before: he concludes, that
both ye opinions may be defended. Bonauenture blyndly Bonauenture.
concludes, that there may be a cause preceding grace to deserve it. So that
in these unfruitful questions, which in gender nothing but conte^tion, have
they spent all their lives, and for these things be given unto them peculiar
names, as subtle and seraphicall, and irrefrigable Doctors. But against them
all, I set S. Paul, which took intolerable labors, to prove by invincible
Scriptures, and examples thereof, that there was no cause but alonely the will
of God. And to prove this, he brings in an evident example of Jacob, and
Esau, how Jacob was Jacob, Esau.
elected, and Esau reproved, before they were borne, and before they had done,
either good, or bad.

Can there be a playner example? what means Paul in these words when they
wear neither borne, nor had done neither good nor bad, but that the election
of God might stand? Does he not clearly take away all manner of merits, both
de congruo, and also de condigno? and declare the will Meritum de congruo.
of God to be the cause only? But hear will subtle blyndnes say, that God
saw before, that Jacob should do good, and therefore did he choose him. He
saw also, that Esau should do no good, and therefore he repelled him. Alas
for blindenes, what will you judge of that, that God saw. How know we that God
saw that? And if he saw it, yet how know we that that was the cause of
Jacobs election? Jacob is elected and Esau rejected.
These children be unborn, and they have done neither good nor bad, and yet
one of them is chosen, and the other is refused, S. Paul knows none other
cause, but the will of God, and will you discuse an other.

And where you say, that God did see before, that one of them should do good, I
pray you what was the cause or whereby saw he, that he should do good? you
must needs say by that that he would give him his grace, Ergo, the will of
God is yet the cause of election, for because ye God would give him his grace.
Therefore God saw, that he should do good, and so should also ye other have
done, if God would have given him that same grace. Wherefore you gyauntes,
that will subdue heaven and earth, leave your searching of this cause, and be
content with the will of God, and doubt not, but the will of God, is as
righteous, and as lawful a cause, as your merits can be. And doubt you not,
but S. Paul (that took so great labors Romans 9.
in this matter) did see as far in man's deserving, as we can do: and yet he
concluded with these words of scriptures, I will show mercy: to Gods mercy is
ye cause only of our salvation.
whom I show mercy: I will have compassion, of whom I have compassion. So lies
it not in man's will, or cunnyng, but in the mercy of God. He says not, I will
have mercy on him, that I see shall do good? but I will show mercy to whom I
will. He says not, I will have compassion of him y^ shall deserve it de
congruo? But of him of whom I will have compassion. This does S. Augustine well
prove in these words: The disputation of the^ is vain August. super Ioannem
tract. lxxxviij.
y^ which do defend ye presence of God, against the grace of God, and therefore
say, that we were chosen before ye making of the world, because ye God knew
before that we should be good, not because he should make us good. But he
that says, You have not chosen me, says not that. For if he did therefore
chose us, because that he knew before, that we should be good, the^ must
he also know before, that we should first have chosen him? etc.

Here is it plain, that the election of God is not, because he saw before,
that we should do well, but all only the cause of election, is his mere
mercy, and the cause of our doing well, is his election. And therefore S. Paul
says, not of works, but of calling.

Now go to you subtle Duns men, with all your carnal reasons, and search out
a cause of his secret will. If you did believe, that he were good, righteous,
and merciful, it were a great comfort for you, that the election stood all
only by his will, for so were you sure, that it should be both righteously
done, and mercifully, but you have God is merciful.
no faith, and therefore must you needs mystrust God, and of that, fall you to
invent causes of election of your own strength. As one should say, because God
will not of his righteousness, or of his mercy choose us, we will be sure that
we shall be elected. For first will Ma^s good intent to save him self.
we invent, that the election comes of deseruyng, and then will we also
dream certain works, that shall thereunto be appointed of us, and those
will we do at our pleasure, so that the election, and reprobacion, shall
stand all in your hands, let God do what that pleases him. But now because
there be certain open places of scripture, that give only the cause to God,
all only of election, and also of reprobation, therefore are these men sore
troubled, and can not tell no other remedy, but all only to study, how they
may wring, and wrest the open scriptures, to the fortifiing of their error,
and to the satisfyinge of their carnal reason: so that where the holy Ghost
says, I will obdurate the heart of Pharao, they will take upon them to learn
and to teach the holy Ghost to speak better, and to say of this manner: I will
suffer Pharao to be indurated, but I will not do it, but my easynes, my
softnes, whereby that I shall suffer him, shall bring other men to repentance,
but Pharo shall it make more obstinate in malice. So that God does indurate (as
you say) when he does not chastise a sinner, but shows softnes, and easynes
and sufferaunce to him. He is merciful, when he does call a sinner to
repentance by affiction and scourging. So that induration after your
exposition, is nothing else but for to suffer evil by softnes, and by goodness.
To have mercy, is nothing else but to correct, to scourge, and to punyshe men
for their sins.

This is the exposition of induration, Origin in per^arcon. Glos. Romans 5
Hier^. super Esaiam.
after S. Hierome and after your common gloss. S. Hieromes words be these:
God does indurate, when he does not by and by castigate a sinner. He has
mercy, when he does call a sinner by and by unto repentance by afflictions.
etc. This is authority enough, as you think, what should you search any
farther? Did not these men understand scripture? Is not this exposition plain?
This takes away all inconuenie^ces? By this exposition God is not the auctor
of evil? This is a clarkely exposition? Briefly, this this must needs be the
true exposition Wherefore it wear better for you, to err with S. Hierome, and
with our oulde schoolmen, then for to say true with these new heretykes, so
call you all them, that will reprove oulde errors.

Now have you well defended the which be new men.
matter. Now is your cause well proved. Now must the holy Ghost chang his
words. For he has new schoolemaysters. And wheare he was wont to say, I
have hardened Pharos heart. Now must he say. Pharao has hardened him self, by
my softnes, and by my easines, but I have not done it.

But yet I pray you, how would you satisfy a weak conscience? that sticks
fast to the word of God, and reckeneth that the holy Ghost knows well what
he shall speak, and will speak nothing without a great cause but that that he
speaks, shall be so well spoken, that you can not amend it?

How think you? is it sufficient to say to this poor man, S. Hierome, and all
school men say so? hold thou thy peace, be thou content with their
expositions, search thou no further, it does not become thee to know it?

But now, if he will lay to your charge, that this thing is openly writin
scripture, and the words of Moses and of Paul be plain, therefore you must
answer to them. And it shall be as lawful and as necessary for him to know
the mind of holy scripture, as the exposition of S. Hierome, or of M. Duns.
Scripture says plainly, that God does indurate Pharaos heart, and not Pharao
his own heart. It is a new exposition, to say, I will indurate Pharaos heart,
that shall be as much, as Pharao shall indurate himself thorough my softnes
and patience. By this rule shall Anaragoras Philosophy come in place, that shall
How the Papists and school men pervert the holy scriptures.
make of every thing what he will. And where as scripture says, Saul, Saul,
why dooste thou persecute me? Shall be as much to say, as why suffer thou
me to be persecuted. Also the father of heaven, sent his only son into the
world, shall be as much to say, as he suffered his son to be sent. So
that we shall expound all places of Scripture, to our own purpose, and not to
look what is the sentence of holy Scripture, nor yet what the mind of the
holy ghost is: but what exposition will please us best, and what will best
serve to our carnal mind. Furthermore, if God do harden men's hearts, when
he suffers, and when he is soft and shows mercy: then did he harden the
hearts of the Jews, when he brought them out of Egypt into wilderness: then
did he harden them, when he brought them out of the captivity of Babylon,
then hardens he all the world, whom he suffers in great softnes and
mercy. Also after your exposition, he was merciful to Israel, when he sent
them into Babylon. For there did he chasten them, and by afflictions provoked
them to repentance.

Likewise the father of heaven had no mercy on the world, when he sent his
son, for of that he gave m^n an occasion of induratio^. But when he he
damneth the sinners, then by your rule has he mercy on them, for he chasteneth
and punishes them for their sins. This is your rule of induration, and no
man may say against it. Miserere may not signify to geeue grace, nor to
remitte sin, but to chastise and to scourge, and by pains provoke to
repentance. And indurare, shall not signify to harden, but to suffer, and to
be patient, and to be mer^^ull, and not to chastise.

But masters, how was God merciful unto Pharao, by softenes, and by
sufferaunce, whom he chastened so sore with ten plagues, and with such
plagues as Moses marueyled of? Call you that softnes? was that suffering of
Pharao? was that an occasion of induratio^? by patience? easines, and by
sufferau^ce? God send his adversaries of that patience, and of that
sufferaunce. I pray you, how could God chastise him more? and yet at every
plague, he says: I will indurate Pharaos heart. Wherefore Pharao had none
occasion of induration by sufferaunce, and patience of God, but rather by his
scourging. Wherefore there must be an other sense in these words then you do
make, and we must seek out an other way to know, how God does work
induration How God indurateth.
in men's hearts (such words does the holy ghost use, therefore dare we speak
them.) And how he is y^ doer both of good and evil: and yet all things that
he does, is well done. First, you must needs grant, that after the fall of
Adam, the pure nature of man was corrupted by sin, whereby we be all
wicked, and borne (as S. Paul says) by nature Ephe. 2.
the children of wrath, and as David says, we are all conceived in sin.
Notwithstanding, of this corrupt nature, does God make all me^, both good and
bad. Those that be good, be good by his grace. Those that be badde, be badde
of corrupted nature, and yet God has made them. Nevertheless, by nature they
are of the same goodness, and no better the^ nature is, that is to say, evil:
but yet the creation of God, and his workmanship is good, thouth the thing be
evil in it self, yet is Gods work before himself good, though all the
world say nay.

Now God of his infinite power does rule, and guide all manner of men both good
and badde, and all me^ by his infinite power, are moved unto operations, but
every man after his nature. As after your own philosophy, Primum mobile, by
the reason of his swifte motion, caryeth all the inferior things with him,
and suffers nothing to be unmoved: notwithstanding, he moves all things
after their own natural course.

So likewise God of his infinite All things are subject to the will of God.
power, lets nothing to be exemted from him, b^t all things to be
subject unto his action, and nothing can be done by them, but by his
principal motion: so that he works in all manner of things that be either
good or bad, not changing their nature, but mouinge them alonely to work
after their nature: so that god works good, and evil works evil, and God
uses them both as instruments, and yet does he nothing evil, but evil is
done alonely through the evil man, God working by him (but not evil) as by an
instrument. Take an example. A man does saw a block with an evil saw. The
which is nothing apt for to cut well, and yet must it needs cut at the moving
of the man, though it be never so evil, for the man in moving, does not
change the nature of the saw. Nevertheless, the action of ye man is good and
cunningly done, but the cutting of the saw is after his nature. So likewise
God moves these evil instruments to working, and by his common influence
given to all creatures, suffers them not to be idle, but he changes not
their nature. Wherefore their operation, is a fruit Gods actio^ is good.
convenient for their corrupted nature, but yet there is no fault in Gods
mouinge.

Here have you now, how God works all things, in all men both good and bad.
But now let us go to the induration of them, that be evil. Thus is it.
First, they be evil by nature, and can abide nothing that is good, nor yet
suffer any good to be done. Wherefore when God the author of goodness, does
any thing, or says any thing unto them, then are they more, and more, sorer,
and sorer contrary unto God, and to all his works, for of their nature they
are so corrupted, and can not agree to the will of God, nor to any thing that
is good, but when it is offered them either in word, or deed, the^ blaspheme
they, then withstand they with all their might, with all their power, then are
they provoked of their corrupted nature to more mischief, and more, and always
harder and harder: As for As yt faithful take profit by the hearing of the
word of God, so the wicked and unfaith full take hurt thereby.
an example, when the blessed word of God is preached unto them, that be
wicked, to whom God has given no grace to receive it, then are they nothing
amended, but more indurated, and always harder and harder. And the more yt
word of God is preached, the more obstinate are they, and the more mischief
intend they.

Then all their study, then all their wisdom, then all their labor, then all
their might, then all their power, then all their craft, and subtlety, then
all their friends, that they can make in heaven and in earth is nothing else but
to oppress the word of God: yea and they think all to little, for yt more it
is preached the more they grudge, and the woodder be they. After this manner
was the heart of Pharao indurated, when that the word of God was declared unto
him by Moses, and he had no grace to receive it: then the more that Moses
labored in the word, the more sturdyer was he in withstandyng of it, and
always harder and harder.

This is also evidently seen in the corrupt nature of man, for the more a
thing is forbidden him, the more desires he to do it. But what need me to
go into Egypt to fetch an example to prove this? Look of mine own
countrymen, if they be not openly indurated and so blinded, that no man is
able to defend them by any reason, or law, and therefore they take them selves
to violence and oppression, as Pharao did, which be the right signs, and
tokens of induration. For the more yt word of God is preached, and the verity
is declared unto them the more sturdyer, and obstinate be they against it. And
all their study, all their wits, all their counsels, all their craft, and
mischief with all glosinges and lyinges, and with blasphemyng of God and his
preachers, is nothing else but to keep yt word of God under, and to withstand
that verity, which they know in their conscience must needs go forth,
though all the world say nay. And therefore will they hear no man, nor reason
with any man but even say as Pharao did, I will not let the people go^.

But if they were not indurated, and the very enemies unto the verity, they
would at the lest ways hear their poor brethren of charity, and know what
they could say, and if they could prove their saying to be true: then if
they had yt love of ye verity, as they have but ye shadow, they would give
inmortall thanks to god, and with great meekenes, and with a low spirit,
receive the heavenly verity, and thank their brethren heartily, that they
warned them of such a damnable way, now in good time and season. But there is
no love to the verity, nor yet fear of God, nor regard to the danger of
their souls. And why? For they be children of induration and of blasphe my.
And therefore the more it is preached, the more are they obstinate. This is the
very induration, that God works in men's hearts, whereby they be the children
of darkness. Therefore let us pray instantly to God, to mollify: our hard
hearts, for Christ's dear blood sake.

Amen.
That it is lawful for all manner of men to read the holy Scripture.
HOw can Antichrist be better known, then by this token, that he condemns
Scriptures, and makes it heresy and high treason against the kings grace for
lay men to read holy scripture. As though it were alonely a possession and an
heritage of certain men that be marked alonely with exterior signs, and the
truth to say with the token of the beast: as with shaue^ crowns, long gowns
The Pope and his clergy will not allow yt scripture to be in yt mother and
vulgar tongue of yt people.
and baners about their necks. They that have these tokens be the heirs of
holy Scriptures, and may read it at their pleasure, though they understand as
much as a Popingaye. But holy Scripture, that is sent us from heaven, yea and
that by the son of God, to destroy all heresies: this holy scripture shall
engender in lay men heresy: If this be not the doctrine of Antichrist, I know
not his doctrine. Tell me what can be more contrary to Christ, then by
violence to oppress the scriptures, and to condemn them as unlawful, yea and
as heresy, for certain men to read, and to say that there be certain
secrettes in them that belong not for lay me^ to know. And that this thing
shall not be denyde (for I know they be slipper that I have to do with, and
there is no hold of them) therefore will I recite an open act that all the
world does remember.

My Lord of London openly at Paul's This was Bishop Stokesley.
cross was not ashamed with intolerable blasphemes to condemn the holy
testament of Christ Jesus having A common practice of Prelates to deface the
scriptures.
for him, but a damnable color and and a deadly reason of the devil, that
was, how there were in the translation so many heresies, that all yt world
knows that it was abominable and and a deadly lie, though it were a lordly
lie. But such probations does God all ways let them have, that be against his
holy veretye. But let us grant that that translation was so false. Why did not
you there take upon The clergy were more willing to find fault with the
translating of the Scripture then to amend it.
you openly for to amend it and to set forth truly the holy testament of
Christ. You must needs grant that there is an holy testament of his in earth
(except you will deny Christ as I doubt not but that you will in effect)
Wheare is it? Why have we it not? If that wear not it? Why do not you set yt
very true testament out. You were ready to condemn an other W. Tyndal
man's faithful labor and dilygence: but you had no charytie to amend it. You
think always to disceaue the world with your holy hypocrisy. Men be not so
blind but that they can well indge, If you had condemned that testament all
only because of errors, yet at yt least ways you should both of charity,
and also of duty have set forth the true text, and then would men have
thought, yt you condemned the other by the reason of errors. But men may now
euydently see, yt you did not condemn it for errors sakes, (For how should
they judge errors that be so unlearned) but all only because that the
verity was there in, yt which you could The only cause why the Scriptures
were condemned by the Bishops.
not abide that men should know: and that did the process of your sermon and
also your tyranny that does follow will prove. But my Lord I say to you, and to
all yours if you do not amend it shall be to your eueralsting damnacyon: for
God will not take this rebuke at your hand. Remember that he has sworn (by
the mouth of his Esaias. 61.
Prophet) by his right hand, and by the might of his strength, that he will
defend this cause. Be not these lordly words, of the eternal God, think you
to make him forsworn? Remember how the holy ghost threatyneth you in an other
place saying, if a man Hebr. 10.
did despise the law of Moses, he must without any mercy dye. How much more
are they worthy of punishment, that do tread the son of God vederneath
their feet, and despise the blood of his testament. How think you is not this
openly against you, that condemn not all only Christ, but also his blessed
word, and all that longs to him, Take away Christ's word, and what
remains beehynde of Christ? nothing at all. I The words of God was first
written to all nations and people, and not to priests only.
pray you my Lord to whom was this word first preached? to whom was this
written? all only to priests and not unto lay men? yea was it not written to
all the world? yes truly. Whereby will you convert a Turk or an Infidel,
not by holy Scripture? When they be converted, what will you learn them? what
will you geeue them to read, any other thing then holy Scripture? I think
nay. Now will you make your own countrymen, your own citizens, your own
subjects, yea your own brethren, redeemed with Christ's blessed blood, worsse
then Jews and Infidels? But there is no reason, nor no brotherhod, nor no
Christen charity that can move you, or that can help you, for you are so
blinded and so obstinate against Christ, that you had rather all the world
should perish, then his doctrine should be brought to light: but I do
promise you, if God do spare me life, and geeue me grace, I shall so set it
out, if you do not revoke it, that it shall be to your utter shame and
confusion: find the best remedy that you can. I do believe steadfastly, that
god is mightier then you: and I do reckon The Bishops worse then the great
Turk.
and faithfully believe, that you are ten times worsse then the great Turk:
for he regards no more but rule and dominion in this world: and you are not
therewyth content, but you will also rule over men's consconsciences, yea and
oppress Christ and his holy word, and blaspheme and condemn his word. Was
it A worship full counsel of an vnpreachyng Prelate.
not a holy connsell of the Chaunceler of London, to counsel a certain
merchant to buy Robyn hoode for his servants to read? What should they do
with vitas patrum, and with books of holy Scripture? Also the same Chauncelour
said to an other man: what find thou in the Gospel but a story? what good
can thou take there out.

O Lord God where art thou? why The earnest zeal of Doctor Barnes.
sleep thou? why suffer thou this blasphemy. Thou have defended thy
Prophets with wild fire from heaven, and will thou suffer thy only fonne and
thy heavenly word, thus to be despised, and to be reckened but as a story of
Robin hoode. Rise up good Lord. Rise up, thy enemies do prevail. Thy enemies
do multiplye, show thy power, defend thy glory. It is thy contumely and not
ours, what have we to do with it but alonely to thy glory. Revenge this cause
or thy enemies shall reckon it not to be thy cause. O thou eternal God
though our sins have deserved this, yet look on thy name, yet look on thy
verity. See how thou art mocked. See how thou art blasphemed, yea and that by
them, that have taken on them to defend thy glory. But now heavenly father,
seeing that thou have, so suffered it: yet for the glory of thy name, give some
man strength to defend it, or else shall thou be clearly taken out of the
hearts of all men. Wherefore most gracious Lord, of thy mercy and grace I
beseech thee, that I may have the strength to defend thy godly word to thy
glory and honor, and to the utter confusion of thy mortal enemies. Help good
Lord help, and I shall not fear a thousand of thine enemies. In thy name
will I begin to defend this cause.

First comes thy faithful servant Doctor Barnes most earnestly defe^deth
Christ's cause.
Moses, true and just in all thy works, and he commands faithfully and
truly, with great threatenings that man, woman and child should diligently read
thy holy word: saying. Set your hearts on all my words the which that I do
testify unto you this day, that you may command them unto your children, to
keep, to do, and to fulfill all things that be written in the book of this
law. Mark how he commanded them, to learn their children all things that
be written in this book, and so to learn the^ that Deuteronomy. 32.
they might keep and fulfill all things that were written in yt book: Moses
made nothing of secretnes, and will you make secrets therein? how shall men
fulfill those words that they know not. How can men know the very true way
of God and have not the word of God: is not all our knowledge therein? The
Prophet says, thy word is a lantern unto my feet and a light unto my paths.
He calls it a lantern Psalm. 118.
and light, yea and that unto all men: and you call it but a story, darkness,
and a thing of secretnes, yea and occasion of heresy, how can the occasion of
darkness give light, how can a lantern be a thing of secretnes, how can the
verity of God be occasion of heresy? The holy Prophet says, blessed Psalm. 1.
is the man that sets his delectation The Pope and Christ are contrary.
in the will of God, and his meditation in Gods law night and day. Here says
the spirit of God, that men be blessed, that study the word of God: and you
say that men be heretics for studying of it. How does the spirit of God and
you agree?

Also S. Paul commands us to Ephesians. 6.
receive the helmet of health, and the sword of the spirit, the which is the
word of God. I pray you to whom does he here speak? to Priests only? How
many of your Priests did he know? yea was not this Epistle written to the
whole Church of the Ephesians? And did not they read it? were not they lay
men: and why shall not our lay men read, that they red? Moreover does not Paul
call it the sword of the spirit: is it not lawful for lay men to have the
spirit of God? Or is the spirit of God not free but bound alonely to you. Also
S. John A godly saying of S. Ihon.
says, if any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house nor yet salute him. Here the holy ghost would we should have no
other doctrine, but holy scripture: and you will take it alonely from us.
Furthermore this was written unto a woman and to her children and you will yt
no other man, wife nor child shall read it. But if we should receive your
Priests into our houses, after this rule: I think we should not be greatly
co^bered with them, for their are few of them that have this word. Also our M.
Christ says unto the pharesies, search you scriptures, for in them you think
to have eternal life. Our Master sent the Pharisees to The Pharisees judged
better of the scriptures of God, then our Bishops did.
scriptures, and you forbid Christen men to read them: who had a worse sprite
then they? and yet they judged better of holy scriptures the^ you do. For they
judged to have life in the^, and you judge to have heresies in the^: so that
you be ten times worse to scriptures, the^ ever were they. Also Paul says,
all scripture given by insperation 1. Tim. 3.
of God is profitable to teach, to improoue, to inform, io enstruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, and prepared unto all good
works. You will not deny but but scripture is given us of God? Ergo it
follows. etc. S. Paul says it is profitable to learn with: and you say that
it is dawnable and good to learn herises with. S. Paul says it is good to
improoue Papists and S. Paul are contrary.
heresies, and you say it engendereth heresies. S. Paul says it is good to
inform, and to instruct righteousness: and you say to inform heresies. S.
Paul says that the man of God may be perfect by it, and you say that the
Priests al only shall have it, so that you play overthwart with. S. Paul in
all things. Also S. Paul says, you may all interpretate scripture, one by
one, that all men may learn, and all men may have comfort, but let your wynes
keep silence in the congregation. Mark how that all men may prophesye: which
S. Augustine does declare, for interpretating Scriptures. Therefore, it
belongs not all only to priests. Also he says that women must hold their
peace, which he need not to command if they were unlearned.

Furthermore he will that women shall learn of their husbands at home: How
shall their husbands learn them if they be unlearned themselves? Also S.
Paul gives testimony of 2. Tim. 3.
Tymothy that he was learned in holy scriptures, from his childhode, the which
were able to instruct him unto salvation, by faith that is in Christ Jesus. Here
you not how Tymothe was learned in holy scriptures before he was either
priest or bishop, yea being but a child? the which as S. Paul says, wear
able to enstruct him, and you say they be able to condemn me^. Is not this
clean contrary against S. Paul: are you not ashamed? What works shall
Antichrist do more contrary to Christ the^ these be? let all christian One of
the chiefest works of Antichrist is to condemn the scriutures of God.
men write the deeds of Antechrist and they must all agree in this that he
shall condemn scripture. But that shall be not do, without some color of
right and of holiness: and you condemn it having no color, nor no shadow of
holiness, but all only reason of fleshlynes, and of stark madness. Think you
if the great Turk would receive such reasons as yours be, yea and a great
deal better against his Mahomet, that he could reign so long as he has
done.

Nay doubtless, and yet you look to be allowed against Christ, the right son
of God (yea and that of Christen men) which could not be hard against mahomet.

Also our M. Christ commands his Apostles that they should preach y^ Mar.
vlt. Mat. vlt.
Gospel unto all creatures, and as Matthew says, that they should teach me^ to
keep all manner of things that he has commanded them: Mark that the
Gospel, must be preached to all manner of men not to priests only, the
Apostles must also learn to keep all things of the Gospel, which they can
not do without they know them no if these things that the Apostles: did
learn should engender or be any occasion of heresies, then the holy Apostles
were occasion (by their doctrine) of heresies. Yea and that at the
commandment of our M. Christ, what need the Apostles to learn us any thing
that might be occasion of heresy? were we not in heresy before they came?
were we not all disposed of our nature unto all manner of mischief? and yet
after your learning they come and learn that thing that is occasion of
heresy. But of your The Papists are blasphemers of Gods heavenly word.
conscience, are you not ashamed, thus damnably to blaspheme the heavenly word
of God? thus shamefully to condemn Gods word? thus presumptuously to
vndertreade the gift of ye holy ghost? yea and that under the pretense of
holiness, and of Christendom, as though you did favor Christ. Will you make
Christ an auctor of heresy, and that under the name of holiness: will you by
your holiness, and your damnable hipocresye, condemn our M. Christ, the auctor
of all goodness? But brieflye if you would teach nothing, but that which our M.
Christ has left to be taught, we should not have so many heretykes as we
have. For now men be no heretykes for speking against Scripture (for you
grant that men speak scripture) but for speaking against your law: for ye
cause be they made heretykes, and by ye be they proved heretykes. Now let
every Christen man Judge in his conscience if this be right or lawful. Is not
this a merueilous thing, let a man live in fornication, in whoredom in theft,
in murder, drunkenness, in extortyon, in bribery, briefly in all manner of
mischyfe, and you will have nothing to do with the^, you will scarsly reprove
him: yea he shall be a great officer underneath you, and greatly in your
favor. But let a man come and Papists abide the true preachers of the Gospel.
preach ye very true Gospel of Christ, and thereby reprove your damnable
lyuy^g, and the^ beegynneth he to be an heretycke, and it shall cost you
great labor, if you make him not an heretyke in deed. And yet have you
nothing that you can reprove in him as concerning his living, but all only
that he preaches the Gospel. Is not this a merueilous heretyke? whose living
you must needs grant to be good. And also you can not prove, but that his
learning is of Christ: but all only that it pleases you not: no you dare not
take in hand to prove it false but all only by vyol^ce you will condemn it.
Think you that God will thus suffer? remember what he says by the holy
Prophet: Thou have reproved Psalm. 9.
the unfaithful people, and have destroyed the wicked, and taken away their
name for ever. The Lord has prepared his trone of Judgment, doubt you not but
he shall shortly reprove you. His trone is set, and to the Judgment must you
come, where you shall never be able to defend this cause, but you must perish
for ever. But here will you say that you preach the Gospel to the people, and
that is inongh: for they need not to have it in English. I answer, I pray
you when was there any law that ever men were bound to keep, but that it was
given them in wrighting? I will not say that you do not teach them the right
Gospel, for you know it not. But how are they able to bear away The
evangelists and Apostles did not only preach, but also wrote the Scripture
that all me^ might read it.
that thing ye they do but hear? And if they may hear it of you, why may
they not also read it? But look on S. Luke that wrote his Gospel that men
might know for a certain, those things that they were informed of.

Moreover why did y^ Apostle write yea and that unto lay men, seeing that they
were so diligent in preaching I dare boldly say as you be* But let us see how
lay men were forbidden to read holy Scripture in the Apostles Acts. 17.
time? The noblest of Thessalonia, which received the word, searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things that Paul preached were so or not,
here have you plain that lay men searched Scriptures to know whether Paul's
doctrine were true or not, and also how they read daily Scriptures. And now
come you and say that lay men shall read no Scriptures but alonely receive the^
of your Papists preach lies.
preaching? What if you preach lies (as it will be proved to your face that
you do) shall it not be lawful for them to search Scriptures, but to learn
your lies?

Here will I recite how a great prelate of Christ Church (the first letter of
his name is Doct. Allen) did interpretate Dect. Alen expounds Scripture.
and declare certain places of Scripture, to the ghostly instruction of
Christ's Church as all men may judge.

The first place was this a three fold cable is hard to break, by this three
fold cable, he understood, the Reverent father in God my Lord Cardinal. The
first fold was, that he was A Popish Doctors interpretation.
an Englishma^ borne, the which was a strong thing and hard to withstand. The
second fold was that he was Legate and that not after the common manner, but
Legatus a latere, this is spro^g out of the blessed side of our holy father the
pope. This was a strong fold and could not be lightly broken. The third sold,
he was a Lord and that of the kings counsel. This was a strong A foolish tale
of a tubbe.
fold, and all these three together did make so strong a cable that no man
within the Realm might break it or withstand it. I was sore afraid that he
should have reckened the noble and the royal blood, that this threefolde cable
did spryng out of, then had it been so strong, that the strongest Ox in the
butchers stall could not break it. This exposition did I here and sat by him,
therefore I can testify it the better.

The second Scripture was this from Syon shall come out a law, and The
Papisticall and vain doctrine of Papists.
the word of God from Jerusalem. This did he expound on this manner. The
commandment of the most reverent father in God Lord Legate, is come from his
high Palace, and from his noble grace hither unto you.

The third Scripture, was this Sumite Psalmum and date tympanu^, this did he
expound on this manner, I have done my visitatio^, now give me my money. How
think you by this holy Doctor, and this Prelate of Christ's Church has he
not well declared holy Scripture, is he not worthy to be beleeured? What
reason were it that lay men should search Scriptures, then might they
reprove this noble prelate? what order ware that? It were right if he were
well served ye he had a threefold balter to stretche Authorities to prove
that the scriptures ought to be in the mother toungue.
him in. But by such doctors as these be, must the poor people be ruled and
if they will search for the verity them selves, then must they be heretics
because they will not believe these holy fathers. But let us proceed in our
matter against these blasphemers of Gods word: Priscila and Aquila did expound
Acts. 18.
unto Apollo which was a great learned man y^ perfect understanding of
scriptures. These were lay persons and yet were they so learned in scriptures
yt they were able to teach a great Doctor. And now lay men may not read
Scriptures. This was allowed by Peter, and Paul. But their successors will
condemn it as heresy.

Also Eunuchs that was the treasurer Act. 8.
unto the Queen of the Ethiopians did read Esaias the Prophet. The which he
understood not, till God sent him Philip to declare it unto him. This was a lay
man, and also an infidel and yet was not forbidden of God to read Scriptures.
But rather helped to the understanding of them and now will you forbid Christen
me^, to read holy Scriptures, that are sworn unto them, yea and also to
defend them unto death.

Also S. Paul says. Let the word Collos. 3.
of God dwell in you plenteously. S. Paul would that lay men should learn
the word of God, yea and that plenteously. And you command that they shall
have nothing of it. How stands your nothing with Saint Paul's abundance.
Abundantly, and nothing, be far a sunder. But thus do you always agree
with S. Paul and with holy Scripture. And if you would say plainly in words
that your deeds do declare openly, then were we in no The Pope and his
Clergy are the very ^lntechristes.
doubt of you: for all y^ world would take you, as you be taken before God,
that is, for the Antichrists that the world looks for. Nevertheless, doubt
you not, but God shall declare it openly at his time, to your utter confusion
and damnation. For doubt less you neither hold with Christ, with his holy
doctors, nor yet with your own law, where they be against you: but all
these must be expounded and wroonge unto your carnal purpose, or else you make
it heresy. But think you that the father of heaven (which for the great
tender love, that he had to man's soul, sent his only son to redeem it,
and also to geeue it a law to live by, out of his own mouth) shall thus
suffer it lost thorough your hypocrisy? and his godly word to be over
frodden for the mayntaynyng of your worldly glory? Nay doubtless, for if it were
possible that he could more regard your pomp and pride, then man's soul and
his godly word: yet were it impossible that ever he should so despise the
sweet blood of his blessed son sweet Jesus. Wherefore look upon your
charge.

But to our purpose, S. Augustine August. ad fratres. s. 3^.
is openly against you in these words. My brethren, read holy Scripture in the
which you shall find what you ought to hold, and what you ought to fly.
What is a man reputed without learning? what is he? Is he not a sheep or a
Goat? Is he not an Ox or an Ass? Is he any better the^ an Horse or a
Mule, the which has no understanding. etc.

Here S. Augustine moves men to read holy Scripture: and you command them
not to read it. S. Augustine says: they shall know in them what to do, and
what not to do, and you say they shall learn nothing therout but heresies, S.
Augustine says, a man without learning of scriptures, is no better then a
brute beast: are not you good fathers that will make all your children no
better the^ beasts? Also Athanasius: If thou will that In epis. ad Ephesians. c.
6.
thy children shall be obedient unto thee, use them to the words of God. But
thou shall not say that it beelongeth alonely to religious men to study
Scriptures: but rather it beelongeth to every Christen man, and specially unto
him that is wrapped in the businesses of this world: and so much Scriptures
reach the commandments of God.
the more, because he has more need of help, for he is wrapped in y^
troubles of this world: therefore it is greatly to thy profit that thy
children should both hear and also read holy Scriptures, for of them shall
they learn this commandment: Honor thy father and thy mother. etc.

These words be plain enough against you, they need no exposition: And the
doctor is of auctority, wherefore answer you to him. Also Chrysostom In Genesis
(...). 9. ho 28.
that was a Bishop as well as you be, condemns your sentence openly, saying:
I beeseeche you that A notable saying of S. Chrysostom.
you will oftentimes come hither, and that you will diligently hear the lesson
of holy Scripture, and not alonely when you be here, but also take in your
hands when you are at home the godly Bibles, and receive the thing therein
with great study, for thereby shall you have great advantage. etc.

These words be so plain, that I can add nothing to them, would you that
we should take you for bishops, and for holy fathers, that be so openly
against Scripture, and so centrary to holy doctors? That will I never do
while I live. I will never look to see other Antichrists then you, and so
will I take you, till I see almighty God convert you. Also the same doctor
says. Which of you all that be here, (if it were required) could say one
Psalm without the I^ Mat. c. (...) hom. 2.
book, or any other part of holy scripture, not one doubtless. But this is not
alonely the worste, but that you be so slow and so remiss unto spiritual
things, and unto deuillishnesse you are hotter then any fire, but men will
defend this mischief, with this excuse, I am no religious man, I have a wife
and children, and a house to care for. This is ye excuse wherewith The
scripture is meet to be known of all states and sorts of people.
you do (as it were with a pestilence) corrupt all things: for you do reckon
that the study of holy Scripture beelongeth alonely unto religious men, when
they be much more necessary unto you then unto them. etc.

Here may you see that your damnable institution was in the hearts of men in
Chrisostomes days, and how they would read no scriptures: but you see he
condemns it, and calls it a pestilence, and will you now bring it in
again? If you had but a lousie statute of your own against me, or an other
man, you would call us hetikes. But you neither regard Christ's holy word,
nor holy Doctors, nor yet any other thing ye is against you. But let us see
what your own law says to this: If Christ (as Paul Di. 38. Si iuxta.
says) be the power and the wisdom of God, the^ to be ignorant in
scriptures, is as much as to be ignorant of Christ. etc. Here have you
plainly that to take away scriptures from lay men, is as much as to take away
Christ from them, the which no doubt but that you do inte^de in your hearts to
do, and that thing God knows, and your works do declare it, the which God
shall aduenge full straightly over you. Also in an other place. I will set my
meditation in thy iustifications, 7. Sinod. c. Omnes et. d^. 38.
and I will not forgette thy words, the which thing is exceeding good for all
Christen men to observe and keep. etc.

Here is a counsel of your own that has admitted that all Christen The
readyng of the Scripture allowed by a counsel.
men shall study Scripture. And will you now condemn it? Is there neither
Scripture of God, nor practice of Christian men, nor exposition of Doctors, nor
your own law, nor yet any statute of counsels that will hold against you? You
be marvelous giantes, how shall a man behave him self to handle with you? it
is not possible to overcome you, for you will admit nothing that is against
you. But yet will I not so leave you, but I will first declare it manifestly, ye
you be contrary to Christ, and to all holy doctors. S. Hierome, reprooueth
you very sore in these words. O Paula and Eustochium, if there be any thing
in this In prohe. In Epist. ad Ephesians. Li. 1.
life that does preserve a wise man and does persuade him to abide with a good
will in the oppressions and the thraldomes of the world, I do recke^ that
specially it is the meditations and the study of holy scripture, seeing that we
do differ from other creatures specially in that that we be reasonable and
in that that we can speak: now is reason and all manner of words contained in
godly Scripture, whereby that we may learn to know God and also the cause
wherefore we be created. Wherefore I do sore marvel, y^ there be certain
men the which give the^ selves, to slouthfulnes, and sluggishnes and will not
learn those things, What benefits we may receive by readyng of Scripture.
that be good, but reckon those men worthy to be reproved, that have that
good mind. etc.

Mark how that this was written to two women that were learned. Also he
reckeneth nothing better, then to study holy scriptures, he also marueileth,
that certain will neither study Scriptures them selves nor yet let other me^
study the^. It is well known, that these words prick no men but you, and ye
be so slothful and so given to voluptuousnes, that you your selves will not
study Scriptures nor yet suffer other me^ to study them: but if you do study
them, it is to deceive your simple and poor brother there by, and to maintain
your abominable living, with wrostyng and wryngyng of them: other profit
comes there none of your study, as all the world knows. For you may not
preach, but when you have damnably condemned Christ's blessed word or else by
violence, made some of your poor brethren heretics: then come you with all
your gorgious estate, pomp and pride, to out face Christ and your simple
brother, with your outward damnable pride before the face The great arrogance,
pride and tyranny that is in Papists.
of the world. But my Lords, leave of your fasing and your brasing: for our
Lord whose cause we defend against you, will at length not be out faced.
Remember how the holy ghost prays against you saying: judge them Lord, Psalm.
5.
that they may fall from their cogitations: expel them Lord for they have
provoked thee: doubt you not but this holy spirit will prevail against you,
though God suffer you for a season, yet has he till this day defended him
self and his godly words against all the proud crakyngs of the world: and
think you that he will now take a fall at your hand? nay nay, he shall first
thrust you out headlonge that all the world shall take example by you: this is
my believe. For that word that you have condemned does thus learn me. Wherefore
if you do not revoke the condemnation of the new Testament, and ordeine that
all Christen men may read holy Scripture, you shall have the greatest shame that
ever men had in this world: for you are never able to defend it by any means,
nor by any power ye is in earth. And if all power in earth will withstand it,
he shall rather bring them all to dust and raise up of stones new rulers. You
worms meat, you stinking car Doctor Barnes is vehement.
rion, you nourishment of hell fire, how dare, you thus presume against your
God omnipotent? whether will you fly to avoid his danger. Heaven and earth,
water and fire, sun, moon, and stars, saints and angels, man and child,
be against you and hold you accursed. What though the devil laugh on you for
a season. Remember the end, but God give you his grace, that I lose not my
labor about you.

But now let me assoyle your carnal The Papists first reason to prove that
lay men ought not to read Scriptures.
reasons that you bring for you. The first is this, evil men do take an
occasion of heresy out of scriptures Wherefore it is best they have it not. I
answer likewise, good men do take an occasion of goodness there of Ergo, the
people ought to have it: but will you condemn all things where by men do
take occasion of evil? The^ must you first put out your own eyes for by them,
take you occasion to see many idle things: you must also destroy your hands,
your feet, your tongue, and all that you have for these do you mysuse very
often, you must also destroy your own hearts whereby you have not alonely
occasion of evil, but you do think evil in very deed: you must also destroy
all fair women, for of them take you sore occasions of evil: you must also
burn all your goods and destroy all your riches, for of the^ men take
occasion to be thieves Evil men will take occasion of evil of every good
thing.
and you to be proud: you must also destroy all wynes, for of the^ men take
occasion to be dro^ke^, you must destroy all meats, for they geeue me^
occasion of gluttony, yea you must destroy the mercy of God, of the which
evil men take boldenes in their myschief. Briefly what is there so good a
thing but that evil me^ can take an occasion of evil, yea and that of Christ
him self, as Saint Paul says which unto 1. Cor. 1.
the Jews is offense, and unto the Gentyls occasion of folyshnes: and yet for all this you may not destroy Christ but he must remain still, and so likewise
the Gospel: for though that the evil men (which will never be good) receive
of it occasion of evil: yet there be many thousands ye receive there by their
salvation.

Now because the spider gathers poyso^ of ye good herbs, it were no reason
therefore to destroy al good herbs. An other of your reasons: three be
certain Math. 13.
se^tences in scripture y^ do not belong for every man to know, as our An
other reason of the Papists.
M. Christ says, unto you it is given to know, the mysteries of the kingdom
of heaven, unto them it is not given. I answer, whom mean you when you say,
unto you it is given: if you mean that Apostles and all only there
successors, then may not you read holy scripture, for you be not the
successors of ye Apostles, by my Lord of Rochesters auctorytie, but if you
mean the Christian people, that have y^ spirit of God, as our M. Christ meant,
then be you excluded, for you have not the sprite of God as ye effect does
declare, therefore you may not read scriptures. Mark also that our master
says, unto you it is given, as who says if it were not given you, you should
no more have it then other men.

Now how can you prove that the understanding of scripture is given to you* but
now to ye text: our Master Christ speaks hear of the sprituall, and the
right understanding of holy scriptures, which is the gift of God only, and he
speaks not of studying* or reading of holy scripture: for you have in the
same place, how that What is meant by this saying, to you, is given the true
vnderstyng and interpretation of scriptures.
many did follow him, and hear his preaching, but yet they understood him
not. Therefore this text makes directly against you, and your works do
declare that you be the hearers and readers of the word of God, but the
understanding is not given you. But now wyllmy Lord of Rochester say that you
have the very understanding as holy doctors had it, for though that scriptures
in themselves and of their own nature be plainest, and best to be known,
yet be ye holy doctors playnest unto us: wherefore he that will understand
scripture must first learn to understand the doctors, and they shall bring him
to the true understanding of holy scripture, or else he must err. I answer:
O my Lord do you write this with a safe conscience? think you y^ you can
discharge your conscience before the dreadful face of Christ with this
triflyng distynction, Quedam sunt notiora nobis, et quedam notiora naturae, I
pray you if you will prove that God were wise, would you beegin to prove it at
your wisdom? if you would prove that God were alive, would you prove it by
that y^ you be alive? if you would persuade a man to believe that there is a
God, would you learn him, that he must needs believe it, because y^ there
be creatures? These things be best known unto you, and if you would prove
that a man has a true sense of Scriptures, will you prove it, by that that he
has the sense of the doctors? What if ye doctors had taken a false and a
contrary sense, (this case is possible) would you therefore say that the sense
which the man has taken out of scripture is false. But I pray you my Lord,
after this this rule, how could men understand scriptures, in Peter and Paul's
days when there wear no doctors. But after your own learning, that same
Scotus. 11. Sent. di. 3. q. 3.
science which must prove the princypelles of other sciences is first known
actualiter, and distinctly. Now be all the pryncipels of all other doctors
proved ^rew by holy scripture: therefore there is no saying nor exposition of
ho Scriptures must be first known and thereby you may judge the opinion of the
Doctors. whether they say right or not.
ly doctors yt can be perfectly known except that scripture be first known
this is your own dyuynitie you can not deny it, wherefore if you will prove
that you have the verytie you must prove it, because you have the sense of
holy scripture, and not the se^ce of holy doctors. But doubtless I have great
meruell, that my Lord of Rochester, is neither ashamed of man, nor yet afraid
of the vengeance of God y^ thus triflyth with holy scripture.

Besides this you have an other A third reason of the Papists.
bauld reason, the City of London has certain privileges and secret
counsels, it were no reason that all men should know them, this was my Lord of
Londons reason at Paul's cross, when he condemned the new Testament. I
answer my Lord: say of your conscience, did you not speak Cou^s^s are to be
kept secret, but the Scripture must be made known to all men.
these words to please my Lord the Mayor of London and his brethren? But I
pray you is this a like similitude of y^ certain counsels of me^, the which
must be kept secret because they be counsels: and of the holy scriptures the
which were brought into this world not to be* kept secret, but to be
preached openly, as our master Christ commands, preach the Mar. v^^.
Gospel to all creatures, hear you to all creatures, let these me^ have it
(for all these be of ye counsel) and keep you it from the residue.
Furthermore our master Christ says in an other place, that I have showed you
in secretnes, preach it on the tope of the house.

Also S. Paul says, the Gospel is Ti. 1. 2. Tim. 2.
declared openly through preaching and in an other place God have brought life
and immortality, unto light thorough the Gospel. Also our master calls it
the light of the world: now John. 3. Math. 5.
who will set (as he says) a light under a bushel, and not rather openly
that all me^ there by may be lightened. Wherefore my lord your similitude is
very far unlike: and if you were not a Lord, it were worthy to be despised.
But doubtless it may be well thought A foolish similitude made by Stokesley
Bishop of London.
that you were at a sore exigent, when you were compelled to prove this thing
with so ^auld a reason. Who would have looked for so simple a reason in so
earnest a matter of so wise a man, of so great a Doctor, of so worshipful a
father, and of the Bishop of London, yea and of him that is called an other
Solomon, notwithstanding such an haltyng similitude did he never learn in the
Proverbs of Solomon: but it had been a better similitude, of the kings
proclamation, which is proclaimed yt all men might know it and also keep it
and no man is bound to keep it, till it be proclaimed: likewise the Gospel
was given for to be proclaimed, and every man is bound to keep it. Wherefore
it must needs be proclaimed to every man, and unto you my Lord. I beseech
God that you may be one of them of whom it is spoken: To you is it given to
know the misteryes of God.

Amen.
That men's constitutions, which are not grounded in Scripture, bind not the
conscience of man under the pain of deadly sin.
There are two manner of powers.
TO this article we must note that there be two manner of ministers or powers:
one is a temporal power, the other is called a spiritual power: A temporal
power.
the te^porall power is committed of God to Kings, Dukes, Earls, Lords,
Barons, Judges, Majors, Shriues, and to all other ministers under the^, these
be they that have only the te^porall sword, The description of the temporal
power.
whereby they must order al ye commonwealth with all world ly things lo^gyng
thereunto, as ye disposition of these worldly goods, who shall be right owner
and who not, the probation of men's testamentes, the ordering of payments and
customs, the setting of all manner of taskes and forfaites, the correction of
all transgressions, whereby the common wealth, or any private person, is
disquieted or wronged: as correction of thieves, murderers, harlotes, baudes,
sclanderers, wranglers, extortioners, brybers, vserers, false buyers and
sellers, and of all other things whereunto beelongeth any outward orderyng,
or any corporal pain. In this power is the king chief and full ruler: all
other be ministers and servants, as Paul does declare, ^aying: let every
soul be subject and obedient unto the hye powers. etc.

Also S. Peter: be subject unto the Roma. 13. 1. Pet. 2.
king as unto the chief head, either unto rulers as unto the^ that are sent
of the king for the punishment of evil doers. Unto this power must we be
obedient in all things that pertain Roma. 13.
to the ministration of this present life and of the common wealth, not alonely
(as Paul says) for avoiding of punishment, but also for dischargyng of our
consciences: for this is ye will of God. So that if this power command
anything of tyranny against right and law (always provided that it repugne not
against the Gospel, nor destroy our faith) our charity must needs suffer
it: For as Paul says, charity suffers all thing. Also 1. Cor. 13.
our master Christ: If a man strike Math. 6.
thee on the one cheek, turn him the other, for he does exercise tyranny.
But over these worldly goods, and these present things, and over thy corporal
body, which Christen men do not alonely not regard, but despise it.
Nevertheless, if he command thee any thing against right, or do thee any
wrong. (As for an example cast thee in prison wrongfully) if thou can by any
reasonable and quiet means, without sedition, insurrectio^, A man wrongfully
imprisoned by a tyrant may in quiet manner make his escape.
or breakyng of the common peace save thy self, or avoid his tyranny, thou
may do it with good conscience. As if thou were in prison, if thou could
avoid without any sedition, thou may lawfully do it, and thy conscience is
free so doing, and thou dooste not sin, nor offend the law of God, as Paul
says: If thou may be 1. Cor. 7.
free use it: but in no wise (be it right or wrong) may thou make any
resistaunce with sword or with hand, but obey, except thou can avoid, as I
have showed thee. But if y^ cause Such as have made offenses to the common
weal ought not to break prison.
be right, lawful, or profitable to the common wealth, thou must obey, and
thou may not fly without sin. That men have fled from the tyranny and the
wrong of this power, we have it openly in diverse places of scriptures. As of
Elezy, that fled from the tyranny of the king of Siria. Also Helyas 4. King. 6.
3. King. 89.
fled from the tyranny of king Achas. Also S. Peter fled out of prison: And
Acts. 12. idem. 9. and. 14.
S. Paul out of the City of Damascum, and out of Iconium, as it is open in
the Acts of the Apostles. So that against this power (though thou have wrong)
may thou not make any corporal resistaunce: but alonely avoid by flying, or
else keep ye thing that is commanded thee. But if it be right, and to the
profit of the common wealth, thou must both fulfill it and also abide.

But now will it be inquired of me of this case: if it please y^ kings grace
to condemn the new testament in English, and to command that none of his
subjects shall have it under displeasure, whether they be bound to obey this
commandment or no? To this will I answer: That I do beeleeue, that our
most noble Prince has not forbidden that Christen What were to be done if the
king should forbid us the readyng of the Scripture.
men may have Christ's Testament, whether it be in latyne or English, French,
Douche, Greek, or Hebrew, for Christ's verity, is all one in all tongues. And
as his grace knows, it were very unreasonable that any man should either
counsel, or forbid his grace that he should know or read the Testament of
the most noble Prince his father, in the which is alouely geeue^ and promised
worldly goods, which as soon as they be geeuen, be ready to decay and to
perish: and if (I say) this be unreasonable and unright: how much more were
it unreasonable to take away from us our father of heavens testament, whose
legacy and promises do as far excel the legacies of the noble Prince his
father, as God does excel man. But what should I make many reasons, to prove
unto his grace that thing to be lawful, that the father of heaven has sent
us, from whom comes nothing but goodness. Yea, and it was not sent by man, by
Angel, or by Saint, but by the only son of God both God and man, and
diligently declared by him to all the world. Not unto the Pharesies alone, but
unto all manner of people, and that to the hour of death, and also thereof
took his death, and not yet so content, but sent his glorious Apostles to
declare and to learn this godly word thorough all the world. And because
the ministration of this word, required a greater strength then was in any
natural man, therefore also gave he them his eternal sprite, to establishe
them, to confirm them, and to make them strong in all things, that there
might be nothing desired, to the declaration and setting out of his word.

Now, who could find in his heart that is a true subject, and regards the
honor of our noble Prince, and the salvation of his soul, either to think
that his grace would condemn it, or else to move him to condemn that thing,
that comes from heaven, yea, and that from the father of heanen, and sent and
learned by his eternal son, which has sealed it with his most precious
blood, and also commanded his glorious Apostles to preach it, and confirmed
it with so many miracles, and did also geeue to the confirming and the writing
of it, the glorious consolatour of the holy Ghost. So that it is open, that the
father of heaven did not send this godly word with a small diligence, or as
though he cared not whether it should remain in earth or not. But so has
he declared this holy word, with such a prosses, that heaven, earth and hell,
should know y^ it is his word, and that it is his will, that all men should
have it, and that he would defend it, and be enemy unto all the^ that
would ouerpresse it. Wherefore let them that be cappitall enemies unto his
grace, both in heart and in deed, susspect that of his grace and move him unto
it, for doubtless I will never do it. For I dare boldly say, that the devil
of hell which is enemy unto his grace, both of body and soul will move him
unto no other thing but alonely so to condemn Gods word: and this thing does
his grace know well, and therefore I doubt not but that he has and also will
avoid the danger thereof. Nevertheless, it may please God to take so great
ve^geau^ce for our abominable sins that after his graces days, he may
send us such a tyrant, that shall not alonely forbid the New Testament: but
also all things that may be to the honor of God: yea, and that paraduenture
under such a co^llour of Gods name, that all men shall reckon none other, but
that he is Gods friend.

This will be a great scourge, and an intolerable plague, the father of
heaven of his infinite mercy defend us from such a terrible vengeance. For it
is the greatest plague that can come in earth (as S. Paul does declare Roma. 1.
to the Romans) when that Gods verity is condemned in Gods name, and me^ be
so blind that they can not perceive it, for they be geeue^ into a perverse
se^ce. This plague never comes, but it is a toke^ of everlasting reprobatio^.
Our most merciful redeemer Christ Jesus, defend us from it, Ame^. But if it
come that we must needs suffer this plague, how shall Christen men use
themselves to this Prince, that will so condemn Gods word? My Lords the
Bishops would depose him with short deliberation, and make no conscience of
it. They have deposed Princes for lesser causes the^ this is a great deal. But
against them will I always lay Christ's fact, and his holy Apostles, and the
word of God, whom Christen men must alonely follow. Therefore, the kings
commanndement, Note here what is to be done if the king do sorbid the
Scripture ^o be read of his subjects.
must be considered on this manner: If the king forbid the new Testament, or
any of Christ's Sacraments, or the preaching of the word of God, or any other
thing that is against Christ under a temporal pain, or else under ye pain of
death: men shall first make faithful prayers to God, and then diligent
intercession unto ye kings grace with all due subjection, that his grace
would relealse that commandment. If he will not do it, they shall keep
their Testament, Subjects must obey, but here is showed in what sort and
manner.
with all other ordinance of Christ, and let the king exercise his tyranny (if
they can not flee) and in no wise, under the pain of damnation shall they
withstand him with violence, but suffer patiently all the tyranny that he
lays on them both in their bodies and goods, and leave the vengeance of it
unto their heavenly father which has a scorge to tame those bedlames with,
when he sees his time. But in no wise shall they resist violently, neither
shall they deny Christ's verity, nor yet forsake it before the Prince, lest
they run in the danger of these words: he that denies me and my word
before men, I shall deny him before my father in heaven. And let not men
regard this matter lightly, and think that they may geeue up their
testamentes, and yet not deny Christ. For what so ever he be that geeueth up
his Testament, as a thing worthy to be condemned, he does before God deny
Christ, though his testament be peradventure (he not knowing) false and
untruly Printed, or untruly translated: yet unto him is it a true testament,
and therefore shall he not deliver it to any that will condemn it as
unlawful. But this shall he do. If any man that is learned do find any
fault there in he shall be glad to amend that fault, but not to suffer in
any wise for that Note here how a Christian subject must show himself
obedient.
or for those faults the whole testament to be condemned as unlawful. For if
that should be suffered, then should we have no testament: for there is no
testament yt is so true, but either there be faults in deed, or else men by
cauilations may invent yt there be defaultes. For this dare I say boldly, that
the new testament in English, is ten times truer, then the old transtion in
Latin is, in the which be many places that do want whole sentences, and many
places, that no man ca^ defend without heresy, as this text. Non omnes
immutabimur. 1. Cor. 15. Math. 20. Act. 20. 1. Tim. 6.
Also this. Sedere ad dexteram meam vel sinistram non aest meum dare vobis. Also
these places want. Commorati sumus trogilij. Seiungere ab is qui huiusmodi
sunt, with many other places more, that no man can say but they be evidently
false: and yet we may not burn our books for all that, but keep them and
amend them. Neither shall they go about, to depose their Prince, as my Lords
the Bishops were wont to do, but they shall boldly confess, that they have
the verity, and will there by abide: and alonely shall they pray to their
heavenly father to change the heart of their Prince, that they may live
underneath him, after Christ's word, and in quietness, as Paul exhorts us
saying. 1. Tim. 2.
I exhort that prayers supplications, petitions, and geuyng of thanks, be
had for all men: for Kings, and for all that are in pre-eminence, that we may
live a quiet and a peaceable life in all goodness and honesty.

This shall men behave them selves toward their Prince and in no wise shall
they deny Christ's word, or grant to the burning of their testamentes: but
if the king will do it by violence they must suffer it but not obey to it by
agreement. This may be proved by ye examples of the Apostles when the hie
Priests of the temple commanded Peter and John, that they should no more
preach and teach Act. 4. and 5.
in the name of Jesus. But they made them answer it was more right to God is
to be obeyed before me^.
obey God then man. Also the Pharyses came and commanded our M. Christ, in
Herodes name, That he should depart from thence, or he would kill him: but
he would not obey, but made them answer to Herod with a great threatening:
Go tell the wolf beehold I cast out devils and I make Luke. 13
men whole this day and to morrow, and the third day am I consumed:
nevertheless I must continue this day to morrow and the next day etc. So ye
he left not the ministration of ye word neither for the kings pleasure nor
yet for fear of death.

Also we have openly, that the three children would not obey to the
commandment Daniell. 3.
of king Nabuchodonosor, but because it was against ye word of God. Likewise we
have an example where as the king Darius commanded Dan. 6.
that no man should ask any petytyon, either of God or of man within the space
of 30. days but of him only. Notwithstanding Daniell went into his house, and
thrice in a day made his prayers to God of Jerusalem, for the which thing he
was put into the den of Lions, the which he did obey as in suffering of the
pain, but not in consenting to the unright commandment, So that Christen men
are bound to obey in suffering the kings tyranny, but not in consenting to
his unlawful commandment: always having before their eyes the comfortable
saying of our M. Christ: Fear not them ye kill the body, which when they had
done they can no more do. Math. 10.
Also S. Peter, 1. Pet. 3.
happy are ye if you suffer for righteousness sake, nevertheless, fear not,
though they seem terrible unto you, neither be troubled, but sa^ctifie the
Lord God in your heart. God does wonderfully work to save and defend his poor
flock.
And let them not fear, but ye their father of heaven has care for them, and
shall deliver them, and also bring his godly word unto light when it shall
please his eternal will, against the which no tyrant is able to withstand.
But when the tyrants think themselves most sure of the victory, and be all
ready provided to burn Susanna, then shall he raise Dan. 13.
up a Daniell that shall caul again the sentence of the lecherous priests:
and when Joseph is sold into Egypt, and there cast in prison, then will he
make him Lord over all Egypt, yea, Gene. 37. and. 39.
and also over them that sold him. He brings also to pass that proud Hamon
(be he never so great in the kings favor) shall be hanged on his own
gallows, that he made for Mardocheus the Israelite. Also when Pharao has
commanded under pain of death to destroy all y^ me^ children of Israel. Then
ca^ he find the means to save Moses, yea and that on yt water: Exodus 2.
where as all yt power of Egypt could not save the king, yea and he nourished
him in the kings house, at the kings cost yea and by the kings daughter. Did
Pharao suppose this? or was there any counsel of Pharaos that could prevail
against this? was there any wisdom or tyranny in the earth that was able to
extinct Moses? nay verily. Furthermore when Israel has been in Egypt iiij. C.
years in great captivity and thraldom, yet against Pharaos will keeps he
his promise and delivers them, and makes water, fire, and earth to serve
the^: and when all Israel was in despair and Pharao the tyrant was ready to
suck blood, then showed our God his mighty power. What can Israel think when
he has the read Sea before him? And Pharao with all his might and power
after him, and of every side a great mountain? what hope has he by man's
might, by ma^s power, by man's wisdom, by man's policy, for to be delivered?
none at all. But before Isreal's carnall^tye all thing is in extreme
desperation.

But now you Princes that Judge the earth learn and take heed: here Psalm.
(...).
comes the God of Israel, whom all Egypt has despised, scorned mocked and
condemned, and shows his might where as nothing ca^ help but be only, and
where the tyrauntes reckon to be most sure of victordem, there brings he
all their malice to an end. And when Herod has Peter in prison fast bound in
cheynes, and Acts. 12.
of every side of him a soldier, and keepers set at the prison door every man
in his office watching that Peter shall not escape (for Herod intends the day
following to bring him forth to wonderyng and also to death.) Then against
Herodes will, above all his might, above all his wisdom and policy,
notwithstanding all the soldiers and gaylers of the prison, comes the power
of our eternal God and ledeth Peter through the first and the second ward, yea
and the brazen gate must wilfully open, and let Peter out, whom our Lord God
would deliver.

Shortly, what should I bring many examples to prove Gods power and to declare
how the truth of God and his children be always in persecution, but the end
is always glory unto them. Wherefore this one example, of our master Christ
shall be sufficient to stablish and to confirm all feeble hearts, and also to
mollify all stony hearts, and finally to confound, the violent tyranny of
mortal tyrau^tes which be but stubbles, hay and dust, and in a moment be
brought to a lump of stynkyng carryon. Consider our master Christ which is
the very Math. 27. and. 28.
true son of God, and God him self and yet is he crucified and put to
death, as a seditious person, as a malefactor, Christ is for ever to be set
before us for an example to comfort us in our persecution.
as a thief, as a traitor, yea and as an heretic: he is laid also in the
grave and a great stone before the door, and soldiers that were not of the
common sort, but of the Romans, he set diligently to keep the grave with
all the policy and wisdom that the bishops could devise, and all that he
should not rise up again according to his word: but all this could not help,
for the power of God would not be let, his verity could not be proved
false, his word could not be oppressed: but when the tyrauntes thought to
make their triumph of victory, the^ were they most ouerco^med. For it is
neither water nor fire, Sea nor land, heaven nor earth, death nor hell, that
ca^ let God to defend his children, or to bring forth his godly word to light,
and to keep his eternal promises. Therefore let Christen me^ not fear to
keep the word of God, and fast there by to abide, and not to deny it for any
tyranny: for the day shall come when it shall be greatly to their glory. And
Sodom, and Gomorra shall be more easily handled, the^ such Princes, that do
persecute the holy word of God.

Now is it clear made that we cannot resist this temporal power in no wise by
vi^le^c^^ but if we have wrong either we must do the thing that is commanded
us, or else fly, but if any thing be commanded us that is against We must
rather suffer per^ecution, then in any wise resist.
the word of God whereby our faith is hurt, that we should not do in any wise:
but rather suffer per secution and also death. But against this power goes not
our article, for it commands nothing as cons^^rning the conscience, but all
only as concerning the ordering of worldly things, and therefore, it
mynistreth a temporal pain over the body only and therewith is content.
Wherefore we will now speak of the other power which men call spiritual.

First here is to be noted that this is no power, nor none authority A
spiritual power.
worldly, but all only a ministration of the word of God and a spiritual
regiment, preaching the governing of the soul and the mynistration of ye
spirit, having nothing to do with the erterior Justice or righteousness of the
world, and therefore has it no power The spiritual power has no authority
to make laws to rule the world by.
by right and law to make any statutes or laws to order the world by, but all
only faithfully and truly to preach, and to minister the word of God there by
instructing the conscience of man, nothing addyng thereto, nor taking there
from: but as S. Paul says, to 2. Tim. 3.
abide in those things that they have learned, and that be committed unto
them, for. S. Paul (as he him self Roma. 16.
says) ^urst speak no other thing but those things which christ had wroght by
him. For he curses him be he man or Angel that preaches any other gospel,
Gala. 1.
then he had preached. Therefore the Prophet commands us that we should not
hear the words of those prophets which disceaue us, for Ierem. 23.
they speak visions of their own hearts and not out of y^ mouth of god, and
yet speak they in the name of God. Wherefore these men so long as they speak
only y^ word of God, so long are they to be heard, as Christ himself, after
ye saying, he ye hears Luke. 10. Math. 23.
you hereth me: also whatsoever they say unto you sytting in the chair of
Moses do it. On ye which text speaks S. Augustine, By syttyng in ye chair
Super Joan. Trac. 46.
is to understand the learning of the law of God, and therefore God does teach
by them, but if they will teach By the chair of Moses* is understand the law
of God which Moses delivered to the Jews.
their own doctrine hear it not, do it not, for such men seek that is
theirs and not Christ's. etc.

These words be plain against all them that preach any thing but the law of
God only. Wherefore if these mynysters will of tyranny, above the word of God,
make any law or statute, it must be considered after two manner of ways:
first whether it be openly and derectly against the word of God and to ye
destruction of ye faith, as that statute is whereby they have condemned the new
testament, and also forbidden certain men to preach the word of God, having
no true cause aganst them, but all only their malicious suspectio^: also ye
learning whereby they learn, that works do iustifye: moreover that statute
whereby they bind men under the pain of damnation to be assoyled of them.
These statutes I say with other like men are not bound for to obey neither of
charity (for here is faith hurt which gives no place to charity) nor yet for
avoiding of sclaunder, for the word of God may not be avoided, nor yet geeue
place unto sclau^der, for then should it never be preached, but it must be
fa^^e stuck unto: and the more that men be offended withal, and the stiffer
that they he against it, the more openly and plainly, yea and that to their
faces, that make such statutes, m^st we resist them with these words: we
are more bound Act. 5.
to obey God then man.

This is well proved by Hilarious Hylarius in Mat. can^. 14.
words: All manner of plants that he not planted of the father of heaven,
must be plucked up by the roots, that is to say, the traditions of men, by
whose means, the commandments of the law he broken, must be destroyed,
and therefore caulleth he the^ blind guides of the way to everlasting life,
because they see not that thing they promise: and for that cause he says,
that both the blind guides, and they that be led, shall fall into the dyke.
etc.

Mark that all traditions of men, which are against Gods law, must All
traditions of men that are against God, must be rooted up by the roots.
be destroyed. Therefore let every man take heed, for it longs to their
charge: for both the blind guides, and also they that be led shall fall in
the dyke. It shall be none excuse for him that is led, to say that his guide
was blind: but let them hear the word of God by his holy prophets, walk
not in the precepts of your fathers, nor keep not their judgments, Ezechi*
20.
but walk in my precepts, and keep my judgments. The other manner of
statutes be, when certain things that be caulled indifferent, be
commanded as things to be done of necessity, and under the pains of deadly
sin. As for an example: To eat flesh or fish, this day or that Things
that are indifferent to be done or not done, are to be obeyed, so that ye
same be not commanded under the peine of deadly sin.
day is indifferent and free: also to go in this raiment, of this color or
that color: to shave our heads or not: a priest to wear a long gown or a
short: a gray Friar to wear a gray coat or a russet: a white Friar to wear a
white or a black: a Priest to marry or not to marry: an Heremyt to have a
bearde or not. These with all other such outward works, be things
indifferent, and may be used and also left. Now if the Bishops will make any
law or statute, that these things shall be determinately used, so that it
shall not be lawful for us to leave it undone, but that we must precisely do
them, and not the contrary under the pain of deadly sin: here must they be
withstanded, and in no wise obeyed, ^or in this is hurt our faith and liberty
of Christendom, whereby we are free and not bound to any exterior work,
but free in all things, and unto all men at all times, and in all manner, except
it be in such a cause where as brotherly charity, or the common peace should
be offended. Therefore in all these things be we free, and we must
withstand them that will take this liberty from us, with this text of
Scripture: We are bought 1. Cor. 7.
with the price of Christ's blood, we will not be the servants of men. This
text is open against them that will bind men's conscience unto sin, in
those things that Christ has left them free in. Of this we have an evident
example of Saint Paul, the which would not circumcise Titus Galat. 2.
when the false brethren would have compelled him thereunto as a thing of
necessity, unto whom. S. Paul gave no romthe as concerning to be brought
into subjection. S. Paul Note here that things that o^ the selves are
indifferent and yet are commanded to be of necessity observed, those are to
be disobeyed.
did not withstand them, because that Circumcision was unlawful or might not
be used of Christen men, but because that they would have compelled him unto
it as unto a thing of necessity, that thing would not Saint Paul suffer, for
that was against the liberty that we have in Christ Jesus as he says here
plainly. Wherefore we be not alonely by Christ made free from sin, but also
made free in using all manner of things that be in different, and unto them we
can not be bound as unto things of necessity, as on the Friday to eat
fish, and thereunto be bound in conscience under the pain of deadly sin.
In this we may not obey for it is against the word of God, not because it is
evil to eat fish (for in time convenient and when thou art disposed it is
good) but because that they will in this thing bind our consciences and make
that thing of necessity, that God had has left free.

Therefore speaks Paul against them in these words. In the latter days
certain men shall swerve from 1. Tim. 4.
the faith applying them selves to the spirits of errors, and doctrines of
the devil, forbiddyng Marriage, and to abstain from meats, that God has
created to be received of faithful me^ with thanks: for all creatures of God
be good, and nothing to be refused that is received with thanks. Mark how
Paul says, nothing is to be refused that may be received with thanks this
is openly against the^ that will forbid either fish, or flesh, this day or that
day, as a thing unright for a Christian man to eat: for as S. Paul says,
meat does not commend us unto God. Also in an other 1. Cor. 8.
place the kingdom of heaven is neither meat nor drink. Therefore they Roma.
15.
do unright to bind our conscience in such things, and to think us
unfaithful because we observe the^ not.

Now let our holy hypocrites of the Charter house look on their conscience,
Superstition of the Monks of the Charterhouse.
which reckon to buy and to sell heaven, for a piece of fish or flesh: but
they reckon it no vice to live in hatred, ra^kour, and malice, and neither to
serve God nor their neighbor, but with such an hypocrites service as they have
inverted of their own hypocrisy, and not received of God. They think it a
great perfection to abstain from beef and mutton, and to eat pike, tenche
gurnarde and all other costly fishes, and that of the dentiest fashion dressed:
but a piece of gross beef may they not touch, may they not smell: for then
they lose heaven and all the merits of Christ's blood. Is not here a goodly
feigned hypocrisy, before the world it shynneth bright, but compare it unto
Christ's Scripture and there can not be a greater blasphemy. For here in they
clearly damned Christ and his ordinance and make that of necessity, ye
Christ left as indifferent. Against these holy hypocrites writes S. Paul
saying, we Coll. 2.
ought not to be led with the traditions of men, that say touch not, taste not,
A notable saying of S. Paul.
handle not, which things perish with using of them, and are after the
commandments and doctrine of men: which things have the similitude of
wisdom in superstitious holiness and hu^blenes, in that they spare not the
body and do the flesh no worship unto his need.

Here is clearly condemned all supersticiousnes, and feigned holiness, that men
have invented in eating or drinking, in touching or in handling, or in any
other such, things not that we may not do them, but that we do them as
things of necessity and reckon our self holy when we do the^, and to sin
deadly when we do the^ not. This is by the damnable institutions of men, The
which S. Augustine condemns in these words, The Apostle says, Touch not,
handell not etc. Because that those men by such observations were led from the
verity, Ad Paul. Epi. 59.
by y^ which they were made free, whereof it is spoken, the verity shall
deliver you. It is a shame (says he) and inconvenient and far from the
noblenes of your liberty (seeing you be the body of Christ) to be disceaued
with shadows and to be judged as sinners if you despise to observe these
things. Wherefore let no man ouercom you (seeing you are the body of Christ) that
will seem to be meek in heart in the holiness of Angels and bringing in
things which he has not seen etc.

Here have we plainly that those things which be of the invention of man
do not bind our conscience, though they seem to be of never so great
holiness and of humblenes and holiness of Angels, as Paul says. Collos. 2.
Wherefore, let them make what statutes they will, and as much holiness as they
can devise, Invent as much Gods service as they can think, and lie that they
have received it from heaven, and that it is no less holiness then Angels
have, and set thereunto all their mandamus, remandamus, exco^municamus, sub
pena excommunicationis maioris, and minoris, Precipimus, Interdicimus, and sub
indignatione dei omnipotentis, and Apostoloru^ Petri and Pauli ligamus, with
all other such blasphemies that they have (for doubtless, if their bellies were
ripped, there should be nothing found but blasphemes of God and of his holy
word, detractions, oppressions, Confusyons, damnations of their poor brethren,
Other good have we none of them, let all Christen men answer to this of their
conscience if it be not true) And yet are we free in our conscience, and all
these can neither bynd, nor damn our conscience, for we are free made through
Christ, And in conscience nor bound under ye pain of deadly sin, to nothing
that man can order or set, except it be contained in holy scripture. But in
body we are bound to every man. This does S. Augustine prove Sri. ad to propo.
72.
in these words. Seeing that we be made of soul and of body, as long as we
do live in this temporal life we must use to the noryshing of this life,
these te^porall goods. Therefore must Our bodies are subject to princes, but
our souls to God.
we of that part that beelongeth to this life be subject unto powers, that is
unto men that do minister worldly things with some honor, but as concerning
that part, whereby we believe in God and be cauled unto his kingdom, we ought
not to be subject unto any man that will pervert that same thing in us that
has pleased God to give us to eternal life. etc.

Here is it plain, that we in conscience by Christ be made free, and nothing
can bynd us unto sin but his word only. Now is it clearly open, that if any
power of heaven, or earth, command any thing against Gods word, or to the
destruction or minishing of the same, no man may obey in any case under the
pain of damnation: for Gods verity is not indifferent, to be left or not to
be left. Again, if man command any thing to be done that may be done in
time and place convenient, if he wll bind When things that are indifferent
are commanded to be done of necessity then are not the same to obeyed,
because the same destroys ou^ freedom in Christ.
us unto indifferent things, as unto a thing of necessity, then shall we not
do it, not because it is evil to do, but that it is damnable to be done as
a thing of necessity. Nevertheless, if any of these things be commanded of
the Bishops, as burdens, and as things indifferent, then shall we keep them
in time and place convenient, as where I may by them serve my brother, or
edify him, or do him any good, or that it may be unto him any means to come
to the verity: nevertheless, at an other time, when I am in place convenient,
where I shall not offend my brother, nor engender no sclaunder, nor any
disquietnes in the common wealth: There may I freely, without any charge of
conscience, and without all manner of sin, break the Bishops commandment.
For it is but as a burden of a tyrant, that is laid on us, and neither
helps to the increasing of gods honor, nor to the edifiyng of our brethren,
and they them selves keep the^ not. Of these speaks our master Christ: they
bind grievous and intolerable burdens, and lay them on men's necks, but they
themselves will not once set their little ^inger to them. As for an example: To
eat flesh on the Friday Math. 2^.
is forbidden by the Bishops, now if they compel thee to it as unto a thing
necessary, and without the which thou can not be saved, then shall thou not
do it under the pain of sin: but if they will have thee keep this as a
thing of congruence, and as a thing that may be an exterior mean to mortify
the body, or an outward shine of holiness, and unto this he will compel thee
by outward pains, this thing shalt thou do of thy charity, because thou will not break the outward order, nor make any disquietnesse for those
things that neither make thee good nor yet condemn thee before God: for as
S. Paul says, if we eat neither 1. Cor. 8.
are we the better, nor if we eat not, are we the worse. Always provided,
that in these indifferent things, thou neither set confidence nor holiness,
nor yet offend thy weak brothers charity: for therein though thou be free
in thy self, and the thing is also indifferent to thee, yet of charity freely
make thou thy self servant to all me^, as S. Paul says: When I was free
from all things, yet did I make my self a servant, that I might win many
men. Note that he always speaks of weak brethren, and not of obstinate and
indurate persons, against whom thou shall always withstand and defend thy
liberty as he did: he is thy weak brother that has a good mind 2* Cor. 9.
and beeleeueth the word of God, neuerchelesse, he has not that gift to
perceive as yet this liberty to use indifferent things freely with thanks.
Therefore faith and charity must be thy guide in all these things, and
following them thou can not err.

FINIS.
That all men are bound to receive the holy Communion under both kinds under
the pain of deadly sin.
IF men had stuck to the open scriptures of God, and to ye practice of
Christ's holy church, and to ye exposition of old doctors as it did beecome
Christen men to do: then had it not been needful for me to have taken
these pains and labors in this cause, nor yet to have laid to their charges
those things y^ Antichrist does only. He that does the works of Antechrist,
the same is Antichrist.
But now seeing that they will do the open deeds of Antechrist, they must be
content that I may also give them his name. And that all the world may openly
know, y^ Antechrist does rain in the world (yea and that under the name of
Christ) I will hear set you forth an act of his which when it is compared to
our M. Christ's words I do not doubt but all true Christen men will judge it
to be of the devil, as it is in very deed, though that the children of the
world do judge it otherwise.

This do I say of an act, that the Council of Constance did make against the
most holy and glorious sacrament of our eternal God Jesus Christ. Where in,
the one kind of this most blessed sacrament was condemned as unlawful for lay
men to receive: and y^ every man may know, Council of Co^sta^ce forbad the
Sacrament to be received of the lay people in both kinds.
by what authority they did it, and what thing did move them to condemn so
blessed and so glorious an ordinance of our Lord Jesus Christ, here will I
write their own words which be these. As this custom for avoiding certain
sclaunders and perrils was resonably brought in, notwithstanding The words of
the council and determination of Antechrist.
in the beeginning of the Church this sacrament was received of Christen men
under both kinds, and afterward it was received al only under ye kind of
bread, wherefore seeing that such a custom of the Church, and of holy fathers
reasonably brought in and long observed must be taken for a law yt which
shall not be lawful to reprove nor without auctorytie of the Church to
change it at a ma^s pleasure. Wherefore to say y^ it is sacrilege, or unlawful
to observe this co^suetude or law, must be judged erronius, and they that do
pertinaciter defend the contrary of these premissis, must be restrained as
heretics, and grievously punished by the Bishops or their officials, or by them
that be inquisitores hereticae prauitatis, which that be in kingdoms or in
provinces, in these men that do attempt or presume any thing against this
decree, shall men proceed against them, after the holy and lawful decrees
that be invented against heretics and their fauters, into the favor of the
Catholicall faith. etc.

Now will I exhort all Christen men in ye glorious name of our mighty Lord
Jesus Christ (which is both their redeemer and shall be their judge) that they
will indifferently hear this article discussed, by the blessed word of our
Master Christ Jesus, which was not alonely of God, but also very God
himself: and all that he did was done by the counsel of the whole trinity,
and not alonely by his, by whole counsel all counselles both in heaven and
earth must be ordered, and that counsel that is contrary to it whether it be
of Saint, Angel, or of Who soever does alter y^ word of God and set up their
own inventions the same are of the devil.
man, must be accursed, and judged to be of the devil, though they be never
so mighty, never so well learned, and never so many in multitude, for there is
no power, no learning, nor yet no multitude, neither in heaven, nor in earth,
nor no ieoperdies, nor no sclau^ders that may judge Christ and his holy word,
nor that they may geeue place unto. Wherefore if I can prove by open
Scriptures, of our Master Christ, and also by the practice of holy Church,
that this counsel is false and damnable, then let all Christen men judge which
of us must be heard and beeleeued, either the counsel having no scripture,
yea contrary to all scripture, or else I that have the open word of God, and
the very use and practice of the holy Apostles, and of holy church. Christ is
of God, and that no man doubts, but ye holy counsel though there were five
thousa^des of bishops, therein must prove themselves to be of God by the word
of God, and by their works, the which they can not do if they be contrary to
Christ and his blessed word.

Moreover Christ is not true under a condition because that men do a low him,
for though all the world were against him, yet were he nevertheless true,
but the counsel is not true but alonely under this condition because it does
agree with Christ's holy word, and of it self it has no verity, but is of
the devil if it varye from Christ. Before the dreadful trone of God shall ye
counsel be judged by Christ's holy word, and Christ shall not be judged by
the decree of the All counsels are of the devil if they varye from Christ.
counsel, but he shall be the counsels judge: and if Christ's word condemn
the counsel, who shall approve it, who shall praise it, who shall defend it?
The temporal sword, Gods word is the judge of Councels and not Councels
judges of Gods word.
nor the multitude of Bishops, nor interdiction, excommunication, nor cursing,
can then help. Wherefore, let every true Christian man look on this matter
indifferently: it is no trifling with God, nor with his holy word, for God
will remain for ever, and his holy word must be fulfilled: and if we will not
fulfill it, be shall cast us down to the deep pit of hell, and make of stones
me^ in our stead that shall keep his word. It is no light thing, for it lies
on the salvation and damnation both of body and soul, from the which we can
not be delivered, with these glorious words, Concilium, Conciliu^, Patres,
Patres, Episcopi, Episcopi: for all these may be the ministers of the devil,
yea though they were angels. Therefore ones again, I do monish and exhort in
the glorious name of the living God, and in ye sweet blood of Christ Jesus all
true Christian men, to take heed what they do against Christ's holy word,
which is their eternal God, their merciful redemerand shall be also their
mighty and glorious judge.

Now let us examine the words Note here what the Council has granted.
of the Council. First of all the Council grants that in the beginning of
the church, all Christen men were houseled under both kinds, now would I
know of the Council of whom the Church had received this manner: of Christ? or
his holy Apostles (as doubtless she did) then what authority had the Council
to change the institution of Christ, and of his holy Apostles, and also the
use and practice of holy Church? was not the first Church of God? Did she not
keep Christ's institution? did she not fulfill Christ's word? Did not ye holy
Apostles learn here so? And now shall the Council of Constance first condemn
Christ and his blessed word, and then the learning of Christ's holy Apostles?
and also the long use and practice of Christ's blessed Church, without any
Scripture, without authority, or without any special revelation from God, but
alonely for auoydyng of certain perils? Yea and not content alonely to
condemn these things but under the pain of heresy to condemn them. This is
to sore a condemnation of Christ's open word, and of that thing which they
grant that the Church did use at the beginning.

Furthermore the Council says The Council does shamefully be lie both the
fathers and the Scriptures.
that holy fathers and the Church did bring in this custom to housell lay men
under one kind. Are you not ashamed of these words? Does not your conscience
prike you thus openly to lie? yea of Christ and of his holy Church? Christ's
word is openly against you, and you grant that the use of the church was
also otherwise. And as for holy fathers here may you see what they say to it,
but you are the children of the kingdom of lies: and doubtless if you bring
not forth the holy fathers that make for you, you shall not alonely be taken
for abominable and ^en liars, but also for shameful and detestable
sclaunderers both of holy Church, and also of holy fathers.

But it is no wonder, for Antichrist must declare him self openly to be
against Christ, and yet is he never without Antichrist does at all times
declare him self to be against Christ.
an excuse, and a shadow of holiness, where by he may blind the poor people.
But what excuse had he here in the Council to condemn Christ's word? That
they might avoid certain sclau^ders and perrils, and because that there is
no body without blood. Be not these lawful causes to condemn Christ's open
word, yea and that under the pain of heresy? Is not this a new manner of law
to make New doctrine made by Antichrist.
that he that will not obey a statute made against Gods word, which he is
bound to obey under pain of everlasting damnation, alonely for auoydyng
perrils to be condemned for an heretic?

Briefly by this reason may they condemn all holy Scripture, by laying
icoperdies and perrils thereto, they may condemn all the creatures of God, for
there may be peril in using of them all. But what need many words to prove
this Council to be What soever is contrary to Christ, the same is of the
devil.
of the devil? for if that be not of the devil that is contrary to Christ,
and has no excuse for it but alonely to avoid perrils, I ca^ not tell what is
of the devil? I am sure Antichrist shall never be without some carnal
excuse, for if he will deny Christ to be both God and man, he shall have
stronger carnal reasons for him then the Council has for this: but this
matter must not be judged by carnal reasons. It is Gods word that is above
all creatures: wherefore let us go to the Scriptures as a sure ancore to
overcome Antichrist with all his carnal reasons.

First our master Christ when he did institute this blessed Sacrament did use
these words, take it and eat it, this is my body. etc. Likewise taking Math.
26. Mark. 14. Luke. 22.
the challice he gave thanks and gave it unto them saying, drink all of
this, this is my blood of the new testament the which shall be shed for many
into remission of sins. These be plain words drink of it all: he that
says all excepteth no man. Furthermore Christ's institution of the Sacrament
of his body and blood.
he knew that there might be ieoperdies in the receiuyng of it and yet he
says drink of it all, for it is my blood that shall be shed for the
remission of sins.

Now was it not shed for lay men's sins? why shall they not then drink of it?
The master and the Lord says drink thereof: and shall the miserable servant
withstand his commandment? yea command the plain contrary and say drink
not thereof?

But now comes my Lord of Rochester (which perceives that the Council is
connict in that, that it consents that the whole Church in the beginning did
receive this Sacrament under both kinds, and yet forbids that same thing,
and says to Rochesters gloss upon Christ's words.
maintain this error, that Christ spoke these words, drink of it all,
alonely to his Apostles (for there were no other men there but the Apostles)
and therefore they must alonely drink thereof.

I answer: My Lord if this thing were alonely lawful unto the Apostles, how
will you discharge the primative Church, in the which were those men that
Christ ministered this Sacrament unto? yea and the self men did minister it
under both kinds to the whole congregation according to this commandment
drink of it all. Dout not but they understood Christ's will as well as you in
this commandment.

But in the way of communication let us grant you, that to the Apostles this
was only said, how will you the^ discharge your own Priests from deadly
sin, the which receive it under both kinds, and yet be they neither
Apostles nor successors of the^, but after your own learning the Bishops
alonely be their successors, and the Priests do represent lxxij. Disciples.
Shall they in this thing represe^t the Apostles, and in absoluyng from sin but
the Disciples? But let us see farther in your for fetched reason: tell us how
and by what authority (your high pollitike rule saved) that you dare geeue
either of these kinds to the lay men, seeing they were both alonely given to
the Apostles, for eue^ by that authority that you have power to take away the
one kind, by that self same have you power to take away the other, for they
were both given The Pope may as well forbid all lay men to eat of Christ's
body, as to forbid them to drink of Christ's blood.
at once and indifferently to the receivers, so that as many as received the
one, received also the other, and to them that he said take and eat this,
this is my body, to them he said, drink all of this. etc.

Now if you may thus take away ye parts of ye sacraments at your pleasure, ye
co^sequent shall be, y^ incontinuance all the sacraments shall be destroyed,
and Christ's word set at naught. Wherefore my Lord this blasphemous euation
will not help you: but such shamfull solutions must they use that will be
against the open word of God. Amend your conscience my Lord, for if you do
not remember D. Barnes is plain with the Bishop of Rochester.
the terrible words of y^ Prophet: he shall shake his sword and bend his bow
and make it al ready and therein has he prepared the shot of death, and his
arrows for to burn. This is no small threatening nor lightly to avoid.

But let us see what the scriptures say, that which I gave unto you I received
of ye Lord. Mark. S. Paul's words how he received this thing of the Lord.
etc.

The Lord Jesus the same night in ye which he was betrayed, took bread and
thanked, and brake it, and said. Take ye and eat, this is my body which is
broken for you: this do ye in the remembrance of me. After ye S. Paul
sets forth the institution of Christ.
same manner, he took the cup and said, this cup is the New testament in my
blood: this do, as often as you drink in the rememberaunce of me: for as often
as you shall eat this bread and drink this c^p, you shall show the Lords
death till he come. Mark diligently how S. Paul declares, how the Lord
Jesus Christ did institute this blessed and comfortable sacrament in both
kinds, and in both kinds did mynister it himself, and not that all only,
but also enacted this commandment to all Christen people which must receive
it. This do as often. etc. Yea and this commandment is given after the
Sacrament is ministered in both kinds, Teaching us that in both kinds the Lord
has instituted this Sacrament to be received, and also that they y^ so
receive it not, break this commandment of the Lord. This do as often. etc.

This commandment. S. Paul did not lightly let slyp, but he knew that it
was the ordinance and ye commandment of the Lord: and also knew ye one jot
or title of his words should not, nor ought, nor can not be let slip, without
perrell of the souls of them y^ so littell makes of his word. And therefore he
durst not, nor would not (and yet he had as great authority as the counsel
of constance) let slip or tanspose the institution and commandment of the
Lord, but wholly and fully with all diligence he wrote those words unto all
the whole congregation of the Corinthians, not to the ministers or priests all
only, but to the whole congregation, that is as well to the mynisters of the
word as to lay men: and also the contrary, for he says when you come
together: and that you may perceive y^ he speaks indifferently, he there
reproves the^ that tarryed not for poor men. And also these words be
plain, who so ever shall eat of this bread and drink of this cup worthily.
etc. Now unto this whole congregation (I doubt not but by ye spirit of the Lord
which saw before this damnable error to be instituted of antichrist and his
very and all only mynisters) he said drink you, yea and to reprove and
manifestly to declare this open error, he adeth this word, Cup, signifying
and teaching that Christ's ordinance is Christ's blood is not to be received
in his body only, but in the cup.
not to receive the blood in the body only, but to receive the blood after his
institution) by it self out of the cup, lest they should be found correctours
and blasphemers of the holy institution and commandment of the Lord, Of whom
S. Paul received this commandment, and of no counsels.

Now what Christian man can doubt but our M. Christ (to whom all thing is bare
and open both things present and also to come) knew that there was blood in his
own body. Also Saint Paul his scholar which learned this lesson of him was
not ignorant that there was blood in his body. And yet first our master
Christ geeueth his blood alone by it self out of the cup, and his diligent
scholar knowing the doctrine of his master did the same, regardyng his
masters doctrine and preferring it before his carnal reason, which knew that
there was blood in every body, but his masters doctrine taught him that his
master kept not his blood in his body, but for us lost and damned persons for
our innume rabble detestable (and above all capacity to declare) damnable and
abominable sins, brake his body and shed his blood thereout plentously, and
therewith made sacrifice and satisfaction for all our sins, as Saint John
says. The blood of Jesus Christ clen 1. John. 1.
seth us from all sin, also we are sanctified by the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once for all. Now that all Christen men which be sanctified by
the offering of this body, and by sheadyng the blood out of this body, should
always have both those Hebr. 10.
parts in remembrance, he according as the blood was divided from the body
for all sinners indifferently that will come unto Christ, and according to his
masters institution and commandment, ministered this Sacrament, and also
ordained it to be ministered to all men. The body by it self and the blood by
it self. That they might always not remember alonely that our Savior Paul
ministered Christ's body by it self, and the cup of his blood by it self to
the lay and common people.
Christ offered his body for us, but also shed out of that same body his most
precious blood and therefore says S. Paul (as his master Christ taught him.)
As often as you shall eat this bread and drink this cup, you shall show the
Lords death till he come.

Now my Lords come to your counselles. Christ and S. Paul defends this
thing partinaciter, (as you call it) that is, stiffly and strongly will they
abide by it and will not revoke it. Wherefore after the decree of your Counsel,
they be condemned for heretics. I can no more say, but God help them, for
there is no remedy with them, but they must needs to the fire, for they will
not be abiured in no wise. It is a piteous case, that two, so good men as
these be, will be thus openly against the decree of the holy counsel, yea
and against so many and so noble fathers, and so great clerks, the which knew
this matter (as ye say) as well as they, and it is not to be thought that the
holy Ghost would leave so many excellent and holy fathers, and great Doctors
of Divinity, and so many noble Princes and wise men of the world, and be
with these two poor men which be of no reputation in this world.

Wherefore my Lords, proceed against them after the holy decrees Council of
Constance condemn Christ and Paul for heretics.
that be invented against heretics, stick not for their names, for it is
neither Christ nor Paul that ca^ hurt you, you have also condemned their
learning and prevailed against them: why should you not condemn them as well?
you be Lords, and you have the strength and the wisdom of the world with
you, and as a certain Doctor of the law said: they have no man to hold with
them but a sort of beggars, and despised persons of the world, wherefore spare
them not, be bold, Implete numerum patrum vestrorum, All tyrants be not yet
dead.

But now, when you have condemned them, yet have you as much to do as ever
you had: for your own De consecra. di. 2. 6. co^perimus.
law is openly against you, in these words. We understand that certain men
receiving alonely the portion of the blessed body, do abstain from the
chalice of the holy blood, the which doubtless (seeing I can not tell The popes
own laws against both him self and his Clergy.
by what superstition they are learned to abstain) let them either receive the
whole Sacrament, or else let them be forbidden from the whole Sacrament, for
the division of one and of ye same mystery can not be done without great
sacrilege. etc.

How think you by these words? be they not plain that all men shall either
receive both kinds or none? Here have you an other heretic, for he judges,
and says that it is a sacrilege (which is openly against your Counsel) to
receive it in one kind. But paraduenture you will say this law was written to
priests: I answer, to whomsoever it was written, it makes no matter, for
these words be plain: the division of one misterye can not be done without
great sacrilege. These words be not spoken of the persons that shall receive
it, but of the dividing of the sacrament, whosoever shall receive it, it is
sacrilege to divide this thing, answer you to that. Mark also, The popes
own law says it is superstition to receive but the one kind only.
that your own law cauleth it superstition to receive but one kind, and no
doubt they that did receive it so, were blinded by this damnable reason of
yours, that there is no body without blood, and yet he calls it
superstition.

But let us see what your gloss says on this text, it is not superfluously
(says he) received under both kinds, for the kind of bread is referred unto
the flesh, and the kind of wine unto the blood. The wine is the Sacrament of
blood, in the which is the seat of the soul, and therefore it is received
under both kinds, to signify that Christ did receive both body and soul, and
that the partaking thereof, does profit both body and soul. Wherefore if it
were received alonely under one kind, it The ^gloser against the counsel.
should signify that it did profit allonely but one part. etc.

How think you, does this gloss understand it of preistes only? have lay men
no souls? May not this Sacrament profit them both body and soul? Mark also
that he says it is not superfluously nor without a cause received under both
kinds. Also an other law: When the host is broken, De conse^r. di. 2. c. cum
frangimus.
and the blood shed out of the chalys into the mouths of faithful men, what
other thing is there signified, but the immolation of our Lords body on the
cross, and the shedding of his blood out of his side. etc.

Here is it plain, that the blood is geeuen out of the chalys, and not out of
the body, and into faithful men's mouths, and not alonely into priests
mouths. Also an other law: If that De consecr. de. 2. c. Si quocienscumque.
the blood of Christ be shed for remission of sins (as often as it is
shed) then ought I lawfully for to receive it. I which do always sin,
must always receive a medecyne. etc.

Here your own law says, that the receiving of the blood is a medycinall
Popes law says the receiving of Christ's blood is medicinable
way to be received of the^ that sin: you will not deny but that lay men
sin. Wherefore should they not then receive a medicyne for their sin? you
may perceive that this is not alonely spoken of Priests, but of sinners. etc.

Furthermore, S. Ciprian says: Ad Corneliu^ apam.
How do we teach, or how can we provoke men to shed their blood for the
confession of Christ's name, if we A goodly saying of Cyprian.
do deny them the blood of Christ when they shall go to battle? Or how
dare we able them unto the victordum of martyrdom, if we do not first by
right admit them to drink the cup of our Lord in the congregation. etc.
Here is Cyprian openly against you which will that as many shall receive ye
blood of Christ, as do confess the name of Christ, yea and that out of the
cup and not out of the body.

Also S. Ambrose says to the Emperor Theodosius, how shall thou Ecclesiastica
^ist.
lift up thy hands out of yt which does yet drop unrighteous blood? how
shall thou with those hands receive the body of God? with what boldness will thou receive into thy mouth the Cup of the precious blood, seeing that through
the wodnes of thy words, so great blood is shed wrongfully. etc. Mark that
the manner was in Saint Ambrose Saint Ambrose wills all men to receive the
cup of the blood of Christ.
time that lay men should receive yt blessed blood of Christ, yea and that out
of the cup severally, and not out of the body only: wherefore my Lords see to
your conscience, how you can discharge your self before the dreadful trone of
Christ Jesus, for making this detestable and damnable statute against yt
heavenly word of God* and against the use of holy Church* and The Pope and his
clergy fear not to break Christ's institution and ordinance.
contrary to the exposition of all holy doctors. It were to great a thing for
you so presumptuously to break the statute of your mortal prince, how much
more of your immortal God, which will not be avoided with a carnal reason,
nor with condemnation of heresye, nor yet with saying there be ieoperdies,
perils, and sclau^ders, for these proud crakes can not there excuse you nor yet
help you. For I doubt not but the great Turk has as good reasons for him as
these be, and also as proud crakes as you have, though peradventure he uses
them not so hipocritely against God omnipotent as you do, but yet it will not
help him. Wherefore now most excellent and gracious Prince, I do Barnes
exhorts K. Henry the viij. to restore the sincerity of Christ's holy word.
with all meekenes, with all due subjection admonysh and exhort your most
noble grace, yea and ye father of heaven does openly commannd you under the
pain of his displeasure, and as you will avoid the danger of eternal
damnation, and also by the virtue of Christ's blessed blood, and as you will
receive remission from all your sins through the merits of his glorious
blood, that you do defend with all your might Christ's blessed word and his
sweet blood, and his holy ordinance, and suffer them not so lightly to be
oppressed and trodden under the foot. Your grace may not consider in this cause
yt multitude nor the dignity of men, for you be as good as the best of the^,
but your grace must consider that it is God omnipotentes cause, it is Christ's
cause, it is the word of God, it is yt blessed blood of Christ that is over
trodden, it is the ordinance that comes out of heaven, and not out of
counsels, yea and given by God himself, and not by man's auctoritye: And now
shall your grace suffer this thing so lightly to be broken, because men do
invent a carnal reason against it? the devil was never without a reason, but
that proves not the cause against Gods word. King Saul had no small reason for
him, when he did save king Agag and the best sheep and Ore^ to offer 1. Reg.
15.
to God, was not this a reasonable cause, to save the beasts to Gods honor,
and to offer the^ up unto God? was it not a goodly shine to save the king
rather then to kill him. What man will reckon it evil to save a man? what man
can judge it evil to save beasts, and that yt best to offer them to God? Was
not God best worthy? Reason and devotion, being contrary to Gods will, is mere
blyndnes and impiety.
was not this a good consideration? was not this a good intent?

Finally it is ten times better then the reason of the counsel is, and yet
Saul with all his good reason, with all his good devotion, with all his good
purpose, with all his fat beasts, is repelled of God for ever and all
because he stuck to his good intention and left the commandment of God.
Some men will think it but a light thing whether they receive yt blessed
blood by it self, or else with the body: but as light as they think it, yet is
it Gods word, yet is it Christ's ordinance, yet did the Apostles observe it,
yet did the holy Church so fulfill it. And if yt word of God were away, by
reason it were but a light thing to Baptize in water or in wine, but the word
of God is open that it must be done with water and not in wine, and yet there
is no cause why, but the word of God.

Moreover, by reason it was but a light thing to say: Be glad y^ daughter of
Sio^, behold thy king comes to Zachary. 9 Math. 20.
thee sittyng on an Ass and on her fool. This saying by reason is not alonely
simple, but also foolish, to say that a king shall come riding on an Ass, yea
and on a borrowed Ass, and thereof to make so much a do as though it were a
notable thing: who would not now mock a king if he did so ride,
notwithstanding all this, these be the words of God, yea and also fulfilled
in very deed of our master Christ in his own proper person.

Moreover by reason, it was but a mad token that the Savior of the Luke. 2.
world Christ Jesus was borne, to say you shall find a young child wrapped in
cloutes and laid in a cribbe, what is this to purpose? what is this to prove
that the savior of yt world is borne? will not reason mock this? when will
reason be persuaded by this token yt The sayings and doings of Christ are
not to be judged by natural reason.
Messiah (whom all the Prophets and all the Patriarchs have promised so many
hundred years before) was now borne? and yet this token came from heaven, yea
and by the ministration of angels and the shepheardes did believe yt word.
Briefly by reason what be all the articles of the faith? where is Christ?
where is remission of sins? where is yt life to come? Reason mocketh all these
things but yet they be true, because alonely yt word of God speaks them.
Wherefore most noble and excellent Prince, look on the word of God and not of
blind reason, and save the honor thereof, for it shall save your grace at your
most need.

Furthermore I do exhort and require with all honor, yea and I do command
in the virtue of Christ Jesus and his blessed word, all Dukes, all Earls, all
Lords, all manner of estates high and low, that will be Christen men, that
will be saved by the virtue of Jesus Christ's blessed blood, that they do see
this ordinance John. 6.
of the God of heaven observed to the uttermost of their power, and when soever
that they will be houseled, that they receive the blessed Sacrament under both
kinds, and at the lest desire it with all their heart of their curates, and so
desire it that they may be discharged before the immortal God of heaven which
will not be mocked nor avoided with a damnable reason: but what soever thing
there be that is against the holy word of God, and the glorious ordinance
(what color What soever is ordained against the ordinance of Christ, the
same be occursed.
so ever it bring with it of holiness) let it be a cursed and reckened of the
devil. This does S. Cyprian learn us saying, what thing soever it be that is
ordained by man's madness, where by the ordinance of God is violated, it is
whoredom, it is of the devil and it is sacrilege. Wherefore fly from such
contagiousnesse of men and avoid their words as a canker and as pestilence.
etc.

These words be plain of all manner of men of what estate what dignity, or
of what honor soever they be, and what color of holiness soever they bring
with them. Wherefore in this present writing I do counsel and exhort all true
Christen men to take heed what they do. The word of god is so plain in this
matter that they can desire it no playner. It is no childs game to trifle with
Gods word: God will not be trifled with nor yet mocked. But now to help
poor men that be unlearned I will assoyle certain of their damnable reasons.
The first is we will not give it Blind reasons of the Papists.
under that kind of wine, lest that there should by negligence either of the
Priest or of the receiver, fall any drop on the ground.

I answer, our Christ did know that such a chance might come, you can not
deny it (except you will say that he was not God, as you would not greatly
stick to do, if you might have maintenance) and yet notwithstanding did he
institute it in both kinds. Answer you to this. Moreover, why do not by
this reason your own priests abstain from the wine, seeing that this peril
may also chance to them, as your cautelles of yt Mass do grant. Also if it
be a reasonable cause that you shall not keep Christ's ordinance, because of
avoiding of perilles, then may you take away all the whole Sacrament to avoid
perilles, for in receiving of it in ye kind of bread, is ieopardous, least
there remain any crumme in the receauers teeth. This reason is as good as
yours: so that now all the Sacrament in both kinds is taken away.

Furthermore, if you will avoid all perilles, then may you geeue this
Sacrament to no man, for you can not tell who is in deadly sin and who not,
for you know not their hearts: and it were a sore perell and greatly more
ieoperdye to give the pure body of Christ Jesus into a foul soul, then The
Papists find fault with gnattes, and swallowe Caniels.
yt a drop of blood by negligence should fall on the ground, for there falls
but a drop, and here is yt whole body in a foular place then the ground is.
Also that may be avoided with good diligence and wisdom of the Priest, but
that the sacrament shall always be received into a pure conscience there is
no dilygence of the priest that can make it.

How think you now? now is all the whole sacrament and Christ's blessed
ordinance clearly taken away and all for avoiding ieoperdies and perells.
Thus trifle you with Christ's holy word, yea and yt in your great and holy
counsels. Other reasons my Lord of Rochester brings that be worthy of no
solution: for he does but mock and scorn and trifle with Gods word. He
brings yt miracle of yt five loves, where there is no mention made of wine,
therefore lay men must be houseled in one kind: is not this madness? What
mean these men yt neither fear God, nor yet be ashamed of man? what is this
to the purpose? Christ did a myrackle of five loves, John. 6.
where is no mention made of wine: what is this to the sacrament? If the bread
fygnifyed one part of the sacrament, what sygnifyed the 2. fyshes and they that
were there. These 2. things Fond arguments made by y^ Bishop of Roche estr.
must needs signifye the other part. Also lay men did touch this bread.
Moreover in an other place. Christ gives all only wine. Therefore the
sacrament must be received in the kind of wine al only of the lay men. Be
not these goodly arguments yea and that of bishops? it were madness to answer
to them.

That by Gods word it is lawful for Priests that has not the gift of
chastity, to marry Wives.
The cause that moved him to write of this thing.
I Have seen and heard in diverse countries, where I have been, intolerable
persecution against Priests, that were compelled by weakness of nature to mary
wives, for that intent that they might after Gods law, and man's law use an
honest conversation in this world. For the which thing, I say, they have been
sore persecuted, some cast out of their country, some drowned, some burned,
and some beheaded: Finally, all the cruelnes that could be excogitated against
them, men thought it to little.

Wherefore I, that reckon my self a debtour, and a servant unto all me^ in all
things, wherein I may profit them, and specially in things that apperteine
to instruction of their conscience, has taken upon me, in this cause to show
my little and small learning: charitably desiryng the^ that be some thing yet
against this thing, that they will let them selves be taught, and instructed
by Gods word, and not to set themselves obstinately against the verity of Gods
blessed word. For our Lord can easily bear and suffer, an vnwilled ignorance,
but a perverse malice and a froward resistyng of his verity, can he not
suffer, but thereunto is he a mortal, and an extreme enemy.

Wherefore let men consider, that if this article does stand with Gods word,
and ^ith Christ's holy doctrine, that if then they resist, and set themselves
against it, how that they do resist God, the which no man is able to
perform. Certain men there be, Two sorts of men.
that of a very perverse, froward, and obstinate mind, does set them selves
against this article and other more. And will in no wise admit either reason, or
learning, but still remain in their old error, that they have conceived in
their brains, which is neither grounded in Gods holy word, nor yet in the
holy conversation, or living of blessed and virtuous me^. Unto these men will I
write nothing, because I will not trouble them, and because I would be loath to
be torn with dogs teeth, or else to cast pearls before swyne.

An other sort of me^ there be, that Math. 7.
does not admit this article, by the reason that they be ignorant in
Scriptures, and know not the very ground thereof, but alonely are led by an old
custom, that they have been brought up in. Yet nevertheless they are not
obstinate enemies unto the verity, but would gladly give place to learning,
and reason. And all that they do, is to search with a sober meekenes, what ye
truth is. The which thing they are glad to embrace, as soon as it is laid to
them. Unto these men is my writing, and my labor spent: whom I do charitably
beseech, that they will favorably, and indifferently judge this my writing.
This do I bind my self, to prove this thing (by Gods grace) out of Christ's
holy word, by the sayings of holy Doctors, by the authority of authe^ticall
stories, by the examples, and practice of holy and virtuous men. And if I do
not this, I will be contented not to be believed, which thing, if I can
perform, I think all reasonable men will geeue credence to me.

Finally, and la^t of all I will show those reasons, and authorities, whereby
that the Pope has bound his Priests to keep (as he calls it) pure
chastity. And in conclusion, after my poor learning, I will assoyle all those
Scriptures and reasons, and prove that in this thing they ca^ have no place.
Unto the performyng of the which, Jesus of his infinite mercy grant me of his
holy spirit. Amen.

FIrst comes blessed Saint Paul, whom the Church of God has always had in
reverence, and he approves this doctrine of mine, saying: Let every man for
avoiding of fornication 1. Cor. 7.
have his wife, and every woman have her husband. Mark how blessed S. Paul
commands, where as any danger of fornication is, that every man in auyoding
of vicious living, should take a wife. Here is no man excepted, for the text is
for every man, and specially for them, that can not live sole. Unto the^ it is
a straight commandment to marry: there is none other remedy ordained of God
to avoid fornication, but marriage. Yea, and if there were ten other remedies
more then marriage, yet must marriage be as lawful as they to be used, yea and
a great deal more, seeing, that it is specially appointed of God, for a remedy
in this case. For as for all other remedies (as fasting, watchyng, labouryng,
chastising of a Priests are more bound to mary for avoiding vicious living
the^ to other chastising of their body, seeing that is Gods ordinance there unto
appointed.
man's body) though they be lawful, laudable and good, yet be they not
appropriately, and only appointed of God, to be remedies against fornication:
as blessed S. Paul does here appoint marriage for to be.

Wherefore if it be lawful for Priests for to fast, and watch, to avoid
fornication, it must needs be more lawful for the^ to marry wives, if they
be in danger of fornication. For marriage in this case, is not alonely
commanded of God, but it is appointed of God for an especial, and singular
medecin for this disease. Mark also the occasion that S. Paul had to write
this text to the Corinthians. There were certain men among them, that reckened
it an holiness, and a perfection (as certain me^ does now, for Priests) that
Christen me^ should live sole without wives, as the text declares. It is good
for a man, not to touch a woman. Now does blessed S. Paul answer to this
holy hypocrisy on this manner: To avoid fornication, says he,
notwithstanding your holiness, let every man mary a wife.

Now, if blessed Saint Paul had thought it unlawful to marry for any Christen
man, then would not he have said: Let every man marry. Mark also, that it is
not against the perfection of any Christen man for to marry, but he is rather
bound to marry, if he have not the gift of chastity.

Farthermore, note that S. Paul neither bids them, that thought it holiness
to be unmarried, to fast, or to labor, or to wear here. But alonely to
marry, as who should say, God has ordained and approved a lawful and a
laudable remedy against your sickness. My doctrine is, that you shall hear your
God, and use to your comfort, those creatures and remedies with thanks
geeuing, that God has appointed, and therewith be you content, and reckon not
your selves wyser then God, in helpyng and curyng your diseases. For nothing
can be unlawful that God does allow, and prove. And for using of Gods
creatures and his ordinances, in time, and place requisite, can no man be
blamed before God. But for refusing of Gods remedies, when they be necessary,
let no man think, that he shall avoid Gods danger.

As for an example: He that will not eat and drink when he is hungry and
thirsty, but excogitateth some other remedy of his own brain, so long that
he brings himself in utter destruction: let no man doubt, but in this case
before God he is a murderer, and an homicide. I think there is no learning
to the contrary. Wherefore I would that me^ should well remember themselves in
this case, and think not that they ca^ invent a thing more pleasant unto God,
then he can do him self. His pleasure is best known unto himself. For this
cause, I judge it lawful for every Priest that has not the gift of chastity,
to use the remedy that God has ordained, and also sanctified. Blessed S. Paul
says, that marriage is honorable, and the bed of them is undefiled: but
fornicatours, and aduoulterers God shall judge. Mark that S. Paul caulleth it
honorable, and a clean thing. What presumption Hebr. 13.
is therefore in us, that reckon it a dishonor, and uncleanness for priests
to use marriage? God says, he shall judge whorekeepers and aduoulterers: but
not them that be married. Wherefore yet again, after ye doctrine of S. Paul,
I exhort all Priests that can not live chaste, to receive Gods remedy with
thanks. This is S. Paul's doctrine, where 1. Cor. 7.
he says, I would that all men were as I my self am. But every man has his
proper gift of God, one after this manner, an other after that. I say unto the
unmarried men and wydowes, it is good for them, if they abide as I do. But and
if they can not abstain, let them mary. For it is better to mary It is not
sufficient before God to avoid S. Paul with a light and a vain solution.
then to burn. I can not devise a clearer text for my purpose then this is.
Saint Paul would that every man had the gift of chastity. But in as much as
all men has not one gift, therefore says S. Paul, must every man use
himself after his gifts. And he that has not the gift of chastity, S.
Paul will plainly, that he shall mary. He says not, that he shall chastise
himself with labor and with pain, to remedy that weakness, though I would
be content for my part gladly, that men should prove all manner of lawful
remedies, to help them to live sole. But then, if they can not so continue, I
will in no wise that they shall refuse marriage, as a thing unlawful and
filthy: but rather use it, and prove it at the least wise, as they have done
other remedies, that they have invented, seeing that God has iustituted this,
as a thing that he judges for a lawful and principal remedy. But note, that
S. Paul says, it is better to mary, then to burn. S. Paul's meaning is,
that if man has not the gift to extincte the burning, and ardent desire of
nature, that then he must mary, rather then be subject unto such
concupiscence. S. Paul says not, rather mary then to keep whores. But his
will is, that we should be so far from all whoredom, that we should not
suffer our selves so much as to burn. The which preceedeth all whoredom, and
is less in very deed then whoredom. And yet S. Paul wylling us to avoid
this less thing, commands us to mary: how much more to avoid open
whoredom, and abominable and detestable uncleanness, that is now used
shameless in the world?

I do not reprove that Priests Whoredom is lawful in no case, but marriage is
lawful in diverse cases, ergo marriage must rather be allowed then whoredom.
does live sole, I had rather thereto exhort them. But this I detestate, that
men had rather suffer, and allow priests to live in whoredom, and in all
abominable fornication, then for to use that lawful remedy that God has both
ordained and sanctified. We have no mention in any storye, that ever any
Priest was burned for keepyng of whores, but for marriage, we have seen, and
do see daily, how cruelly and violently men does persecute them, as though
Gods blessed ordinance were rather to be extincted and abhorred, then that
thing, ye both God, and nature reprooueth. Where is there one man in England,
that has so great love, and reverence to the holy state of Matrimony, that he
should keep a married Priest in his house? But Priests that live unlawfully
against Gods law, and man's law, and against all honesty, and moral virtue, be
in every man's houses and company, and rulers, and cou^sellers, and controllers.
Alas for pity, what shall I say to the affections of men's hearts, that thus
can wink (I will not say allow) at such abominable things. Yea, and the self
same men shall be most extreme, and cruel unto a poor simple Priest, that of
a good heart toward Gods ordinance, maryeth a lawful wife. This Priest, I
say, shall neither have meat, nor drink of the^, nor yet no office of
charity. But the other sort shall be exalted, and set up in all honor and kept
in reverence and estimation. And why? Because as they say they be good and
clean fellows, and loves a piece of flesh well. These blasphemous words
have I heard diverse times and many. And men sit and laugh at them, and have a
great rejoicing in them. So sore is Gods holy ordinance, and a moral virtue,
and goodness extincted in men's hearts.

O Lord God, and thy mercy were not, how were this world able to co^tinewe,
that thus abhominably, and shamefully judges of thy hallowed, and sanctified
works? But oh Lord have thou mercy, and pity on us, for the sweet blood of
thy son Christ Jesus. Look not on our sins, oh lord God, for who is able to
abide in thy sight. But Lord of thine infinite mercy, send down thy spirit
into ye hearts of thy people, that they may be taught better to judge of thy
heavenly, and Godly institutions. Amen.

To our purpose. Other articles that I have written of, be something hard,
and obscure, saving all only to these men, that be learned. But as for this
article, me think it is so plain, that I marvel how any man should doubt
in it. For doubtless it needs no learned judge, but only a Ciuell, and a
moral good man, that is I write not against those Priests that ca^, and do
live chaste, but I rather exhort the^ so to continue.
endued with reason and equity. For surely mine adversaries does not earnestly
defend pure, and clean chastity, for they know how few priests there be,
that keeps their chastity. Yea and they know how sore they have punyshed
those men, that has broken their chastity. So that they do not defend
chastity, but rather fylthines, and abominable living. In ye which the most
part of the spirituality does live. Of this I will be reported to the Let
those men at the lest marrye wives seeing they do not, nor can not live chaste.
records of the kings courts, and also to their own records. in ye which
(if they should be serched) should be found an innumerable sort detected of
uncleanness. These matters be open, notwithstanding I am right sorry to rehearse
it, but I am compelled, seeing there is such intolerable violence used against
those poor me^ that marry, be cause they would not all only live virtuously
before God, but also morally before the world.

Now let men all only use reason No man doubts, but a great many does thus
live, the which be great persecutors of married Priests, I would desire them
not to prove my patience to sore. For I know their names, and some of their
children. 1 Thessalonians 4.
in this case, and make comparison between these two manner of lyuings, and
consider which of them does beecome a polytike order, and a common wealth best.
Whether is it after reason better for me to defile shamefully, other men's
wives, other men's daughters, and other men's maidens, that no man's servant
should be in safegarde for me? or else that I should marry a wife of mine
own, as other noble kings, and Dukes, and other good men of the world has
done, and does daily, and so to continue my life with mine other neighbors,
after this manner of good neighborhood? Let men hear without malice judge
indifferently. Blessed Saint Paul proceeds farther with this matter, and
proves clearly, that no man ought, or can be bound to verginitie, farther
then ye gift of God does strengthen him. Thus he says, as concerning virgins,
I have no precept of the Lord, but all only I give you my council, for I
think it good by ye reason of this present necessity, that a man should live
so. As he would say Unto verginitie I can not ^inde yo^, farther then your
gift is, nor I do not reckon it a thing necessary to win heaven by. For heaven
is neither the price of virginity, nor yet of marriage. But all only I reken
verginitie, a Married men shall testify that Virginity is a quiet life.
good, and an expedient thing to live quietly by in this world. For in marriage
is many things ye does distracte, and disturbeth a man's mind. That this is S.
Paul's meaning, it is well proved by ye text that follows. If a Marriage has
a greater cross, then virginity.
virgin does marry, she does not sin vut she shall have much temptation in
the flesh. That is to say, many occasions of disquietnes. But I (says S.
Paul) would gladly spare you from such occasions, for I would have you without
sorrow. And she that is unmarried, has no care, but how to serve God. But she
that is married, has much care, and sorrow, how she shall dispatch all worldly
business.

So that S. Paul does clearly declare his meaning, how that virginity is no
nearer way to heaven, then marriage is: saving that all only an unmarried person
has not so many occasyons to be disquieted, as a married has. Wherefore you
shall mark of this text, First that S. Paul has no commandment to bind
men to chastity.

How comes it now therefore, y^ the Pope compels all those men y^ D^.
xxxi. ca^nte trie^.
will ^ee Priests, first to forswear marriage, and to vow chastity? There is
no learning, that is able to prove, how that the pope ca^ make more precepts
of God, then blessed S. Paul could do. Furthermore, what authority has the
Pope to bind us to any thing, that God, and his holy Apostles has left free?
All learned men that ever wrote, does grant, ye there be two manner of
things in this world. Some be called, Res necessariae. Res necess.
Things that be necessary, and must be done, because that God has
commanded them. And these things no man is able to make iudifferent, but they
must needs be necessarily done. Other things there be, which learned me^
cauleth, Res mediae. things (...) me^^^.
that be indifferent: and these may be done, and may be left, without sin.
Now is the nature of these, contrary to the other, for they can not, nor may
not be changed into things necessary. For that is against their nature, as
S. Paul declares to the Romans Roma. 14.
and in other diverse places.

Now is this of truth, that virginity is a thing of him self by Gods
ordinance indifferent, and may be used and left without sin. Wherefore it
Virginity is a state in differens.
stands with no learning, that ma^s law should change the nature of this
thing, and make it unto any man a thing necessary, whereas after gods
commandment, it is a thing but in different. For that were as much, as both
to change Gods ordinance, and also ye nature of the thing. The which stands
with no learning. For as the Pope, and all the world can not make of Gods
commandment a counsel: no more can they of Gods counsel make a precept.
Wherefore I conclude out of blessed S. Paul, that no man Chastity is Gods gift.
ought to vow chastity, farther then God has geu^n him the gift. For if
chastity were a thing that could be obtained, and kept through vowyng, then
were it not the gift of God, but the gift of vowyng, the which is against our
master Christ, and also against Math. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
blessed S. Paul.

Farthermore, let every man now think in him self, seeing that blessed
Whether it be better to follow s. Paul, or the Pope.
S. Paul had no commandment over chastity, nor yet would give any
commandment, whether that it be the surest way, and the lawfullest to follow
the Popes commandment, or else to follow blessed S. Paul's doctrine? the which
knew the perfection of virginity, and also what did beecome Priests for to
do, as well as the Pope does.

Moreover, if men will judge those Priests, that will marry, which follows
S. Paul's counsel, and doctrine grievously for to sin, and for to be
heretics: Why should they not rather judge those men more grievously for to
sin, and to be ten times worse then heretics, that follows the popes
commandment in not marying? Is no^ S. Paul's doctrine as lawful to be keept,
and as far from sin, as the Popes commandments be? Or is not S. Paul of
as great authority in the Church of God as the Pope is? I think yes. Note
also, that S. Paul would not bind the 1. Cor. 7.
Corinthians to virginity, because he would not tangle them in a snare, but
alonely he exhorts them to virginity, as unto an honest and comely thing,
that they might yt more quietly serve God. Upon this same text, says
Athanasius, that the Apostle would compel Athanasius. 1. Cor. 7.
no man to keep virginity against his will, nor he would not make virginity
a thing of necessity.

Wherefore it must needs follow. First, that the Pope byndyng men to
virginity, does lay a snare for them, and both nothing else (except they have
the gift of chastity) but bring men in danger of damnation.

Seco^darily, he makes a thing of necessity, that ye holy ghost in blessed
s. Paul durst not, nor would not do.

Thyrdly, that thing that S. Paul reckened only to conduce, and help to
quietness in this present life, that same thing makes the Pope a Savior, and a
helper to heaven, the which is a great blasphemy to Christ's holy blood, and
also a perverse using of Gods blessed creatures.

Now let every Christen man judge, if this be charitably done of the pope,
yea, whether he has authority this to do or not? Let no man, I beseech him
judge in this matter after parcia litie, but even as he will answer before
God.

After this blessed S. Paul goes farther, as concerning them that have a
purpose, and a promise between, God (...) virgi^itatem (...).
and them, to keep their charity: his words be these: He that purposes
surely in his heart, having no need, but has power over his own will, and has
so decreed in his heart, yt he will keep his virginity does well. Here note
first, that S. Paul compels no man to vow, but he lets every man stand
to his own will.

Farthermore, blessed S. Paul wills what soever he be, that decrees in his
heart to keep virginity, that be must first consider, whether it lies in his
power to keep his decree or not. If it be in his power, then says S. Blessed
S. Paul dispenses with unlawful vows.
Paul does he better to keep his virginity, the^ to marry. But if it lie
not in his power to be chaste does body and soul, then wills S. Paul that
he marry. Note here, that S. Paul, notwithstanding man's decree, and purpose
which he made to keep virginity, wills that he do marry, if he ca^ not
keep his decree and purpose. How contrary is this to the popes doctrine,
which rather suffers his Priests to live in all uncleanness, by yt reason of
their foolish promise made unto him, then he would suffer them to marry wives
after S. Paul's holy doctrine. Yea the Pope is not ashamed, more cruelly to
punish a poor woman for marying, then he does, if she were a whore. For a
Nun if she marry x^v^ q. c. de filia, in verbo de filia.
(says he) shall never be admitted to receive the blessed Sacrament of
Christ. But if she be an whore, then (says he) may she after penance, be
admitted to the Sacrament. What is abhorryng of Marriage, if this be none? For
to compare it, yea and to make it worse the^ whoredom? what if she have vowed
chastity? has she not also vowed to fly fornication? Now is she bound
unto virginity, but by man's law. But for to avoid fornication, and whoredom,
is Gods commandment Wherefore see how high that the Pope will set him self
above God and his holy ordinance. These. 4.


Furthermore S. Paul says, that the will of God is, that we should abstain
from fornication, and that every one of us should know to keep his vessel in
sanctifiing, and honor. Mark S. Paul's saying: First, that it is the will of
God, that we should abhor fornication. Who will now resist the will of God?
and not regard the thing that God will have done? I trust no Christen man.
Furthermore the will of God is, yt every man should keep his vessel in
honor. Now if Priests be men, and have not the gift of chastetie, then are
they bound to regard this commandment. For he says, every man.

Mark also, that blessed S. Paul calls the vessel of married men honorable
and sanctified. Wherefore the^ should it be unlawful for a priest to use a
sanctified, and an holy vessel? To possess other men's vessels in uncleanness is
against God, and man. But it is lawful for any man here by this text, to
possess a vessel of his own, the which God has sanctified and honored. How
can man now for any occasion curse that thing, that God has sanctified, or
make it unclean, that God has purified.

S. Paul having yt spirit of God did prophecy, that there should come 1.
Tim. 4.
men in the latter days, which should forbid men to marry, and these men
should speak lies in holy hypocrisy. Now mark the text. Men shall forbid
marriage, and that in the latter days. The truth is, that no man has
forbidden any certain state of men to marry, but the Pope only. Wherefore
this text must needs touch his kingdom, seeing that he is also in the
latter days. There were certain heretics called Taciani, which did condemn
fully and wholly all manner of marriage. And though Taciani.
Saint Paul speaks against them, yet in very deed the Popes doctrine is not
excepted, seeing it is contained in these latter days. For though there were
twenty heresies more the^ Taciani, yet must the text be applied against them
all, that does co^de^ne or else despise marriage, in the whole or in the part.
For the text is against them all that does forbid marriage, and specially in the
latter days.

But he that does forbid his priests to marry, does forbid for so much
marriage: The Pope forbyddeth marriage.
therefore the text makes against the Pope. Note also, that these men that
shall forbid marriage, shall have an holy color of hypocrisy. Now has the
Pope forbidden his Priests to marry, under the color of holiness, because (as
he says) that his Priests must be pure, and clean: As who should say,
that marriage were unclean and vnpure for priests to use. What can be holy
hypocrisy, if this be not hypocrisy? Here is the holy and pure institution
of God condemned, as a thing unclean for his holy Priests to use. Moreover,
the Taciani did not forbid marriage under the color of holiness: but they said
it was fully, and wholly an unlawful thing. The which doctrine had no manner of
color. But the Pope says, that marriage is good and laudable in it self, but
his priests be to pure, and to holy for to use that simple thing. For it is
not a thing (says he) that does become yt state of perfect me^, but it
belongs to weak and imperfect men. Now judge good reader, which of these
heresies, either Taciani, or Papacy does pretend yt greatest color of
holiness? And yet I am sure yt the holy Ghost in S. Paul, did speak both
against the greatest, and also smallest hypocrisy. For he allows no manner
of feigned holiness.

There were other certain heretics called Marciani. These did receive no man
to be a Christen man, except he would refuse marriage. Mark what diversity
is between these heretics and the Popes learning. The Pope receives no
priests except they forswear marriage. The The Marcianites and the Pope, all
one.
Marcianites, they receive no man to be a Christen man, except he forswear
marriage. So that there is no diversity betweete the heretics and the Pope,
but that these heretics does except a greater number then yt Pope does, and
speaks more generally: but the thing is all one. For the Marcianites judges
marriage unclean for their sort, and so does the Pope for his sort.
Farthermore, Marcian says, that among Christen men may be no temporal
maryages, but all conjunctions must be turned unto a spiritual marriage. And
the Did. xxxi. ca. l^x.
self same thing says the Pope of his Priests. Wherefore seeing that they
do grant how that blessed S. Paul, 1. Tim. 4.
and also holy fathers has condemned this heresy of Marcian, it m^st needs
also follow, that the opinion of the Pope is likewise condemned. But yet
paraduenture here will be Obiectio.
said, as Doctor Eckius, and other me^ writing of this matter says, how that
the Pope does not condemn marriage, but he causes men alonely to keep their
vow. I answer, that this is but a small evasion. For The Pope compels me^
to vow, and for so much he forbids marriage.
first the Pope co^pelleth them, if they will be priests, to vow, and to
forswear marriage. For if there were no statute made before of the Pope, that
all priests should forswear marriage, then should there no vows be made of
priests against marriage, but the thing should be free. So that the vow
comes out of the Popes decree and prohibition, and not the decree out of the
vow. Therefore ye probation goes before the vow. Wherefore this evasion can
have no place.

Take an example. The Emperor makes a statute, that no man shall be admitted
into his service except that he first swear to be an enemy unto the kings
grace of England. Is not now the Emperor first an enemy A good example
against the Popes practices.
unto the kings person, and then also a forbydder of love and favor, toward
the kings grace of England? I think his grace will take this act none
otherwise. For though he does not, nor can not make all men the kings
enemies, yet he makes all that appertain to him, to be the kings enemies.
So likewise the Pope, though he do not forbid all men marriage, yet he
forbyddeth as many as will be Priests. Yea, and he will admit no man to
be priest, except he first forswear marriage. So that ye vow is first made,
ere that that pristhoode is geeuen.

Now if he were not an enemy in very deed unto marriage, what should move
him to compel his priests to forswear marriage? why does he not as well
bind all his Priests to marriage, as he does to chastity? Yea, why does he
not at yt least keep himself indifferent, and neither make decree against
marriage, nor against chastity? But the very truth is, that all the
protectours of uncleanness and filthy living, does know very well, that this
solution is of no strength or valor. For in very deed their hearts does
reckon matrimony unclean and vnpure: and though they would now make a gloss,
yet their own laws, yt which be sprung out of their hearts, does show how
much they hold of holy and unpolluted Did. 32. c Erubescant.
matrimony. The pope does call clarks yt be married, impios, yt is, wicked,
cursed, unclean, filthy, and all yt naught is. Also in an other place, he
cauleth the matrimony of lay men, a fleshly, and carnal thing, and the
chastity of D. 31. c. lex.
his spirituality, he cauleth spiritual marriage. What says Marcian more then
this is? Is not this abominable doctrine? thus shameless to speak of holy and
sanctified matrimony? and to call it fleshly and carnal? And yet he is not
thus content, but he cauleth yt marriage of priests sin, and defenders of
the same, sectatores libidinum, Did. 82. c. Plurimos.
the folowers of filthy lusts, preceptores viciorum, the teachers of vice,
laxantes frena luxuriae, geeuing liberty to lechery. Tell me, if any man
would speak and reprove yt whores of the stews, what other words co^ld he
use against them more shameful then these? And yet they will not be noted to
condemn matrimony. What mischief can not the devil cloak, if men would
believe him.

But farthermore, let us see, how holy, and blessed that he reckeneth
matrimony for to be, by the reason of honors, and rewards, that he gives
unto priests that marry. First Did. 82. c. quia aliquanti.
says he, if a Priest does marry of ignorance, by the reason that he knew
not the statute of the pope, forbidding priests to marry, that then this
priest The popes laws against marriage of Priests.
first shall forsake his wife, and then shall so continue with out any farther
promotion, as long as he lives. And if there be any Priest, that will defend
his marriage, by the example of the Priests in the old law, him does the Pope
private of all manner of Ecclesiastical honor for ever. Moreover New devised
sin against the holy ghost, help God.
he says, that if any spiritual man does after this decree marry, then his
sin shall never be forgeuen him, nor they may never afterward handle the
blessed sacrament, because that marriage is a fylthy, and a foul concupiscence
says he.

Now judge indifferently Christian reader, if this be not dispising of holy
matrimony, thus shamefully to speak of it, and so cruelly to handle them, that
holyly does live in it, having nothing for him, but a lousy decree of Pope
Siricius. So that men may perceive clearly, how that he byndeth not his
priests, by the reason of their vow, as his protectours does say, but by yt
reason of the statute, that Siricius had made before the priests had vowed any
chastetie.

S. Paul, when he should order such bishops, as should be in the 1. Tim. 3.
Church of God irreprese^sible, among all other things he would that he
should be a man of one wife, having Tit. 1.
children well brought up. Here Saint Paul aloweth him one wife.

How comes it then, that men say, that a Priest shall have no wife? How
agrees this one, with none? Men must at the least ways grant, that S. Paul
did not reckon marriage vnpure, and unclean for a bishop, for if he had, he
would not have granted him one wife. Yea moreover he speaks of his children
well brought up, in the which he admits, and aloweth, the conjunction, and
copulation Children be not gotten with lookyng on women only.
beetweene them two, for to be godly, and virtuous. He has other eyes to
look on the blessed, and holy conjunction, which is between man, and wife,
then the Pope has. For the Pope rekeneth it fylthy, and not semely, that a
Priest should with his holy hands touch a woman's body, and with the same
hands to conscecrate yt holy sacrament. Oh Lord God, what ca^ not the devil
bring to pass? what abominable holiness of hypocrisye is this? to reckon a
Priest vnpure, and unclean, because he has used him self in Gods holy
ordinance? Is not this as much to say? God thou art an inuenter, and ordayner
of that thing that makes men vnpure, and unclean? thou art the auctour of
this uncleanness? For had thou not instituted it, so had men not used it?
The Pope allows his priests to keep whores, but cannot abide that they
should have an honest wife.


Alas how feign would I chide. I could here say some thing, If I would but I
may not. Nevertheless it greeueth me, for I can not tell where to use evil
words, if I shall not use the^ against such abominable, and execrable heresye
as this is. But yet I pray you one word. Why be not your hands defiled for
handeling of whores sleshe? Is whores slesh so clean? that Priests may handle
it? and the flesh of an honest, and a good woman so unclean, Burn all
Priests that be known for open whore masters, and benesices will be the^
better chepe And I will reckon you then earnestly to defend chastity.
that Priest must be burned for handeling of it? Fie on the, devil. Think
thou that men has neither reverence in their ^artes toward God, nor yet reason
to judge of these things? What can be shameless, if this thing shall be thus
allowed amongst Christen men? Here be all honest women and that in honesty,
abhorred and despised, and whores in comparison of them, be sanctified, and
blessed. But oh thou Lord God, I do yet believe that thou will once be
revenged of this d^shonour, and shamefulnes. Moreover, why does not oppression,
and violence, and theft, defyle Priests hands, as well as marriage? What has
pure matrymonye offended, that it alonely should defyle priests hands, and all
other manner of vices, and uncleanness, does nothing contaminate them. But alas
for pitye, how blindly do we judge of this holy ordinance, and institution of
God, that thus do blaspheme it?

What will men say to blessed S. 1. Cor. 9.
Paul, where he says, Have we not power to lead about a sister to wife, as
well as the brethren of the Lord, and as Cephas? I will not dispute, whether
that Paul had a wife or not But this I am sure, that this text does clearly
prove, and that after yt mind of great doctors how that Peter, and other
Apostles had wives. Wherefore then should it be unlawful for our priests to
marry? Be our priests holier the^ S. Peter and other Apostles? Or is marriage
now more unlawful, then it was then? But peradventure A great blasphemy
against Christ and his holy Apostles.
here will be said, that the Apostles had wives before yt Christ did choose
the^, but afterward they forsook their wives, and followed Christ.

To this I answer, that it is not enough so to say. For seeing that they have
granted, how the apostles had wives, when they were cauled, it stands with
reason, that these men should prove by an open scripture, that the Apostles
after their caulyng, did forsake their wives. Yea, I will go farther with
them, and say plainly, that is an abominable lie, and a great blasphemy
against God, and his holy Apostles, to say that they had forsaken their wives.
For our M. Christ taught them not to forsake their Math. 19.
wives, but in any wise to keep the^, saving alonely for fornication. Now The
Apostles forsook not their wives as men dream.
is the election unto Apostleship, neither fornication, nor yet like unto
fornication. Wherefore I say boldly, that it is a false lie against the holy
Apostles, to say that they forsook their wives. Also this same place of S.
Paul does prove it a false lie. For S. Paul speaks, how S. Peter after his
Apostleshyp, and also other disciples of Christ, carried their wives about with
them, when they went a preaching. Wherefore it is but a lie, to say, that they
had forsaken them.

Now Christen reader, here have I performed I trust, one part of my promise,
that is to say, I have proved this article of mine by Gods holy word so
plainly, that no man (I trust) can or will deny, but that these Scriptures be
sufficient to move me and al other me^ to be of this doctrine that I am of.
The second part of my promise was to prove this also by holy doctors. Unto the
which, I will now prepare my self.

But before all things, I lovingly, and charitably, desire the reader to set
apart all parcialitie and malice, and to judge indifferently of my doctrine, as
he will answer at y^ dread full day of doom, and not to refuse that thing
that is truth, for hatred, or displeasure of my person. For surely mine intent
is neither to hurt, or harm, nor yet displease (as much as lies in me) any
person. And though I have in times past, somewhat vehemently written against
those things that I thought errors: yet would I require heartily every man to
weye every thing indifferently by himself, and consider how I have taken upon
me, not to enuey against any person, but alonely to fight against that
deuillishe doctrine, which is dishonor to Christ and his blessed blood, and
perilous and dampnable unto all Christen men's souls.

Secondarily, I have been wrongfully, and uncharitably handeled, as God and
all good men does know, the which I will be bound to prove whenever it
shall please God and the king to assign indifferent judges to hear me, and
mine adversaries. Now, let no man require in me, that he can not find in
himself, that is to say, that I can so patiently, and so easily bear and
suffer these intolerable wrongs, as I ought for to do, yea and paraduenture
as I gladly would do. Wherefore I confess, that many words has been
sharply written by me, the which I would gladly had been more charitablyer
written, but then God had not geeue^ me so great patience. Wherefore I trust
now by Gods grace, somethyng more temperately to speak, desiring every good
man of his charity, to help me with his devout prayer. Amen.

To our purpose. First comes blessed S. Ciprian, of whom was asked a
question, what should be done Ciprian ^pist. 11.
with those religious persons, that could not keep their chastity as they
had vowed. These be his words. Thou do ask what we do judge of vyrgins,
the which after they have decreed to live chastely, are afterward found in one
bed with a man. Of the which thou say that one of them was a Deacon. We
do with great sorrow see y^ great ruin of many persons, which comes by y^
reason of such unlawful and perilous companying together. Wherefore if they
have dedicate them selves unto Christ, out of faith to live purely, and
chastely, then let them so remain with out any fable, and strongly, and
steadfastly to abide the reward of virginity. But S. Ciprian did more regard
honest living, then the religious vow.
and if they will not abide, or else can not abide, then is it better to marry,
then for to fall into the fire of concupiscence, and let them geeue unto the
brethren and sisterne none occasion of sclaunder. etc. I do for my part
require no more then blessed Cyprian does here teach, that is to say, if
Priests can live sole, I beseech our Lord to reward them for it, and geeue
them grace to continue. But if they can not, I would have no snare laid for
their souls, nor yet have them compelled to a thing that they can not keep.
But I would the thing should be indifferent for them that can live chaste,
so to remain. And they that have not the gift, nor can not so live, for to
use that lawful remedy that God has ordained. What has men to do, or what
moves the^ The marriage of Priests is allowed of God, and therefore not to be
condemned of men.
to compel Priests not to marry, as long as God is contented with priests
wedlock? Let no man think that such a compulsion is acceptable to God. And if
men will not be contented with this doctrine, that is so good, so reasonable,
and so honest, what ca^ I say to it? I must be content, I can do no more, but
say my learning, and let God alone with his punishment.

Also blessed S. Augustine writing of this same matter, says these Aug. de
b^no coniugal^ ad Iulianum.
words: Certain men do affirm those men to be aduoulterers, that does
marry after they have vowed ^hastitie: but I do affirm, that those men do
grievously sin, the which does separate them. etc.

Note first that S. Angustine writes of them that had vowed chastity. And yet
notwithstanding he would that those men should continue in their marriage
together. The which thing he would never have suffered if it had been
unlawful and heres^e, as men would make it now a days.

Secondarily observe that there were in his days (as ^ee now many in ours)
that thought it a grievous S. Aug. dispenses with vows where danger is of
fornication.
sin, for a man to marry after his vow. And yet this opinion S. Augustine
does condemn.

Now let men admit this doctrine of S. Augustine, and I will require no more.
And if they will condemn me, then let them also condemn S. Augustine, for I
have learned it of him. Also blessed S. Ambrose, writes of virginity in this
manner: Chastity of body ought to be desired of us. The which thing I do give
for a counsel, and do not commau^de it imperiously. For virginity is a thing
alonely, Ambr^. 32. quest. cap. 1. Integritas.
that ought to be counsayled, but not to be commanded, it is rather a thing
of voluntary will, then of a precept. etc. Note how S. Ambrose teaches, how
that virginity ought not to be required, as under a precept. Wherefore it must
needs follow, that the Popes doctrine is unlawful, when he commands, that
no man shall be a Priest, except he vow chastity. For ^ere the Pope
compels men under a color, for to vow chastity. As for an example.

It chances me to meet by the way a thief, the which says unto me. Thou
shall not go over y^ bridge, except thou will deliver me thy purse. Now is it
of truth, that I may choose whether I will go over the bridge or not, but yet
this man does violence, for co^pellyng me either to go back again, or else
to lose my purse, if that I will go over. And I doubt not, but Vows that have
unlawful conditions are not to be observed.
the kings law will both condemn him for doing violence, and also take him
for a thief. So likewise the pope does wrong, when he says, I shall not be
a priest, except that I first vow chastity. I say, that this condition is
unlawful, and it is wrongfully done, to bind me to any thing under any
condition, that God has left free to me. Moreover, our M. Christ did not
require that condition of his priests. Wherefore it must needs follow, that it
is not a thing, that of necessity belongs to Priesthode.

Also S. Hierome approoueth this Hi^. d. 37. cap. Legan^.
doctrine of mine, saying: Let bishops, and priests read this thing (he
speaks against mispendyng of goods, that is offered to help poor men with)
the which does teach their children profane letters, and makes them to read
commedies, and to sing baudy songs of iesters, and these children they find
of the charges of the church. etc. Observe this y^ S. Hierom speaks here of
Bishops, and priests children, the which they could not have, if they were
unmarried. For it is not to be supposed, that S. Hie^ome speaks of bastardes,
or of whores children, for then he would have used other words. So that good
reader, it is clear, after the doctrine of holy Doctors, that it is lawful
for Priests to have wives, and specially if they can not live sole.

But now will we go farther, and see what holy councels has ordained in this
cause. The truth is that y^ devil has of long time harped on this stryng, to
sorbyd Priests Matrimony. Not for any devotion, that he had to virginity,
for he knew well men could not keep it, farther then their gifts were: but
alonely that he might lay a snare for men's souls, and also bring the holy
institution, and ordinance of God into a contempt, and a despising. But God
has always of his infinite mercy, styrred up some good man to resist him. We
do read in authentical stories, that in the counsel of Nicene, certain men
went about to have pri^ated Priests from their wives. But almighty God did let
them. The words of the stories be these. The Council of Nicene, The holy
Council.
willing to reform the life of men, did set certain laws, the which we call
Canones: among the which, certain Ex tripertita historia* Did. xxxi. ca.
Nicena.
men would have had a law to he brought in, that Bishops, priests, Deacons,
and Subdeacons, should not lie with their wives, which they had married, before
their consecration. But Paphnutius a confessor, did withstand them and said,
that their marriage was honorable, and it was pure chastity for the^ to lie
with their wives. So that the Counsel was persuaded, not to make any such law,
affirmyng it for to be a grievous occasion both unto them, and also unto their
wives of fornication. And this thing did Paphnutius, though that he him self
was unmarried. The Council did allow this sentence. So that nothing was
decreed, as concerning this thing: but every man was left unto his freewill,
and not bound of any necessity. etc.

Here is to be noted, that this holy Counsel did not reckon it an vnpure* or
a filthye thing, for a Bishop, or a The Council of Nicen^ did not think it an
unmeet thing for a Bishop to have a wife.
Priest, to company with his wife. But they do grant, that it is a pure, and
a clean chastity for a Priest to company with his wife. The which is clearly
against y^ Pope. For he says, that it is fleshly, and carnal, and that their
hands be defiled, and they made unworthy thereby, to handle the blessed
Sacraments. But here will be said that these me^ had wives before their
consecration, the which thing they will also grant, that a married man may be
chosen a Bishop, and also keep his wife afterward. But he may not marry after
his consecration, that had no wife before.

To this I answer, that it is no lawful solution, thus to say. For if it be
lawful for a man to keep his wife after his Priesthode? why shall it not be
as lawful for him to take a wife after his consecration? What thing is there
in his matrimony, that is made after his consecration, that was not in his
matrimony before his consecration? Or for what cause did he take a wife before
his consecration? If he did it to avoid fornication, then is he now much
more bound to take a wife then before: for it becomes him a great deal worse
to live in fornication, after his consecration, then he did before. But these
me^ that makes this light solution, do not handle this matter truly before
God. For it is not their meaning, that married men should either be Bishops, or
Priests. For let them show me in The Pop^ will not suffer that married me^
shal^e chosen Bishops.
all their chronicles, that ever any married man was chosen to be a bishop*
since they had made laws, that Priests should have no wives, and then I will
believe them: But alonely they seek an e^asion, how to defend the matter by.
For I dare say, if any man should go about to choose a married man to be a
bishop, or else a person, they would think he were mad. In so much that some
of them has said, that marriage was so unlawful Di^t. xx^i. ca. O^in^.
for Piestes, that they have feigned, y^ ^olye Apostles for to forsake their
wives, after their election. How stands these two togeathers? that married men
may be bishops, I fear me If married men may be Bishops, then second brethren
shall no longer be beggars.
the byshoprickes will soon be gotten out of their hands, and most part
also of all benefices. Wherefore I would counsel them rather to grant that
Priests might have wives, then for married men to be made bishops.

Furthermore mark, that the holy counsel made no law, whether y^ Priest
should marry after their conse^ration or not. Wherefore it must needs be
taken away of them as free and an indifferent thing, for a priest to marry
after his co^secratio^ or not. For if they had reckened it unlawful for him to
marry, then would they have forbidden it. For the counsel was gathered for to
reform those things y^ were a^sse, as the text says clearly. Moreover, if
it had chanced then a priest to have married after his consecration, he had
not offended, for there was no law at that day, that did forbid him.
Therefore, it is now no necessary article.

If men will not be content with these auctorities: yet somewhat to satisfye
them, I will bring them an other law, which the Papists calls Canon
Apostolorum, the words be Canon Apost.
these. If any man does teach, that a Priest by y^ reason of his order ought to
forsake his wife, cursed be he. etc. Mark of this law, that for color of
holiness, no man ought to forsake their wives. Wherefore it must needs follow,
that for priests to marry wives after their consecration is not against their
holiness. Note also, that the text says: how Priests had wives of their own,
and went not a borowing, as they do now. We read in the counsel Consilium
Gangrens. Canon. 4.
of Gangrens, how they made this decree. If any man does judge or condemn a
Priest that is married, that he may not, by the reason of his marriage do
sacrifyce, but will abstain from his mass by the reason thereof, cursed be
he. etc. First you shall know the occasion wherefore this counsel was gathered.

There was a certain heretyke called Eustachius, the which did among
Eustachius, Hereticus.
all other heresies teach, that no mari^d man could be saved. Also be taught
that Priests, which did marry, ought for to be despised, and in no wise for to
handle the blessed sacraments.

Against this heretic, is this decree made. Now let every man judge what
diversity is between this heretyke, and the Popes doctrine. This heretyke
says, that marriage is vnpure, and unclean, and that a married Priest may not
touch the sacraments. The self and the same doctrine says the Pope in diverse
places: and especially in a chapter, y^ begins with Nullum. Did. 2^.
Where he says, that no bishop shall pre ume to consecrate any Deacon, except
he will first vow chastity. For no man ought to be admitted (says he) to
serve at the altar, except his chastity be first known.

Also in an other chapter he says, Did. 28. (...). De^ernimus.
They that either keep whores, or else marry wives, shall be priuated of their
benefices. For they are unworthy for to be in the temple of God, and to touch
the holy vessels of the Church, that does use them selves in such uncleanness,
says he. What is condemning Saving the Pope, and Eustachius.
of matrymony, if this be not? He co^pareth whordome, and matrymony to be
like clean, the which did never none heretyke. The Pope goes further, Did.
28. Did* 28. c. Assumi, and pr^teria.
and says: No man may be either Priest, or Deacon, that is married, except
they will promise to forsake their wives. etc. These laws make against them
that say, how that married men may be Priests. The same Did. 31. ca.
sac^rdotib^^ ^piscopi. Tenere cos. Si laicus.
thing does the Pope also confyrme in diverse other places of his law, having
none other cause why, but only because (as he says) Priests must be pure,
and clean. This same cause had also Eustachius. For he reckened as the Pope
does, how marriage, was vnpure, and unclean, and did therefore forbid Priests
to marry. Yea in our days, I dare say, that no man forbids Priests to
marry, but only they that recke^ marriage unclean. But let ^s go farther, and
see what holy counsels have decreed, as conserning Priests matrimony.

We do read in a counsel, that is called the syxt Sinod, these words: 6.
Sinodus.
Considering yt it is decreed amongst the laws made by the^ of Rome, that no
deacon, nor Priest, shall company with their wives. Therefore we not
withstanding that decree, following yt rules of the Apostles, and the
constitutions of holy men, will, that from this day forth, marriage shall be
lawful, in no wise dissoluyng the matrimony between them and their wives, nor
depriving the^ of their familiarity in time convenient. Whosoever therefore
shall be found able of the order This Counsel does fully establish and
confirm the marriage of Priests.
of Deacon, Subdeacon, or of Priesthood, we will that no such men be
prohibited to ascend the dignities aforesaid, for the cohabitation of their
wives: Nor that they be constrained at the receite of their orders, to
profess chastity, or to abstain from the company of their lawful wives.

It follows, if any man presume therefore against the Canons of the Apostles to
deprive Priests, or Deacons from the copulation and fellowship of their lawful
wives, let such a man be deposed. Semblably, both priests and Deacons, which
puts away their wives under the color of holiness, let them be
excommunicated. But if they continue in the same, let them be deposed.

Note how this counsel does condemn by name the Popes decree, which has
commanded spiritual men to forsake their wives. And in this is also to be
observed, that the evasion of the Papists, when they say, that married me^ may
be priests, is a false lie. For the Pope and they did never admit that, as this
counsel witnesses, but alonely that they are driven to a narrow exigent, by
yt violence of our arguments, and they have none other evasion to delude the
people by. Wherefore they be compelled to help themselves with such a lie.
For here is it plainly in this Counsel declared, how the Pope, and they have
prohibited those Priests yt were married, to company with their wives, and
would not admit them to mynister, before they had forsaken their wives.

Farthermore, note how that this counsel does allege for them, the The popes
doctrine is condemned by a Council.
rules of the holy Apostles, and the co^stitutions of blessed men. What
Christen man will now set him self against this holy counsel, the which has
so good authority for it? Afterward it is to be marked, how that this
counsel does command, that no man shall vow chastity, when he shall be
consecrated, the which thing is clearly against the Pope, that co^pelleth all
his priests to vow chastity, before they be sacred.

Now let every Christen man judge whether it be better, or surer to follow the
Pope having none authority for him, and being also but one man: then to
follow this holy Counsel, having for it the authority of the holy Apostles,
and of other blessed men.

Finally, mark how that this blessed counsel does depose all those that does
private Priests from the company of a lawful wife. Out of the which does
follow, that the Pope, and all his adherentes be ipso iur^ deposed. And if
they re^ their error, they be excommunicated. Wherefore I conclude out of this
counsel, that Priests may lawfully have wives. We have also even there these
words. It is open that neither Did. xxviij c. Diaconi.
Deacons, nor subdeacons, ought to be forbidden from marriage. etc. If this be
not plain? I can not tell Did. xxviij. ca. de Siracus.
what is plain. Wherefore Gracianus concludes, that whether he be Priest,
Deacon, subdeacon, he may lawfully use matrimony. If men will not be content
with these sayings, I can not tell what will satisfy them. Reasonable men
ought not to fight both against God and man. But yet let us go farther, and
see what the Popes law says more.

Innocent the third writes in his De vita and honest. cloricorum.
decretalles, on this manner: Those Priests, that after the manner of the
country, has not forsaken the coniunctio^ of marriage, if they do break
their wedlock, ought grievously to be punished, seeing that they may use
lawfully matrimony. Mark how that this was the manner of certain countries,
that Priests might mary. Therefore it must needs follow, that Priests
matrimony is not forbidden by Gods law. And if it be not forbidden ^p Gods
law? what charity is in the Pope to compel me^ so violently unto the thing,
yt which God has not bound the^ to. Is it not a cruel thing for the Pope to
burn a man as an heretic, because that he keeps not his commanndement and
lives not in open whoredom? Why does he not command him as well neither to
hunger, nor yet to thyrst? And if he either hunger, or thyrst, why does he
not forbid him to eat and to drink? It is as much in our power to vow
chastity, and to keep it, if we have not the gift of God, as it is to vow
that we will neither hunger nor thyrst: for they are both inclinations of
nature, implanted of God. For as Cicero says, and also the Emperor in his
law: Cicero. lib. i. officioru^. Iustinianus lib. i. cap. Ius natural.
we are naturally inclined unto the conjunction that is in matrimony, for
cause of propagation. And it is as much in our hands, neither to hunger nor to
thyrst, as it is to change this natural inclination. And as we It is
implanted in nature to marry, if Gods gift do not change our nature.
when we are hungry and thirsty, ca^ not abstain from eating and drinking: no
more can we keep our chastity (notwythstanding our vow) if God have not
given us the gift. Me^ may here please somthyng themselves, and stand in their
own conseyte, and say how they can invent many remedies to keep their
chastity by.

But I dare say, they would not for all the clothes that belongs to their
backs, that the pureness, and cleannes of their hearts were written in great
letters, and set up on yt church door. Wherefore I would desire me^ to be
contented, and to set aside all hypocrisy, and speak the truth, as it is
written in their hearts: for God will not be deceived, nor yet mocked. And
doubtless, if I could not show infinite examples, how that Priests neither
do, nor yet ca^ keep their chastity, me^ might well blame me for mouyng
this article. But now seeing that their living does testify my doctrine, and
that to yt great offense and sclaunder of Christ's holy Church, and also to the
great rebuke and shame of many a good man's child: yea finally to the
dampnation of many a dear soul: Me think men ought to be content and to
thank me for taking of so great labors, for deliverance of their souls,
and also for mayntenau^ce of honesty, and and good moral virtue, according to
Gods law, and man's law.

But let us proceed farther to Magister Se^tentiaru^. lib. ij. Did. (...).
prove this matter. The master of the sentences, writes on this manner: Our
weakness is prone to fall into filthynes, but it is helped with honest marriage.
And the thing that is unto whole men an offense, is unto sick me^ a remedy.
Mark how the M. of the Sentences says, that we are ready to fall into
filthynes? And how that marriage is an honest remedy? How can men then after
their own learning condemn marriage, as no honest thing? seeing that their
own Clerks cauleth it honest? Moreover the master of the Sentences will,
that both perfect and imperfect may use this honest thing: for to the first it
is an offense, and to the other it is a necessary remedy. Jesus how would men
cry against us poor men, if they had half so much against us, as we have
against them. But our Lord send them his grace, and molisie their hearts.
Amen.

We have also in the Popes law a Ext. de (...) Pres cap ad presentiam. Ven^e^s.
Proposuit. (...) transmissa.
title, De filijs Presbyterorum, in the which there be many chapters written
to the Bishops of England, as concerning Priests children. Wherefore it is to
he supposed, that Priests had then wives. And if they had the^, why may they
not now? By what authority are our Priests now more compelled then they were?
Have our Priests now more articles of their faith then they had? But yet here
will be said, that the Popes law speaks of bastardes, and not of lawful
children. Me thinks that this same is not charitably answered, for here
they do accuse of fornication many an honest Priest, against whom they have
alonely but a light supposition. For they that made this answer, knew not
those men, nor yet their living. And the text speaks but of Priests
children, and not of bastardes.

Farthermore by this solution is (...) not(...)de(...) holy (...) as they do
that grant the^(...)bastardes.
many an honest man defamed, for to ^ee a basta^d, the which is an evil name,
and me think uncharitably laid by these men unto their charges. Wherefore
note, that these men does sore defame priesthode, and that against the order of
charity, that had rather grant all these Priests, that the law speaks of
(which is no small number) for to be breakers of their vow, and to be open
whoremaisters, yea, and also their children to be bastardes, rather then they
would grant that those Priests had lawful wives. The which were neither
against honesty, nor yet the order of priesthode. Wherefore if I should thus
have defamed Priests, and their children, men would ^ore have been grieved
with me: yea I am afraid, that some men will be displeased with me, alonely
because I do write against those priests, who^ I know of surety to be
naught, if having of children can testify it.

But what will they say to yt popes law in the same place, whose words be
these. Thou do ask of us (says Extra. lib. i de fi^s presbyterum. c. Ad
(...).
the Pope, to the Bishop of Cassell) whether that these men, that has Priests
to their fathers, may be promoted to holy orders or not, if they he of good,
and honest de^our, and well learned. To this we answer (says the Pope) that
if they be gotten of lawful marriage, and there be none other Canonical
impediment, then may they lawfully be promoted unto holy orders, and may enjoy
that same benefice, which their fathers had before. etc.

This no man ca^ not deny, but yt law speaks of Priests children, yt were
gotten in lawful matrimony. Wherefore it must needs follow, yt Priests were
then married: yea, and the law calls their marriage lawful, which must also
be noted: so yt men may see that this doctrine of mine is no new thing, but it
is elder then their law.

Also in that same title, the Pope says, we have understood, that N. borne,
and gotten in Priesthode of a Ibidem. cap. Litteras.
lawful wife, has always had an affection to serve God in the office of a
spiritual man. etc. Here note, that the Pope speaks of Priests children:
yea, and of them that were gotten in lawful marriage, and not in fornication.
Wherefore the Pope supposes, that Priests may have a lawful matrimony. And
therefore me thinks, that when men find in the law, mention made of Priests
children, they should rather suppose them to be gotten in matrimony, then in
fornication, both for the honesty of the father, mother, and also of the
child: specially seeing yt Priests had wives in those days. And it stands
also more with honesty of Priesthode, to grant that they had wives, rather
then whores.

Now let us see what the Emperors Imperator Constan. lege. Omnis ^a Ad
perangariam. Codice de Epis. and ele.
law says to Priests wives. We will (says he) that all manner of spiritual
men shall have this prerogative, that their wives, and their children, and their
servants, that is for to say, both male, and female, shall be free from an
homage, which is called Pera^gariam. Here is to be noted, that the Emperor
does not alonely admit Priests matrimony, but also he honoreth it with a
privilege, and a prerogative, the which he would not have done, if he had
judged their matrimony unlawful. Wherefore men may see, if they will, how
indifferent our forefathers has been unto this holy state of matrimony. And
it would not become us evil, if we learned of them better to judge of these
things, that God our maker has both instituted and sanctified.

Now good reader have I proved this article by Gods holy word, by the sayings
of Doctors, by the authority of Councels, and by some certain laws, both
Imperial, and Popish. Wherefore now will I go farther unto the hystories, and
prove this thing by examples, and practice of holy me^.

First, we have she example of blessed S. Peter, the which had doubtless a wife,
as it may be proved by Matthew, which says: Quod socrus Petri Math. 8.
tenebatur magnis febribus. Peter's wives mother had a great agew. Now, if Peter
had a wife, as this text is clear, what thing should forbid our priests
marriage? I think they are not bound S. Peter had a wife.
to more chastity, then Peter was? Nor it will not help to say, that he
forsook his wife after his calling. For the Scripture here speaks of Peter's
wives mother. Why do they not as well take his wives mothers name away, as
they take away his wife? But I have answered to this reason largely enough
before.

Also Philippe the Evangelist, had three daughters, the which he could Acts.
11.
not have bad, if that he had had no Philip the Evangelist was married.
wife: for I think there is no good man that will recke^ them to be
bastardes, and whores children. Neither it can help, to say, that these
children were borne before his election, for this is but a simple saying, and
no probatio^. And it is not enough to say, seeing that men will have it for so
necessary an article: but men must also prove it by open Scriptures. For else I
may say by as good authority, that these daughters were borne after his
election, as other me^ say, how they were borne before his election. And I have
better supposition for me out of the text, then they have: for they are not
called Philips daughters alonely, but Philippe the Evangelist daughters.
Wherefore they may by a good reason say, they were not Philippes daughters, as
they may say, that their father was none Evangelist.

We do read in Tripertita Historia these words: All Priests in the oriental
Ex tripertita historia. lib. 9. cap. xxxviij.
Church does abstain with a free will, and of no necessity from wives. For
many of them, in time when they be bishops, have had of their lawful wives
chlidre^. Note how this history declares clearly, that priests in the
oriental Church were not compelled to vow chastity. Secondarily yt history
cauleth priests wives lawful wives. And also how the bishops had children,
after their consecration. Now does all learned men know, that the oriental
Church receives their manners nerer of the Apostles then we.

Wherefore it is to be presupposed that these men took their custom of
marryage, of the holy Apostels. And at the least wise, it must follow, that if
their priests may have wives lawfully, that then our priests may have also.
For God has laid none other burden on our Priests necks, the^ he had on
theirs.

Moreover we do read in Ecclesiastica Li. iiij. ca. xxiij.
Historia, that Penitus bishop of a city called Gnoseos, would have made a
decree, yt priests should have Penitus. Dionisius.
vowed chastity. But Dionisius Bishop of Chorinth, wrote against him and
required him, that he would not lay no necessity of compulsed chastity in
other men's necks. Penitus followed his counsel. Here you may see, yt the
deuell has been of long time about to bring in this snare for priests but
God has resisted him.

We have also in the same historye, Li* iij. ca. xxx.
against those men, that did despise marriage, a goodly saying which is this
what will they reprove the Apostles? Peter, and Philip had wives, and did also
give their daughters to marriage. In so much as S. Peter did cry unto A plain
place to prove that Peter had a wife.
his wife, when she should be led unto her passion, and called her by her
name, and said unto her: Oh dear wife, remember our Lord. Hear is it clear,
that Peeter had a wife. And hear is also against them that says, how yt Peter
forsook his wife, which is here proved a false lie.

Moreover, Spiridon the bishop of Ibi. li. x. c^. v.
Cipres, having the gift of prophecye, had also a daughter, whose name was
called Irenem, which after her faithful service dyed a vergin. Hear is it
clear, yt this holy man had a daughter, which he could not have, if he had
had no wife. Farthermore we do Eccle. hist. li. v. cap. xxiiij.
read, that Policrates, bishop of Ephesum, does show, that seven of his
parents lynially were bishops in order before him, and he him self was the
eight. Now could not this be, that his fathers from the seventh Policrates.
Ephesians. Epis.
degree could have been bishops, if bishops had had no wives, for the text is
clear of his fathers, and not of his kynsmen. Me think this is a clear
example, and sufficient to prove as great a matter as this is if men would be
content, and satisfied with reason.

Ex damaso Papa, ad Hieronimum, ex Platina, and Nauclero.
But let us go farther, and see, how many Popes have been priests children,
that this matter may be opened by them, and that Popes them selves may be
witness of this doctrine

First is there Siluerius, pope, the which had a bishop to his father called
Siluerius Papa.
Ormisda. This Siluerius lived about the year of our Lord. 524.

Pope Felix, the third of that name Felix. iij.
was yt son of Felix, priest of Rome. This man lived about the year of our
Lord. 474.

Pope Deus dedit, was the son Deus dedit.
of Stephane the subdeacon, which lived about the year of our Lord. 623.

Pope Theodorus, was the son Theodorus. i
of Theodore bishop of Jerusalem. This man lived about the year of our Lord.
634.

Hadrian, yt second was the son of Hadrianus. ij.
Thalare, the bishop. This man lived about the year of our Lord. 873.

Pope John, the xv. of that name, was yt son of priest Leo, This man
Ioha^nes. xv.
lived about the year of our Lord. 984.

Pope Agapitus, the first of that name, had a priest to his father called
Agapitus. i.
Gordianus, he lived about the year of our Lord. 534.

Pope Siluerius, had a father called Siluerius.
Siluerius. a bishop of Rome, This man lived about the year of our lord 544.

Pope Boniface, the first of yt name Bonifacius. i.
was son to Iucundus priest.

Pope Osius, was yt son of Stephan the subdeacon. Osius.


Pope Gelasius, the first, had a bishop to his father called Valenus anno
Gelasius. i.
Domini. 484.

John the. x. pope of yt name, was son to pope Surgius, about the year
Johannes. x.
of our Lord. 924.

All these, and a great many more (as the Popes law testifies) were the Did.
^i* ca. Osius.
children of subdeacons, deacons, and Priests, and have borne rule in the
Church of Rome. Wherefore I marvel very fore, that men do reckon it so new
learning, that priests should have wives, seeing, that it stands with Gods
holy word, with the saying of the old doctors, with the determination of
counsels, with yt Emperors law, and also with yt Popes old decrees.

Moreover, Christ's holy Apostels, and many other holy men, since their days,
have lived in the holy estate of matrymony. Finally, there has been many holy
men, and also holy women borne in the wedlock of Priests.

By what reason now can, or will me^ damn all these things, that be of so
great authority? If men will hear neither God nor man, nor yet no good
reason, what need men then so much to speak of learning? seeing that they
will hear nothing, but that they alonely judge good? Truly this is a great
high mind of me^, thus wrongfully to condemn other men for heretics, having
so good learning for them: and yet they themselves are grounded only of their
own sensual mind, having no learning, nor reason for them. But I will put
this matter to Gods judgment. And let not men doubt (if they beeleeue there is
a God) but that God will be a revenger of such wrongful violence, as men do
use in this case, both against him and against all his blessed company of
Saints. But yet for to do men pleasure, and that they might be persuaded if
it were possible, I will declare unto them, how yt we do find old monuments,
testifiyng clearly, that priests were in peaceable possession of matrimony,
and their children gotten in that same matrimony were admitted to spiritual
benefices.

In the time of Pope Alexander yt third, there was a controversy for the
patronage of a benefice between the pryor of Plimpto^ in Deuenshyre, and one
John de Valletorda. Now were there deputed judges, Rychard Archbishop of
Caunterbury, and Roger Bishop of Wynchester, before whom the pryor of
Plympton proved his patronage, by the reason that he was in possession, and
had geeuen it unto diverse persons. First (he says) there was a Priest of
Plympto^ called Alpheghe, which had by yt gift of the pryor of Plympton, the
benefice of Sutton, which is now called Plymmouth. This Alpheghe had a son
cauled Sadda, which had also the benefice after his father. And after Sadda,
was there an other priest cauled Alnodus, which had the benefice likewise. This
Alnodus had a son called Robert Dunprust, which after the discease of his
father Alnode had also the same benefice. And after this Robert Dunpru^t,
William Bacon his son, enjoyed the benefice likewise. Here men may see, that
it is neither so new learning, nor yet so long ago since priests had lawful
wives.

Moreover, I read in our own Chronicles, that in the time of king Croni* Fa^i.
Henry the iij. which raygned yt year of our Lord 1101. priests might
lawfully marry wives, in so much yt Anseline than Archbishop of Caunterbury in
a Seane that he held at London, did make a decree, yt priests should forsake
their wives, the which was both against Gods law, and man's. For the text of
our Master Christ is clear. Quos deus coniunxit, Homo non seperet. Mark
these two words, Deus, and Homo. And how much the one passes the other.

Farthermore, the Pope himself has not greatly regarded Priests chastity,
if he might get any money for dispensations, in the which thing he could not
have dispe^sed, if it had been of Gods law. And if it be but but man's law,
what charity is in the Pope to compel men so sore to keep it, seeing that it
is so great danger unto priests, and that so many souls been lost thorough
it? Yea, what tyranny is in him, thus cruelly to kill men for breakyng alonely
of his commandment, the which is not in their power to keep? To our purpose,
the Pope has often times dispensed both with Priests, and religious men for
their vow, and has geeuen them license to marry.

It is not unknown to many men Abbot Sa^^te of Readyng.
that there was an Abbot of Reading, whom men for his perfect lyuinge, called
Abbot Sancte. This man being in danger of a certain disease, Priests has
married after their priesthode.
by the reason he had no wife, sent unto the pope, desiring him to dispense
with him for his vow, and yt pope dispensed with him, and gave him license to
marry a wife, but under a condition that it should be secretly done, and not
In facie ecclesie. By this men may see, that the Pope himself holds not so
much of priests chastity: for then he would not regard more money, then it.
And if the pope may dispense with this Abbot for avoiding of a disease
corporal: how much more ought he now to dispense with priests: seeing there
be so many souls in danger? Yea, and also the order of priesthood is sore
defamed and sclaundered, by the reason that priests has no wives.

Moreover, we do read, that N^ generatione. xl.
pope Celestine the third, did dispense with a Nun, whose name was cauled
Constatia, King Rogers daughter of Cecyll, and gave her license to Cransius.
Canutus was seven years a Monk Iuniacensis, and yet the Pope dispenses with
him to marry a wife.
marry with Henry yt Emperor, the sixth of that name. This was about yt year
of our Lord. 1186. So that me^ may perceive how the pope does not greatly
regard the vow of his spirituality, if any thing may be gotten, to pay for a
dispensation. And it will not help to say, that the pope did dispense with this
woman for a common wealth. For the stories makes mention that the pope
dispe^sed with him under a condition, that he should pay him a yearly
pencion for the kingdom of Cecyll, and should recover it of his own charges,
out of the hands of Tancredus, which was then in possession of it. And
because that he might have the better title to the kingdom, he gave him the
only daughter of Cecill. So that yt pope did it not for a common wealth, but
for his own lucre. But now grant that it were for* a common wealth,
therefore, first it was not Gods commandment, that priests should live sole.
For gods word geeueth no place to no common wealth. And if y^ pope did then
dispense for a commonwealth? why does he not now dispense for avoiding of
fornication, in so many innumerable priests? Does not me^ reckon it for a
common wealth to expel fornication, and all occasions thereunto? But now there
is no common wealth to be regarded, because there is no shyning gold
offered. But at yt Marriage of Priests is neither against Gods law nor man's
law.
least ways me thinks that priests which marry, be very far from
heresy: for it is neither against Gods law, nor yet against the common wealth.

Here were many examples to be brought in, how the pope has dispensed both
with Monks, Friars, and Nuns, the which I will pass over, and will she we
as near as I can out out of Chronicles, how long* it is, that the pope has
gone about to bring in the vow of chastity. Doctor Eckius does say, that
Calixtus primus did first make the statute, that priests should vow
chastity, b^t that is false. For all Chronicles bears witness, that
priests had wives in the Council, of Nicene, the which was almost an hundredth
years after Calixtus days. Wherefore it can not be supposed, that yt statute
was made before the Council of Nicene. But authentical hystories does make
mention, that Nicholas the first, which was Nicholaus. 1
Bishop of Rome, the year of our Lord 860. did go about this thing: but he
could not bring it to pass by the reason of an holy man S. Huldericke,
Episcopus Augustensis, the which wrote a very sharp Epistle against him,
reproouyng him sore, because he would compel priests to vow chastity. His
words be these. Thou have not swarued a little from discretion, yt where as
thou ought to have counsayled priests to chastity, thou have with a Lordly
violence compelled them to it. Is not this after the judgment of all wise men,
a Compelled chastity is against the institution of the Gospel.
great violence, when that thou against the institution of the Gospel, and
against ye decree of the holy ghost, wilt compel men to observe thy private
decree? etc. He recites also against ye Bishop of Rome all those same
scriptures, that I have brought herein my book of this matter, and al^o
certain of the counsels, to that purpose, that I have brought them. So that men
ought not to think, that I am the first, that thus has understand the
Scriptures, nor yet the first, that has spoken against priests vows.

Note also how this holy man says, that priests ought to be admonyshed, and
counseled to chastity, but not compelled. For that (says he) is a great To
compel Priests to vow chastity that has not yt gift, is half brother unto
heresy.
violence, and against Christ's holy Gospel, and yt blessed spirit of God.
These be as vehement words as I have spoken. For out of these words men may
gather, that it is not far from heresy to compel priests to vow chastity.
This holy man proceeds farther with yt Bishop of Rome, and tells a fact of
S. Gregory, the which went about to compel priests to vow chastity.

Upon a day S. Gregory sent unto his pondes for fish, and in the nets A
lamentable and horrible sight.
that they fished withal, were brought up above six thousand young childrens
heads, the which thing, when S. Gregory saw, stroke him sore to the heart, and
he was very heavy of that sight, and perceived anon, that his decree, that
he made for priester chastity, was the occasion of this great murder: In
that that priests could not live sole, nor yet they durst not auow their
children, for fear of the decree. And so for sauegarde of their honesty, they
fell into a fearful, and abominable sin, to kill their own children. And
for this cause S. Gregory (says this holy Bishop) did revoke his decree again,
and did greattly O Lord God that our Bishops would now be so charitable.
allow the saying of the Apostle: Iis better to marry then to burn. Addyng unto
it of his own: It is better to marry then to give occasion to murder.

Here note good reader, what a terrible, and a fearfully example this is? Is
not this a piteous case, that so many thousands innoce^tes be thus slain?
When shall the chastity keepyng of all the priests in the world be an
occasion of so great goodness, as the law of chastity has been hereof
mischief? Alas is there no pyty in ^e^s hearts? that are nothing moved, when
they read such horrible factes in holy men's writyngs? Or do men think, that
there is no mischief now in our days done, by the reason that priests are
compelled to chastity? If men think that there come any mischief by the
reason of it, how can men reckon to avoid Gods vengeance, that will so stiffly
and strongly maintain the same?

I have been informed of credible persons, the which if need were, I could
yet bring forth, that in a place of Religion within this few years, there
was a religious man, that did A fruit of chastity.
get a woman with child, the which woman was brought a bed in the brothers
chamber of a fair son. This child was Christened in the same chamber, and as
soon as it was christened, he brake the neck of it, and buried it in the
night, in the Churcheyarde. A horrible tale.
This is the truth, I ca^ prove it. Is not this a terrible thing? does not
nature abhor this? And yet men had rather here this abhominablenes, the^ for
to release a little of their own will. But oh Lord God, how straightly shall
thou punish this?

It is not yet out of yt mind of man, sins yt an honest man lost his
daughter, by the reason that a priest defiled An other trabbe of yt same tree.
her, the which (because he would not be dishonested) killed the maid
privily, and afterward cast her into a well. If men will not be moved at
this? and such like other factes? I can not tell what will move them?

I could recite a great many of abominable, and detestable factes, if I were
not more ashamed to tell them, then priests has been to do them. Neither
will I recite how shamefully that men's daughters, men's wives, men's servants
has been, and are daily cast away, by the* reason that priests are so hoate
of courage, and can not keep their chastity. Would it not abhor a Christen
man, to hear tell of the innumerable baudes, that are made by yt reason yt
priests ca^ not live chaste? What a petious case is it to see so many young men
cast away? the which does see daily their masters unclean living? Here were
many I will not speak of the little pretty ^oyes that follow Priests in long
doublets* and short hosen.
things to be recited, but honesty compels me to pass the^ over. But I
think there is no good man, but he will think as much in him self, as I
either would say, or can say.

I could tell, if If I would, the occasion why yt those Cardinals of Rome,
which keeps whores, be noted of the common people to be of the best sort of
Cardinals? But I will pass it over. Nevertheless it greeueth me a little,
that I may not somewhat open my heart. But this I promise them, if The chastity
of the court of Rome, from the which God defend us all.
any of these proiectours of this fylthy chastity does take in hand to defend
it against me, I will not be ashamed to written, that they have not been
ashamed to do. Nor I will not keep secret how certain bishops of England,
and also of other countries does let whores to ferme unto priests. And all
because they will not suffer them to marry. Yet hear will I tell you one
pretty tale.

There is a bishop living at this same day in Germanye, which had M. spare me a
little, to speak but, one word more.
need of a great some of money (I could tell his name if I would) this bishop
called unto him a gentilman, a great friend of his, which smelled a littell of
the new learning, so called. An hystory sprung out of the chastity of Priests.
Unto this man he made his complaint how that he must needs make shifte
shortly for a great sum of money, desyring him both to help him, and also of
his counsel. This man said unto him, if he would follow his counsel, he
would shortly help him. The This man intended to declare to this holy father,
what honestye was mayntayned by Priests chastity.
bishop was very glad, and granted to follow his counsel. Then said the
gentylman.

My Lord, your Lordship shall give a strayte commandment, that all your
Priests within your diocese, shall put away their whores within this two
months, under the pain of heresye at the least. After this, your Lordship
shall send. ij. of your cou^sellers, that be known to be greatly in your
favor, to handle with the priests, in their own names, for to take up this
matter, between your Lordeship and them. But under this condition, that the
priests shall grant unto them a certain some of money and they shall promise
the priests, yt they will bring it to pass, that your Lordship
(notwithstanding your strait commandment) shall be contented to suffer them
to live, as they have done in times past, and after the old custom of the
Church. The bishop A pretty practice to find out a naughty concious Bishop.
was contented with this counsel, and incontinent gave out yt commandment,
and afterward sent out two of his best friends, priuelye to treat with the
Priests in their names, but not in his. For he would not be known of it,
because he had vowed chastity.

But what think you, that these two me^ did gather in this one byshoppricke,
within yt space of ij. months? Verily ^xx. M. guyldens, the which money the
bishop received very devoutly, and thought it not against the vow of
chastity. What shall men say to these men's conscience? that will not stick to
burn a poor priest, that maryeth a wife? but yet, they will receive. xx. M.
guyldens to maintain open whoredom. O lord God thou know this, and yet
doubtless thou suffer it. And all because they should have space, and
respite to amend, unto which, God give them grace. Amen.

But again to our purpose: men may perceive that this holy bishop Hulderyke
was against the pope, and did also allow my doctrine, and declare that S.
Gregory did repent him Did. (...). ca. Ante trienium.
of yt statute yt he had made for priests ^astitie. Wherefore I conclude here
yet again, that Gods holy word, old doctors, holy counselles, the Emperors
law, old decrees of the Church, the practice of the holy Apostels, the living
of holy men, Gods law, and man's law, nature and reason, does allow this
article of mine. Wherefore I trust no good nor reasonable man, will withstand
me, in this case.

There runs a great voice of The world will lie.
me, that I have married a wife, and for that cause men does reckon that I will
something prove my wit, and also stretch my learning, to mayntain that
priests might have wives. But I have marvel why men are ashamed to come and
lay this thing to my charge, now that I am here?
the very truth is before God, and man that I have no wife, ^or never went
about to marry: I thank God of his grace. And of this I have as noble princes
as be in Germany, to bear me witness, and also many other worshipful, and
honest men, yt does know me, and my conversation. I have also the right
worshipful man Doctor Lee, which was the kings Ambassador with us, and all
his servants to testifye for me, which be honest men, and sufficient in a
greater cause then this is.

Finally, here is also the bishop of our city, with whom I do dwell, and am
most conversant with. Hear is also the Ambassadors of Lubycke, which does
also know me, and my conversation. And I doubt not, but all they will testifye
for me, as far as any law shall require. Yea I dare boldly say, yt mine
adversaries have not so good testemony, that they keep their vow of
chastity, as I have, that I am not married. But all is done to bring me in
defamation. Let God provide. Nevertheless, what if I had a wife? is y so great a
crime? What can men make of it? Has not many noble Princes, and good men
wives? Will me^ make more articles of salvation for me, then for princes D.
Barnes lived sole and unmarried.
or for other Christen men? what have I deserved thus to be taken? Men will
have to do with me, but I promise them, they shall get no good by it, if I
may come to my answer, I will be able always to defend a wife (if I wear
disposed to marry) against all those that keep whores. Let them begin when
they will. Notwithstanding, I do not abstain from a wife because that is
evil, and unclean to marry: but I have other lawful considerations. Let no
man doubt, but this is of truth, if I had a wife, I would not have meddled with
this article, because that men might have suspected me, that then I would have
defended this article, for the maintenance of my fact. But now on the other
side, that men should not think how I despised marriage, or thought it unlawful
for a Priest to marry, in as much as I my self do not marry. Therefore have I
taken this labor on me, to write my meaning, and so much the more boldly,
because that men have no cause to suspect me, that I speak to defend mine
own cause, but all only to set out the veretye, so God help me. Amen.

But now will I go to the Popes law, and see what time that this thing
begun to take strength. It had been often times attempted, but it was
always repelled by one good man or other, till after the days of Saint
Gregory.

Pope Siricius made a statute, that priests should have no wives, but it took
none effect. Did. 82. ca. Plurimos.


After him came Pelagius the second, and he commanded, that those priests
that had married wives should abstain from their wives.

Next after him came S. Gregory, and he thought that statute of Pelagius to
sore, that men should abstain from their wives, which had neither vowed
chastity, nor yet had used themselves to continency. And therefore he
decreed, that the Bishops should consecrate no Subdeacon, except he would
first vow chastity. This is openly in the popes law. Here beegan the thing
somthyng to spring, Did. 31. ca. Ante trie^ium.
and to take effect, but yet it was not fully establyshed. For afterward S.
Gregory himself repented him, as S. Hulderike bears witness, by yt reason
of the great murder thath he saw come thereof. Wherefore it remained so
still a great while, unto the coming of Leo the ix: and he says, that
priests may keep their Did. 31. ca. Omnino.
wives, but they may not company with them, for the Apostles (says he) did
forsake the company of their wives: alonely they provided them meat and clothe.

After him comes Innocentius the second, the which (not regarding Did. 28.
ca. Docerni(...).
Gods ordinance) joins priests that maryeth, and priests that keeps
whores, all under one damnation.

But all these yet could not bring this matter to pass as they would. For in
many places (for all this) all priests had wives: till the time of Gregory the
seventh, which was cauled Nauclerus. Alber^^s. Hirsucid^^sis.
Hildebrande, a man of evil living, as the chronicles testifies, and also a
great nygromancer, and very familyar with the devil. And as chronicles says,
a man that had poisoned 4. or 5. popes before, that he might come the sooner
to it. This man (I say) in the year of our Lord. 1074. Here beganneth priests
cha^ get the o^ hand. For this was a captain for the no^ce.
began to attempt this matter very sharply in Germany, where priests were
then quietly suffered to have wives. This man sent his commandment unto Otto
bishop of Constantinople, commaundyng to forbydde priests that had not yet
married, for to marry. And those yt had married, to be separated from their
wives. But bishop Otto perceiuyng this thing Pe^am (...) gem. Quos deus
co^^u^x^ homo no^ seperet. Et nemo dimittat vxore^, excepta fornicationis caus^.
for to be deuillishe, would not exercise his commandment. Wherefore Pope
Gregory cursed him, and assoiled all men from his obedience, and cited him unto
Rome, where he had gathered a counsel, in the which he had made a decree,
that no Priest should afterward marry. And they that had married before,
should forsake their wives. Moreover, it was there decreed, that no man should
receive holy orders afterward, except he first swear to live sole.

These decrees were prouulgated over all Italy. But the priests, and Bishops
of France resisted this decree, Who ca^ require a better answer then these
Bishops make? their words be^ Gods words.
and said, that this counsel was contrary to Gods word, and took from
Priests, that God and nature had granted them. And therefore yt Pope (said
they) was an heretic, and an auctour ofdamnable doctrine, and that this
decree came not of God, but of the devil, and alleged for them the saying of
our master Christ. No^ omnes Math. 9.
capiunt verbum hoc. And also S. Paul, De virginitate prec^ptum non 1. Cor.
(...).
habeo. They said also, that the pope would compel them to like like Angels,
and how he did open a wyndow unto fornication and uncleanness. Wherefore they
made him answer, that they had rather to forsake their benefices, then their
wives. And if he would despise married priests, then should he go and
provide him Angels to serve his cures. But the pope was This has always been
the Popes manner of teaching, other doctrine had he never.
nothing moved at all with their scriptures or reasons: but still wrote to yt
bishops strait letters, co^maundyng them, and threatening them under the pain
of cursing, and priuating them of their byshopprickes, yt they should bring
this thing to pass. So that at yt last, the most part of the Bishops
consented to him for fear, and labored all yt they could to persuade the
priests to forsake their wives, and to vow chastity. But it was long ere the
priests were persuaded: yea some of them would never agree thereunto as long
as they lived.

This Pope wrote also to the Archbishop of Mentz, commanding him as primate of
all Germany, to compel married priests to forsake their wives, and to cause all
other to vow chastity. This bishop called a conuocatio^, in the which he
declared the Popes pleasure. But yt priests resisted meruaylous earnestly,
alleging for them Scriptures, reasons, and counsels. So far they proceeded
together, that there had like to have been a great A tumulte for priests
wives.
tumulte. Then the bishop being a wise man, considering how stiff, and
earnest the priests ^ere, desired the^ to take half a years deliberation,
exhorting them to agree unto that thing with a good will, unto the which, he
must else compel them, by the Popes authority. After the half year was come
out, the bishops called a convocation at the University of Erforde, and there
required an answer of the priests, but they were stiffer the^ before, and
said, how they had rather dye then forsake their wives contrary to Gods law.
On the other side The devil sleeps not nor gives not gladly place to Christ.
the archbishop was earnest in setting forth the popes commandment.

Then the priests required to take their counsel, and so when they were
departed out of the convocation they agreed (seeing that neither scriptures,
reasons, counsels, nor yet intercession could ^helpe as they said) that they
would go in again, and kill the Bishop, that all other Bishops after him
should be well advised, ere they set forth that thing any more. But the
Bishop had some friends amongst them, the which reuelated this thing unto him,
and he straight ways sent certain of his friends unto yt priests, requiryng
them to come in again peaceably, and he would promise the^ so to entreat the
pope, that he should be content to let it pass, and that they should keep
their cures still as they had done before. Notwithstanding the Archbishop could
not change the popes mind in any wise. For the year after the pope sent
down his Legate Curiensen Episcopum, and joined the Bishop of Mentz with him,
commaundyng them to gather a convocation in Mentz, and there to propounde his
decree again. But yet yt priests would in no wise agree unto them, but laid
all Scriptures, and reasons for them, that they could. And when all these
things would not help, then they fell to entreatie, and intercession. But the
popes Legates What shall men do against violence, and tyranny.
were so stiff, that there was no remedy, but tyranny, and violence to be
used.

But as soon as the priests saw that, they gathered them together, and made
a tumulte, that the popes Legates escaped very hardely with their lives out of
the convocation house, and so was the convocation broken. And the Archbishop of
Mentz would never meddle more in it, but committed the matter to the popes
discretion. So that the pope was feign to tarry a convenient time, till he had
gotten certain Bishops, and certain priests of his party. The determinate
time does not yt stories declare, but alonely we see that now he is prevailed
in mischief.

Wherefore I will now proceed after my promise, and recite their Scriptures and
reasons, whereby they prove Celibatum Sacerdotu^. Their first scripture is. Be
ye holy, for I am holy, Did. xxxii^ cap. Tenere.
says the Lord. Upon this Scripture disputes yt pope on this manner. The
priests of the old law did not company with their wives, in the time of their
ministration. Wherefore the priests of the new law, which does Solutions to
their reasons.
always minister, must much more always keep their chastity. First, the
pope does allege this Scripture The popes arguments for yt maintenance of
their constrained chastity.
wrong. For it is not Moses mind, where this text is spoken, to compel men
from their wives, or not to marry (the which thing the pope has taken upon him
to prove.) For Moses speaks there to the whole household of Israel.

Now was not the house of Israel compelled by the text, either to forsake
their wives, or else to vow chastity. Wherefore this text can not make for the
popes purpose. Farthermore, the text says no more, but that we should be
clean, and holy. Now is not matrimony, either unclean, or unholy: for it is a
thing instituted, and sanctified of God. And the purest creatures Adam. Eua.
that ever God made did use it, and was not thereby defiled. Ergo, this text
makes not for the popes purpose. And where as the pope says, that yt priests
of the new law shall be clean, we The Leuitirall cleannes lies to much in
the Popes head.
grant the same, and desire God with all our hearts, that they may be so. And
because that we would, that it should be so: therefore do we exhort them to
use Gods holy ordinance, that they may be holy. For all creatures of 1. Tim.
4.
God be good. And unto them that be clean, nothing is unclean. Now is
matrimony gods ordinance* Wherefore it must needs be clean of it self, and
may be lawfully used with thanks.

Farthermore, what argument is this of the popes? The priests of the old law,
did abstain from their wives, Always. Sometime.
the time of their ministration, Ergo, our priests must always abstain? How
follows this, always, out of the old priests, sometime? But me Why has ^ot
our Priests sometime wives, as the old Priests had.
thinks the pope should rather take an occasion of this place, to bind his
priests to marriage, if they can not live sole. For the priests of the law, by
Gods commandment had wives: Ergo, God would not reckon marriage unclean, and
vnpure. And if it were clean for them, it must much more be cleaner unto our
priests. For all things be cleaner unto us, then to them. Wherefore me
thinks yt pope should rather dispute on this manner. The priests of yt old
law had wives, and were not thereby defiled, Ergo, my priests must much rather
have wives, for they shall be less defiled.

Moreover, it follows not. The priests of the old law abstained from their
wives, in the time of their ministration, Ergo, our priests must abstain
always, because they be always in ministration. For many things were
unclean to the priests of the old law, that be not unclean unto our
priests. Also unto them it was a commandment so to do, or else it had been
lawful for them to tarry by their wives. But our priests has no
commandment. Ergo, they are not bound to abstain. Finally, this text of
Scripture did not bind the Apostles, nor all the holy fathers after the
Apostles till Innocents time to abstain from their wives. Ergo, it byndeth
not our priests now. For gods word was in as full strength before Innocents
days, as after.

The second Scripture is this. Abstain Did. 31. c^* Nam sicut. Abstinete ad
tempus, vt vacet is orationi.
for a time that ye may the better give attendaunce to prayer. On this text
disputes the pope on this manner. Paul commands (says he) lay men to
abstain for a time. Ergo, much more are priests bound to abstain always.
The which must always pray, and be in a continual sacrifiyng. This argument
is also false, and not concluded after Saint Paul's mind. For S. Paul would
not by this text forbydde marriage, by the reason of prayer. For how could he
say then, Abstain for a time? Unmarried men must abstain always, and not for
a time only. Nor it is no commandment unto lay men (as the pope says) to
abstain. For S. Paul will, yt they shall not abstain, except that they be
both agreed. Yea and also in a case, yt is, where their abstayning should be
an occasyon of more prayer. But if their abstayning may be the occasyon of
uncleanness: Or else, if the one party will abstain, and the other can not:
Then will blessed S. Paul that neither of them shall defraude the other. For
they are more bound in this case to use them felues in the office of
matrimonye, then pro illo loco, and tempore to pray. For yt text is clear Vxori
vir debitum reddat. Let men mark my saying well. For though we be bound to
pray by the Gospel, yet I think that the cercumstance of time, and place, is
of man's law, and reddere debitum, is in this case of the Gospel. Wherefore
the other must give place. Take my words charitably, and after learning. But
yet grant it a commandment. How can it follow there out, that priests shall
never marry? because that lay men are bound (as the pope says) to abstain for
a time? Why does not the pope The popes doctine is repugnaunt to the doctrine
of S. Paul.
rather bind his priests in time, and place requisite to matrimony, for
avoiding of fornication, as S. Paul does? All the world knows, yt priests
does not always pray. Wherefore then does not the pope grant them that same
liberty, yt S. Paul does. For he w^ll (lest yt devil should te^pt them by
incontenency) yt they should return again after their prayer to yt office of
matrimony.

O Lord God, how would men cry out against me, if I should thus The Pope is
a tearer and wrester of Scriptures.
tear, and wringe scriptures? But this popet may do what he lysta: nd all
that he does, men do reckon to be articles of our faith There is not a
stronger place in all scripture for matrimony, then this is. In so much that
all learned men, that ever spoke of this matter, has brought this same chapter
of S. Paul for them, and yet yt devil in the Pope can turn this topse turuy.
And that yt makes against him, must needs make for him, or else he will wring
him till he break his neck. What learning can prove this, that priests may
not marry? because they are bound to pray? and to do sacrifyce? Does marriage
defyle their prayers, or can it co^taminate their sacrifyces? then the holy
patriarchs, and Prophets, have no clean sacrifyces. Yea Christ's Apostles
had unclean sacrifices. But here is a wonderful iuglynge of the devil. For
sometime The Pope makes a hotchpot of marriage.
matrymony shall be an holy, and a blessed sacrament, and shall geeue grace:
and an other while it shall be against God, and all his sacrifices, and a
defyler of Gods mynisters, and of all their prayers.

Wherefore I conclude, that this text of S. Paul, Abstain for a time that
you may the more diligently pray, makes nothing for the Pope. For if we
should be bound (as yt pope says) not to marry, by the reason that we Lay
men are bound to prayer, as well as Priests.
ought to pray, then might no lay man marry a wife. For lay men are as much
bound by the Gospel to prayer, as priests be. There is no time, that the
Gospel commands a priest to pray in, nor yet no prayer, that is commanded
to priests by yt gospel, but lay men are bonnd to the same. Wherefore if the
pope will conclude that priests shall have no wives, because they are bound to
pray. By the same reason will I prove, yt no christian man may have a wife. Nor
it will not help to say, that priests are more bound to pray, then lay men,
and therefore they have no wives. For whether that they be bound less or more
that makes no matter to yt argument. For both the parties are bound to
prayer. Therefore, after the popes doctrine, neither of them both may marry.
But whether the one be more bound then the other, it makes no matter to me,
for they are both bound: therefore they must both abstain. I would desire all
Papists, to let this reason of mine stand still vnassoyled.

An other reason their is of Pope Did. xxxi. ca. Omnino. 1. Cor. 9. Nunquid
no^ habemus potestate^ muliere^ sor^re^ circunduce^di. etc.
Leo the. ix. that bringefh this text of S. Paul: Have not we power to lead
about with us a wife, as the brother of our Lord, and Cephas? Out of this
text disputes the pope thus. S. Paul says not, we have power amplectendi
muliere^, to embrace a woman. But circunducendi, that is 1. Cor. 9.
to lead her with us, that she may be sustained (as the Pope says) of her
husband? But there may be no company of marriage between them. Every Christian
man may see what a skle^der argument this is of the pope. S. Paul says not,
amplecte^di sed cercu^ducendi. Ergo, non licet sacerdotious habere vxores? This
can no man deny, but S. Paul's mening is there, how that priests may lawfully
have wives as the example of Peter does there prove. Wherefore I think no man
so mad to judge, that the Apostels did myrry wives, alonely to lead the^
about with them (as the Pope says) and to put other men to costs and and
charges? For this office they might have had of all other women, and neded not
to marry, for leading about of women with them. Wherefore it must needs
follow, seeing S. Paul's meaning is, that priests may lawfully have wives that
they may also lawfully use the office of matrimony. For his own doctrine is,
that the man has no power over his own body, 1. Cor. 7.
but his wife. Wherefore it must follow, that the pope makes an evil
supposition, when he supposes, that the Apostles had wives, and did only
but carry them about, to give them meat, and drink, and not to company with
them.

Also mark of this argument, how the pope grants, that the apostles had
wives? Wherefore he must now prove, that the Apostles, forsook the company of
their wives, as he says. But I am content to take this argument at the popes
hand.

This the pope grants, that the Apostles led their wives about with them.
Wherefore it must needs follow (eue^ after the Pope) that our priests may also
lead wives about with them. If ye grant me this, I am content, I will not
bind priests amplectendi vxores, I will put it to his wives discretion, and
his, as they two ca^ agree: so am I content, alonely to let them have the
liberty that the Pope grants the holy Apostles to have had. And I doubt not
but there will How many factes could I recite here, of amplecte^di?
follow tokens, not only of circumducendi but of amplectendi.

Truly I have great maruayle, yt men be not ashamed, thus to trifle if
children that be gotten might bear witness.
with holy Scripture, yea, and that in matters that be so weighty, and whereby
they see daily so great offense and sclaunder to spring in the holy church of
God.

An other Scripture the pope has Did. lxxxi^ c. Proposu^sti. Qui in carne
sunt Deo placer^ non possunt.
which is this: They that are in the flesh can not please God. On this text
disputes the Pope thus: They that are defiled, are in the flesh: But priests
that marry wives, are defiled: therefore, they be in yt flesh, and can not
please God.

If men had either fear of God in their hearts, or else reverence to Gods holy
institutions, and ordinances, they would not thus speak nor judge of pure and
clean matrimony. I trust The Pope accompteth whoredom to be more clean then
holy matrimony.
there is no Christian man, but be will grant me that matrimony is of gods
ordayning and settinge? Wherefore it must needs be pure and clean. For our
God is no God of uncleanness, or of filthiness, let the pope judge him as he
will. Now to the Popes argument. The Pope says in his minor, how Priests
that marry, be unclean. I deny that, and say steadfastly, that the pope
blasphemeth both God and his holy gifts. And when he can prove his minor
true, then will I grant it unlawful for Priests to marry.

But I will take the Popes argument, The Pope blasphemeth God.
and prove that no man shall have wives, and so shall the world soon be at
an end. The popes mayor is this: They that be in the flesh can not please
God. But married me^ (as the Pope thinks) live after ye flesh, therefore no
married man can be saved. Let the pope of Rome, and all his adherentes answer
to my argument, and I will soon answer to theirs. For this I am sure of,
that ye scriptures which he brings, makes not against matrimony, nor yet
more against priests then against lay men. Wherefore let him conclude what he
can out of them against priests, and I will conclude the same against lay
men. These be all the Scriptures that I can find in the Popes law against
this matter. Wherefore, now will I go to their reasons.

Their principal reason is this. Married Men that have wives may be Priests,
but after their priesthode they may not marry.
men may be chose^ to be priests, but after their priesthood (say they) may
they not marry.

These me^ must first consider what doctrine they defend, yt is to say, how
they inte^de to defend ye popes doctrine, and yt doctrine, which they call the
doctrine of the church: for there is none other doctrine against us but that.

Now does this doctrine clearly deterne against them, and say how Did. x^
viij. c. Nullum. etc. Assumi and. ca. Preterea. and. c. Pr^usquam.
no man that has a wife, may be chose^ to be Priest or a Deaco^, neither
they ca^ bring me one example, that ever the Pope did grant, that a married
man might be a priest except he got money for dispensing. So that the Pope
by his dispensation has always testified that it was against his law for
Remember the tyranny of Gregory the vij. which compelled priests to forsake
their wives
a married man to be a Priest. Wherefore these me^ (if they will defend the
laws of the Church) must be bound to prove that married men may after the
laws of the Church (as they call them) be chosen, or else their answer is
naught. For it is no reason that they should feign this solution of their own
brains, and say, that it may be so. But they must prove me, that their
church does grant it lawful so to be. Moreover, where be now all their
Scriptures, whereby they prove that Priests may not marry for defilyng of
them? Is not the company that a Priest keeps with his Marriage is all one,
before priesthode, and after.
wife after his consecration (which they grant) as pure, and as clean, as it
was before his consecration? Has his consecration made yt thing unclean, yt
was before pure? Wherefore if he may keep his wife (after these men) which he
married before his consecration, why may not an other Priest likewise marry a
wife after his Priesthood. What does this man, as concerning the office of
matrimony, that the other man does not?

Farthermore, they were wont to say, that Priests might not keep their wives,
in so much that they fained how yt Apostles did forsake their wives. How
stands this with their solution, that married men might be bishops? But me
think they do but trifle with this matter, and seek no more but a light
evasion, to help them for a time.

Moreover, both the practice and the laws of their church declares clearly,
that their meaning is not to choose a married man to be a bishop. For their
custom is that a man may be a Subdeacon at 16. years old. Now is there no
man customably married so young. And when he shall be subdeacon, Did. xxvi^
cap. Null^.
he must forswear marriage, as the Popes law commands. Therefore, it must
needs follow, that no married man can be a Priest. For he has forsworn
marriage many years before. Moreover, all Doctors do grant, that after the
fall of Adam, matrimony was a remedy against fornication, and S. Paul
approoueth the same. Vnusquisque suam habeat vxore^ propter fornicatione^. What
if this man, after his consecration is in more ieopardie of fornication then
he was before? What remedy will men find now for this infirmity? His
consecration takes not away his natural appetite, nor it makes Gods remedy
unlawful. And either he must live in fornication, or else marry a wife. Let
men judge, which of them becomes a priest best after his consecration.

Farthermore no man can deny, but the hystories make mention, how diverse
priests have been married after their consecration, at the dispensation of the
pope. Wherefore it must follow, that it is not against Gods law, for a Priest to
marry after his consecration. For then the pope might not dispense with him.
Men must grant, that many Priests have had wives. Now stands it with good
reason, and learning, that they prove, yt all these men did marry before their
priesthode only, and not after, seeing they will have it so necessary, and so
perfect a solutio^. And if they ca^ not prove it, The Pope mainteineth his
constreined chastity against the institution of Christ.
why do they affirm it so styfly? what moves the^ so to say? yea, and so
boldly? But yet I will be content, let the matter be indifferently handled,
and let as many married men be chosen to be Bishops, as be unmarried, seeing
they grant it lawful: And then am I sure, yt we shall avoid a great heap of
fornications, that been now used. Yea I fear me, that our chaste men shall
soon be quyt of all, and the married men shall have all.

An other reason they have, and that is this. Priests may extinct the brennyng
Priests may get chastity, by praying, and fasting.
heat that is in the^, by fasting, labouryng, watchyng, praying, and by other
good works doing. And if they do thus, no doubt, but God will give them the
gift of chastity, for he is liberal in giving, and mercyful in hearing of
their prayers, Ergo, they need not to marry.

First I desire to know of those me^, if they will say of their conscience,
that the third part of Priests in England do keep their chastity? I think
they will rather swear nay, the^ yea. Now A Notary of London said to me
openly, that he had written a thousand dispensations for Priests children in
his days. How many then have all Notaries written.
come to their argument, and see how shamefully they do reprove priests. I
durst not speak so much against them, as these men do. For first they say,
that if priests did pray, or fast, or did like good works, the^ God would,
yea he must of his liberality, and mercy give them the gift of chastity.
Secondly, they grant that yt third deal of priests keep not their vow. Now
is this as much to say, thinks me. First, that Priests be naught in deed.
Secondarely, that they neither will, not yet desire to be better. For if they
did desire it of God, he would give it them, say they. In him is no fault,
Ergo, the fault is in the priests, that neither be good in deed, nor yet
will pray, or desire to be good. I would not gladly have such patrons in my
cause.

Moreover I grant that Priests Priests shall fast, and pray. But what if all
that will not help.
shall fast, and pray to keep their bodies low. But now to them. Why shall not
priests also marry to avoid fornication, as well as fast, and pray? seeing
that God has ordained matrimony, for a peculiar, and singular, remedy against
fornication? I do not condemn true fasting, and praying. Why do they then
condemn marying? seeing that God which ordained fasting, and praying, has
also ordained marying? Yea, and me think, if any one thing should be first
proved, then should marriage be first proved, seeing that it is deputed of
God, for a proper, and spedy remedy against fornication? Notwithstanding I will
be content, first to exhort all Priests, both to praying, and fasting, and
if they can so keep their chastity, I will thank God with them. But if they
can not, then will I in no wise, that they shall be compelled either by law,
or by vow to chastity. For that is against Gods word, and the doctrine of his
holy Apostles.

But yet let me touch their ground nearer. I would desire the^ to tell me, and
to prove unto me by learning, that God is bound, in as much as God is bound
to as much as he has promised.
he is liberal, and mercyful to grant unto them yt gift of chastity, for
their praying, and fasting. It is not enough for them thus to say, seeing that
many good men has both prayed, and fasted, and yet had not the gift of
chastity: But they must bring me an open Scripture, wherein that this promise
is made unto their fasting, and watchyng, or else they must grant that they
be bound to use Gods remedies, which he has ordained, and instituted, to
the helpyng of our infirmity. If I were hungry, and thursty, and would go,
and pray to God to slake my hunger, and thurst, and would not use those
means, and remedies, that God has ordained, think you that God were bound of
his liberality to grant me my request? Nay for s^^th. But it were rather to
be judged, that I were a tempter of God, and a despiser of his holy
ordinance, and would not be content with those remedies, that God has
appointed.

The devil comes with like te^ptatio^ Math. 4.
to our M. Christ, and requires him to the honor of God to do a miracle, to
leap down from the highest of the temple, if he would be taken for the son
of God, and as for harm he could have none. For the Scripture Psalm. 90.
testifies (says he) that God had commanded his angels to bear thee up in
their arms. Wherefore (says the devil) it shall be a great honor to God,
and also a great declaration to thy power, if thou descend from the height of
the temple, otherwise then any other man can do. And if thou go down by
the steyers, God shall The devil tempts God.
no more be glorified in thy fact, then in other men's, nor thou shall not be
taken for the man, that thou art, and would be.

Moreover, thou need not doubt, but God will help thee. For the scripture
speaks of thee, which can not be false. Notwithstanding all this, our M.
Christ calls it temptyng of God, when men will seek unto him for other
remedies, then he has appointed. And therefore our M. Christ does clearly
declare, that the same Scripture, which the devil brings for him, makes not
for his purpose. For though that God does promise to help Christ, and all his,
yet will he be glorified in his creatures, and will that we shall use them
with thanks, to the intent, and purpose, yt he has ordained them for: And
then, if there be any thing lacking unto our health, and salvation, he will,
that we shall both pray, and trust in him. With what boldenes ca^ I desire of
God to help me? and am not concent to receive his creatures, that he has
instituted to help me? Whereby shall God help me, If I despise his
ordinances, and creatures that he has already ordained to my helping? Is it
reason, that God at my instaunce, shall make a new ordinance God changes not
his order for our pleasure.
and new remedies for my diseases? Why am I not content (if I will be helped
at Gods hand) with those remedies, that be all ready instituted? It was but a
small thing, and a vile thing in a manner, for Christ to desce^d by the steyers
from the heyghte of the temple, seeing that the devil required him, by Gods
honor, and also by his own, to show some special power.

If I wear diseased, and sick, and would not use the counsel of Phisicions,
nor of other medecines, yt God has instituted, but will fast, and pray, and
watch, and do alms deeds, think you that men would reckon me wise? And if
I did thus dye, were not I a despiser of God, and of his good ordinances? God
has appointed Phisicions, and given virtue to herbs, and other creatures, to
help my disease. Wherefore I am bound with meekenes, and with thanks to
receive them, and to pray to God, yt he will fortifye, and strengthen the
natures of these creatures, and that they may have virtue, and effecacy in me.
This is a Christen man bound to do: God has ordained every thing to a purpose,
and thereunto must they be used.
For if this reason of these men shall have strength, the^ will we use no
manner of creatures, or remedies yt God has ordained, but against hunger, and
thirst, heat, and could, agues, and pestilences, poverty, and necessity,
swoordes and gonnes, against all manner of diseases, against all manner of
misfortunes, will we use nothing, but all only pray, or fast, or else give
alms, as we shall think best. So that we will teach God what thing is best to
the helpyng of all imperfections. I thank you good Masters for your good
doctrine, I pray God reward you.

Finally I have great marvel, why that prayer, and fasting shall all only
get Priests to the gift of chastity? and not all other men? And Priests have
a privilege before other men.
if other me^ may have the gift of chastity through their prayer? why be not
all men moved to live chaste? seeing yt chastity in very deed is a higher
state then matrimony is. Why be priests more bound to pray for the gift of
chastetie, then other Christen men be?

Now mark this doctrine. If a lymme of the devil would come now and preach
universally to all men the ercellencye of chastity, and to show what a great
quiet living it is, and what a plesau^t state it is before God, And
contrariwise, of marriage would The flesh would gladly have a quiet living, and
pleasant.
say, that it wear a sorrowful state, full of troubles, full of cares, full of
heanines, and (as the Pope says) a fleshely, and a carnal state, and that
seems to have in it self any vnclenenes: and by these reasons, and
perswasyons, with many more that he might bring, would exhort all manner of me^
in England to live sole, and unmarried, And would also teach them to pray, and
to fast for the gift of chastity and not to doubt, but that God of his
liberality would geeue it the^. I would feign know of learned men* if this man
were gods friend and the kings? How much he is gods, I will not dispute. But I
am sure there could not be a greater traitor to the kings grace the^ he is.
For if he might bring to pass that he intends by his doctrine. First he
should destroy yt kings succession. Secondarily, he should within this seven
years, make yt king a Lord of a few subjects, or none, and finally of none
indeed. And all this would they do by fasting, and praying.

But what thing so ever they tell us of their fasting, and praying, I am Had
the world continued, they would have made us poor men believe, that they had
gotten children with fasting, and praying.
sure that they fall to getting of children as soon as other men do, and all
is with fasting and praying. Alas what thing can not the devil misuse.

But let no man take me, as though I condemned fasting, and praying. For
surely I would that they should be used, and that diligently. But I would,
have them used in time, and place convenient, and for the intent, and purpose,
that God has ordained them. But yet I would not, that other remedies, and
gifts of God should be thought unlawful, and also be despised for them.

Now most gracious Prince, here have I showed unto your grace, first mine
obedience, willing that every man should both so learn, and so do.
Seco^darylye, I have showed my learning in certain articles, for yt which
there is a varie^ce in the world at this day, protesting unto your grace, that
I have said nothing, but I trust be true, and agreeable with Gods holy word,
and with the learning of the Doctors* Notwithstanding, if there be any man
within your realm, that can prove by good learning the contrary (so that your
grace shall allow it to agree with Gods word, and to be suffycient before
Gods dreadful judgment) I shall be content to submyt my self to your graces
determination, and to do that thing that beeco^meth a Christen man, and a true
subject to do. Thus our Lord Jesus Christ, ye purchasour of all grace and
goodness, ever preserve your grace in all virtue and honor,

Amen.
That it is against the holy Scripture to honor Images, and to pray to Saints.
IF men had the very true faith in Christ Jesus, that beelongeth to Christian
me^ to have, this article were open of it self without any farther probation:
for if men did beeleeue first that Christ were God and omnipotent, and mighty,
to geeue all things: Secondarily, that he were merciful, gracious, and
loving toward us, and so loving, that we could desire nothing of him, but yt
he would geeue it us: if men (I say) had this faith, and this love toward
Christ, they would go no farther but to him only, they would make, inuente,
and devise no mediators, but faithfully receive him (according to ye
Scriptures) for their only mediator, Savior, and redeemer: and believe and
know surely, that they could ask nothing so great in his name, but that they
should receive it, so that he would him self geeue it, and thereunto is
able. Also by this faith, they should perfectly know, that they could not be
so unworthy, but he of his only and mere mercy, is able, and also would
make them worthy to receive their peticions, so that if men had faith, they
should perfectly know that they had need of no more then this one Christ, that
they should nor ought not seek to any other mediator, either to obtain any
thing, or else to make them worthy: but should know and confess both in word
and deed, that Christ alonely is able enough, yea and so mighty and so
merciful, that all other feigned and invented mediators of men be vile,
filthy and abominable of themselves, to be compared to him. If this faith (I
say) were printed in the hearts of me^, then what should they or could they,
desire more then this one mediator Jesus Christ? What could they have, that of
him and by him they could not obtain? Truly nothing that they could
righteously ask, as all Scriptures bear witness.

But now, let all these makers of new Gods cumilate themselves together on a
heap, and show me but one place, yea but one jot, or one example in holy
Scripture, that ever men did pray to Saints? or one that entered into heaven
by Saints prayers? Christ ascended (as the Scriptures Christ ascended into
heaven by his own power.
be plain) into heaven by his own power: now would I know of these new
Godmakers, by whose power and help that the first Saint came into heaven: say
not by the intercession of Saints, for I will say then there were none in
heaven: nor by his own holiness, for then dyed Christ in vain: and if he came
by Christ only, why may he not alone help us thither? His power is not
weakened: his mercy is no less toward us then it was toward him. Now here
you see all the causes that brought the first Saint to heaven, and these
causes be sufficient, yea and alonely allowed of the Scriptures of God:
therefore they be also sufficient for us, if we will beeleeue the scriptures
of God.

But now to declare and make this matter open, I will recite the words of the
Scriptures: first I will speak of Images, of whom speaks Moses Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5.
these words. Thou shall make thee no graven Images, nor similitude of any
thing that is in heaven We are forbidden of God to make Images.
above, or in earth beneath, or in waters under the earth: thou shall neither
honor nor worship them. Be not these words plain against all manner of
Images or similitudes? For if saints be in heaven or in earth, or under the
earth, here be their figures excepted, either to be honored, We must
neither honor Images nor worship them.
or worshipped: and mark that he excepteth both honoring and also
worshipping. Now what can you geeue to Images that is neither hohonour nor
worship? It makes no matter to me, whether you call it latria or dulia, if it
be either honor or worship, then is it against Scripture: and if it be
neither, then is it nothing but a void name invented of your insaciable
covetousness, to deceive simple men with, and to heap innumerable good to your
selves. For if you had no more profit by Images then you have devotion to
them, then should they be soon left down: Who has seen a precious
offering of a Priest geeuen to any Image? but we see daily how ye rob
Images of other men's oblations.

But let us return to our purpose, Duns on this text says, that by it was
Duns. 3. Distin. 9.
it forbidden to make images before the incarnation of Christ. etc. Now must
you prove where they be allowed since the incarnation and show with manifest
scriptures where this text is condemned in the new Testament or else it stands
fast against you after your own. M. Duns, whom you dare not deny. Also yt
Prophet says, a man did plant a pinaple tree, and Esaias. 44.
the rain did nurrish it, and thereof was made a fire unto men, he took of it
and warmed him, and burnt it and baked bread therewith, and of the other part
he Made him a God, and did honor it, and prayed unto it saying, deliver me for
thou art my God. Mark the process of yt Prophet, first the man planted this
tree, the^ he burnt part of it and baked bread with it, and of the other part
he made him a God whom he honored and worshypped, mark also if all these be
not true, and fulfilled of your images, of the one is made your God which you
do honor, and of whom you desire to be delivered, some from death, some from
sickness, some from pestilence, some from poverty, some from thieves, some
from evil fortune, some from ha^ging, some from drowning, and some to save you
from the tooth ache, some to save your horse, some your pyges, and some to help
your weemen with child, with many other things more, so that for every thing
that you will desire, you have a God to ask it of. Now of the other part is
made a pair of gallows: is not this true? is not this plain? of what other
thing in earth can the saying of yt prophet be verified, but of your images?
And if it may be verified of an hundred other things, yet is it also true of
your Vain Imaginatio^s of men.
images: and unto them agrees most peculiarly. The prophet speaks not of one
only, but of all things that be like. Now deliver your Gods if you ca^. They
will not be delivered with the answer that Doctor Rydley did once make unto
me, that there was no man so blind, nor so mad, or foolish, for to honor
the stock and the stone that stands before them, but they refer the
honor to that thing that the Image does represent. I answer: good Master
Doctor, I pray you tell me one thing, what did Cicero with all the whole
Senators of Rome? did they not honor that same thing that stood before the^
(and yet as you say) they did refer it unto the thing that was thereby
represented. These men were wise me^ and as well learned in their time as you,
and yet you see (for lack of knowledge of the truth) they honored stocks
and stones. I am sure you will not excuse them from Idolatry, yea and that
because they did honor the stocks and stones, and not alonely for honoring
of the the thing that was represented.

Also what did Roboam when he did set up two golden calves in Bethell 3. King.
12.
and said to the people, Go^ no more to Jerusalem behold thy Gods Israel.
Was not this done to the honor of God? for they were not so mad (as ye say) to
think that those calves were Gods, but they did honor them in the honor of
God, and that was well declared in their sacrifice which was none other, but
such as God had commanded in the law, Ergo, after your rule they might law,
fully honor these calves referryng it to God. They had also a great color
for them, for all the old fathers did always offer to god calves, as Abraham
with many other which, oblatio^ was accepted of God. Wherefore they might well
think that God would be honored in the images of Calves.

Now what thing can you lay to them whereby you will prove that they honored
their stocks and their stones, and their Calves, but those same things shall
also be laid unto you, and unto yours, to prove that you do likewise honor
your stocks and your stones. First you run from place to place, to seek
them, which is a toke^ that you do honor the stock or stone, for there have
you nothing of the Saint more then in an other place, saving only the stock
and stone.

Now, when you have found the^, How we have been by ignorance led to
worship stocks and stones.
then pray you before them, and that with kneelinges, and knockings, and
shaking of your heads, and lookyng devoutly and pitiously, then kiss you
their feet or their shoowes (for they be seldom barefooted least they should
have the murre or the coaffe, by the reason they be not used to could, as you
may see by their smooked scolions faces, hands, and feet, with all the place
where they stand) and wipe your napkyns, and rub your beads on them, and
lick them with your tounges, and lay your eyes on them. Then set you lights
before them, and then offer you to them (though in yt M. Doctor your person
is nothing guilty) great oblations, so that they shine in gold and silver and
precious stones: yea and not thus content, but also promise to visit that
stock once a year, if God and that good Saint send you life, and health.
etc.

I pray you is not this honourynge of the stock and stone? what did Cicero
with all the Romans to their stocks and stones? what did Roboam to his
Calves, if this be not honoring, define me what honoring is: what more
exterior honor can you devise then this is? and yet you do say yt you honor
no stocks nor stones. But worldly shame, and invincible Scriptures, have
brought you to make this damnable evasion, because you see men now wax wise
in the Lord, by the which they see clearly your false dissimulation and
hypocrisy. But if you were the true honourers of God, as you be secret
hypocrites, you would not make this damnable euaston to stablish, uphold and
maintain your Idolatry, nor yet suffer (so much as lay in you) any thing to
be done that has any color or shadow of holiness that might be an occasion
of Idolatry. But because you be hypocrites and insatiable belly Gods, you
care not (so you may deceive the simple people and lead them with blind
shadows, thereby to fill your offering boxes and cheestes to maintain your
insatiable carnal appetites) how the honor of God be saved, or how your
poor brethre^s conscience be deceived. Think you that this is enough to say
that no man is so mad nor so foolish as to honor the stocks and stones. And
yet to suffer and daily before your eyes to see, so great exterior honor
given unto them. That no tongue can express nor heart can devise more: yea if
you will beeleue your subtle Duns, they Stocks and stones the Papists honor
as Gods.
give unto them (as I shall well prove by his diffinition) honor which is
called Latria: the which Latria after your own learning ought to be given to
God only. This says Duns, Latria is called an exterior honoring or a bodily
service. etc.

Now if that be true, it follows that they give that honor to stocks and
stones that only pertayneth to God, which do any exterior honor (whether it
be offering of candels, or kissyng of their shows, or any other thing) to
them: Make you the conclusion, for I need not to say that they do Idolatrye.
Farthermore, this word Latria, (where with you deceive the simple people) is a
Greek word and after. S. Augustine it signsfyeth no more but service, the
which you ca^ not deny but that you give to your stocks and stones. Conclude
now this proposytyon after. M. subtle doctor Dunces diffinition I pray you,
for I have no leisure. Thinks your doctourhed that the children of Israel with
their hie Priest Aaron could not have made this Pope holy excuse, that they
were not so mad nor so foolyshe as to honor the golden Calfe, but rather to
refer that honor to ye living God? They had a good color for them. For they
knew none other God nor saint but him: and yet this excuse was not lawful, nor
could not be allowed when Moses came with the word of God. Mark also what he
was that made this Calfe, not a fool nor ignorant person among the people, or
one of none authority: But the most wisest eloquenst and chief among them:
yea he was that time the very head of the Church or congregation. Also note ye
intent which was to keep the people together in good order. He also made a
Calfe with the which thing all their fathers had pleased God in doing sacrifyce
with them: so that they might well think y^ it might be acceptable to God to
be honored in the image of a Calfe before any other Image. But all these
colors be naked before the word of God.

Brieflye would you allow that the people should give that same honor to me
ye they do geeue to your stokes and stones? And under y^ same color that it
should be in ye name and honor of God (you can not say but I am as good as
your best stocks and stones: and if they be the Images of saints and
represent saints after your fayning, I am the Image of God and represent him
so long as I believe in him according to the holy scriptures. And if a conning
and an artificyall grauer made them, God made me. And I have. ij. things
above them, which all your caruers, and you with all your distinctions can not
geeue to your stocks nor stones: That is, I am a living creature, and your
stocks be dead: I am created to live with the everlasting God, and your
stocks be made to the fire) I am sure you nor no man will allow it. But there
is one merueilous wonder, That if the best and most holy of all your new gods,
yea one that does miracles every day, were taken out of your hands, and set
again in ye Caruers and his makers house, he should be no better the^ a
stock or a stone, nor could do no miracles: yea if he were prayed Practice of
Papists to cause Images to work miracles.
never so much: no not so much as if ye house were a fire, to save either ye
house or him self.

Also it is not lawful so long as he there stands neither to pray to him,
nor yet to offer to him, which offering would both help the poor man, his
wife, children, and servant. But let them suffer you to take this wormye God
into your hands again, and then is he Lord over all the world, then makes
he rych men and poor men, then makes he men blind, and blind to see
again, then makes he lame men whole, then makes he we men with child, yea
and also brings them well to bed. Then expels he devils, then tells he
things to come, then rules he in heaven and earth and in water, brieflye he
defeneth both king and kingdom. Is not here a sudden mutation? and all is
because he has got him a new M. and a new place. O* you hypocrites think
you that men be so blind y^ The hypocrisy of the Papists has greatly
prevailed in the practysyng and aduauncing of Idolatry.
they ca^ not see this falsed? You would make them blind in deed the which
would make them to honor stocks and stones: yea and that in the name of an
other thing, the which also they know not. Which of you all has seen our Lady
or any other saint where by you may learn to make her similitude? and if you
have nothing to lay for you but because she was a woman, then is your Image as
much ye similitude of an harlot of the stues the which bears all the shape y^
belongs to a natural woman as well as of our Lady. Notwithstanding that our
blessed lady is a vergin and the other a strumpet, yet in exterior forms and
shapes that may be seen and judged by senses, be they all one, yea and your
Image in all exterior signs is a great deal more lyker unto an harlot, then
to a pure and a blessed meek virgin. And yet are you not ashamed with these
damnable shadows, both to private God of his honor and also compel your
simple brethren to this shameful idolatry. If you will look your self and
see clearly your idol in a pure mirour, read the. vj. chapter of Baruch,
wherein you shall find these words, Their stocks be polished Baruch. 6.
of the carpenter, and they be gilded and siluered, but they be false and A
notable declaration of Baruch the Prophet against Idols and Idolatry.
ca^ not speak. How think you, have not your Images these properties? Their
Gods have golden crowns on their heads from whom the Priests does take away
gold and silver and spend it on themselves: They geeue also of it unto their
stru^pets, and deck their harlotes: And when they have taken it away from
their harlots, the^ deck they there with their Gods again. Wherefore know that
they be no Gods. Be not all these things fulfilled on you? do not you take
away their oblations and therewith maintain your pomp and pride, and deck
also your harlotes, say not nay, for all the world will condemn you, for open
liars, the matter is so plain. Their Gods have a septer like a man, and like a
Judge of a land, but they ca^ not sley him that offends the^, wherefore fear
them not. Does not this agree with your Gods? Note how bold the prophet is
which dare crake with your God, and says how yt they ca^ not hurt their
enemies: wherefore he bids us that we shall not fear them.

Now if you think that this be not spoken of your Gods (not with standing that
none of these things they be void of) go to them and cry: but remember that
you cry aloude, for they be very thick of hearing or per adventure they be
gone forth a town and occupied. Therefore I say cry and whoope aloud, and bid
them if they be Gods or will have any honor y^ they will now aue^ge themselves
of their enemies. If they can do nothing, the^ will we lay unto them this
mock of the profyt and will not fear them. They have a sword in their hand,
and an axe, but they can not deliver them selves from battle, nor from thieves:
therefore fear them not. A righteous man is better that has none Images for he
shall be free from obprobriousnes. How think you have not your Gods all these
tokens? how many thieves have you hanged for robbyng of your goods? but your
gods never saved the^ self from thieves. Moreover, why make you so suer locks,
and so sure doors, if your Gods be able to keep your goods? I think you
fear not their runnyng away.

Farthermore, why keep you so great bandogs, if your Gods be able to save
their Gods from thieves? But me thinks the bandogs be mightier then your
Gods, and also you trust more to them: for they defend both you and your
Gods. You dumme stocks, where is all your reason? where is all your wit?
where is all your wisdom? where is all your policy? where is all your godly
faith that you ought to have in the God of heaven? Are you not ashamed thus
groslye to deceive men? yea and with those things which you can neither
defend with scripture, nor yet with any reason. But paraduenture you will say
that the Prophet speaks here of Idols and not of Images.

I answer: I pray you what call you Idolum? is it not as much as Imago There
is no di^fere^ce between an Idol and on Image.
in Latin? which we call in inglishe an Image, but we will not varry for the
name: let us go to y^ properties. Have not your Images all these properties
that ye Prophet lays to these things which you call Idols? ca^ you say nay?
can you prove the contrary? Does not experience learn us that they be all
one? Now what matter is it what name you geeue them, when the properties and
the very thing is all one. Moreover the Prophet David does define an Idol with
these properties: First it has eyes and can The description of an Idol or
Image.
not see: it has a nose and can not smell: it has a mouth and can not speak:
it has ears and can not hear: it has hands and can not feel: it has
feet and can not go. etc.

Now which of all these properties has not your Idolles? what will you make
now of them? The Prophet David makes an Idolle of ye thing that has these
properties: and will you make a God and a helper of the^? will you pray to
them? will you offer to them? will you run from place to place to seek them?
There is no distinction, there is no subtlety that can help you. For more
reverence, more service, more honor, more cultus duly may you not do to your
Images then the Prophet would that we should not do to Idols: for they be
one in all properties and conditions. And as for your miracles that you defend
them by, they be but illusions of the devil, inverted of your own
imaginations, and contrary to the word of God, unto the great blaspheming of
the omnipotent God of heaven. For miracles be never done of God that any man
can prove of surety, but all only to the magnifiing and declaration of his
blessed word. As for all other miracles may be suspected to be done of the
devil, by the sufferaunce of God, to the probation of our faith, and specially
when they be against the open word of God. This may be proved by the
words of Moses: If there arise in the Deuteronomy. 13.
midst of thee a Prophet, or a man that says I have seen a vision, and tell
thee before a sign and a wonder, and that thing that he told thee do also
come to pass: Now if this man say unto thee, let us go and follow strainge
Gods which thou know not, and let us serve them, thou shall not hear the
Prophet, nor the dreamers words, for God does prove you, that it may be open
whether you love him in all your heart, and in all your soul or not.

Be not these words open against all manner of miracles? yea and against
Prophets whose prophecy is true: and yet because he will draw the hearts
of y^ people unto other things beeside God, therefore shall he not be heard:
your Images be not here excepted. Farthermore, what signifies this, that God
will have all our hearts and all our souls. If God have all, then can your
Images have no part. But mark how God does prove our faith with such
miracles, so that he would that neither heaven nor hell, Saint, nor
miracles, Prophet Idolles or Images work no miracles. Hipocrites feign them to
be the workers of miracles.
true, nor false, should draw our hearts from him, or from his word: but
alonely to stick fast to him. Wherefore lay for your Idols what you ca^: first
they be no Gods: seco^darily they can no more do (if they do so much) but
do miracles, and tell you before of those things that be to come. And yet all
this can not help, for it is openly against the word of God and we may not
hear them.

Farthermore against your Idols will I set the brazen Serpent, of who^ it is
written that it did miracles so openly that no man ca^ deny it, yea and that by
the word of God: which did also stand many hundred years, till the people did
to it so much as they now do to your Gods: that is, they did offer inse^ce and
other oblations thereto, and therefore was it destroyed. Not withstanding it was
instituted of God, and so be none of your idolles, wherefore miracles can not
help. And among the Turks be miracles done as they think, and yet that
proves not their sect to be lawful. I will tell you of a miracle that is
written in their law. On a certain time there was a controversy between the
Priests and the religious men which of them should have, the oblations of the
people. The Priests laid that they were best worthy because they were
ministers in the temple and servants to the Gods, and night and day took
pain for the people. The Friars laid for them that they were the succession of
all their holy fathers and by their prayers and merit^ was the king and all the
people kept, (...) ^he land defended from all evil with many other things
more.

Briefly this matter was deferred of both parts to the sentence of the A
notable miracle done by false gods in Turkey.
king, the which had thought to have given sentence with the Priests. But
when the Friars knew it, they came to the king and desired him that he would
defer the sentence vij. days, and see what the Gods would show for them.
The night before that the king should give sentence, was he compelled by
nature to go to the preuy, which when he came there, ye preeuy brake, and he
fell in, and there was he crying by the space of an hour, til he was so weary
that he could cry no more, and no man could come to him for the palace was
locked. The^ suddenly appeared unto him a religious man with a glorious light,
saying unto him. Now where be they y^ thou would have given sentence with
all? are not they well worthy of the oblations that can not help thee out of
danger? but now may thou see what we may do with the Gods for thee and all
thy land: and with this the king without pain or hurt was taken out of ye
preeuy and laid again in his bed or he wist it: and the day following gave he
sentence that the religious men should have the oblations.

How think you was not here an open miracle? and was it not done on A stinking
miracle.
the king the which had understanding and reason. It was an open matter when
he was in the preeuy and the preeuy broken, and he laid again in his bed
without any hurt, this passed ma^s power. But what will you prove of this
miracle? all your Gods together can not do a more open miracle then this is.

But let us see what the Doctors say against your Gods, Cleme^s writes these
words, We do honor Libro 5. ad Jacob.
visible Images to the honor of the invisible God, the which is a false
thing: but if you will honor the image of God in doing well to man, To relieve
thy poor neighbor that is Gods Image, is to honor God.
in him shall you honor the true image of God. Wherefore if you will truly
honor the image of God, we will open that thing unto you that is of truth,
so that you must do well unto man the which is made unto the Image of God:
give him honor and reverence: geeue him meat when he is hungrye: geeue him
drink when he is thyrsty: Clothe him when he is naked: serve him when he is
sick: geeue him lodgyng when he is a stranger: and when he is in prison
minister to him necessaries. This is the thing that shall be counted to be
geeue^ God truly. What honor is this of god to ru^ne about foolishly to stony
and woody Images, and to honor as Gods idle and dead figures, and to despise
man in who^ is the very true Image of God. Wherefore understand you that this
is the suggestion of the Serpent that lurketh within, the which does make you
believe that you be devout when you do honor in sensible things. And makes
you to believe that you be not wicked when you hurt sensible and reasonable
men. etc.

How think you? does not this damme the worshyppyng of Images, yea though it
be in yt honor of God. He shows you also that there is no There is no true
Image, but only the Image of man which few do honor.
other true Image but man. Which of you all go a pilgrimage to yt Image?
which of you all do offer to that Image? which of you all do honor that
Image? You land lepers, you inuenters of new gods, you Idolaters, what say you
to this? how can you avoid this? is not this agreeable with Scriptures? And yet
this Image do you despise: This image cast you in prison: this Image do you
stock and chain, and whippe from town to town, without any cause. This image
dies in the streates before your doors for hunger and cold, and you run
to Walsingam and to Ipsewiche with great pomp and pride to honor your dead
shadows. It were better for you to burn those Idolles and to warm this true
image of God there by: for this Image was made unto God only, and all your
dumme gods were made for this Images sake. Wherefore it comes of the devil,
that you forsake this very true image and leap to your worm eaten Gods: yea
you have burnt many a poor man for speaking against these dumme Idolles. But
tell me when all the Bishops in England did vex or trouble any man for
speaking or for doing, yea or for destroying this very true Image of GOD: they
had rather destroy it them selves, then it should be undestroyed. Let the
kings books be searched throughout the Realm Of the lively Images of man,
many have the Bishops burned: But of their worm eaten images not one.
and there shall be no small number found of these Images that be troubled
and vexed and cast in prison for trifles, yea and utterly undone by the Bishops
and by their Priests: and yet will they be yt honourers of Images, yea and
that to the honor of God, and of all holy Saints. Is not this against all
wisdom? yea is it not against nature? and yet no man may tell it.

Also the same doctor in an other Clemens in code^ libro.
place, What thing is there so wicked and so unthankful, as to receive a
benefyte of God and to give thanks unto stocks and stones? wherefore wake and
understand your health. etc.

How think you, are you not unthankful unto God of who^ you have De ^er^
roli. ca. vlti.
received all thing, and for them you thank your worm eaten Gods?
farthermore. S. Augustine says, Let us not love any visible spectakilles lest
by erring from the verity, and by loving shadows we be brought in to darkness,
let us have no devotion to our phantesies. It is better to have a true thing
what so ever it be then all manner of things that may be feigned at our own
pleasure etc. Be not your idols visible spectakles? Be they any other things
then shadows? and yet you will love them and honor them. Answer to Saint.
Augustine. You Infydels have not we a living God, and will you bring us from
him to dead stocks? Also S. Super Dani.
Hierome, Be it known unto the King. etc. the properties of the words be to
be marked that he he says, we will not worship thy gods nor yet honor thy
image, for neither of both be come the servants of God to do. etc. Here have
you that neither worshipping nor honoring belongs to Images.

But now to yt worshipping of saints, which has a greater shadow of holiness
Saints says Papists are to be worshypped, for they pray for us
then these dumme Gods have. In primis you say that saints must pray for us
and be mediators to God for us, that by them we may be able to receive our
petition. This is Richardes opynion De media villa, there can not a thing be
invented by yt craft of the devil that may be a greater blasphemye or more
derogation to Christ and his blessed blood then this is. For if Saints be
necessary to be mediators for us, then is Christ insufficient: for
philosophers did never put ij. causes where as one was sufficient: and if any
thing be given us of God for saints sakes then be not all things given for
Christ's sake, yt which is plainly against S. Paul's saying, God for us all
has given his son, and shall he not give Us Roma. 8.
all things with him? Let every christ en man judge what a blasphemy that is.
But let us prove that Christ is all only our mediator. S. Paul says. There
is one mediator between God and man, the man Christ God has given us one
mediator which is Jesus Christ and not appointed any Saint to be our
mediator.
Jesus, the which has given him self for the redemption of all men. Mark
that he says, one medyatour between God and man. Where there is but one,
there can no saints come in. Moreover saints be men, therefore they must
have a mediator for them selves, and then they can not be mediators for other
men. Farthermore The mediator between God and man is named Jesus, but there
is no Saint so named.
the mediator between God and man, is cauled Christ Jesus. Now is there any
saint that has this name? if there be none that has the name, then is there
none that can usurp this office, without blaspheming of Christ.

Farthermore he has redeemed us only without the help of saints, and why
shall he not be only mediator without saints? is not redemption the chief
act of a mediator? Also the holy ghost says, He shall be called Emanuell
the which is as much to say as God with us, what is this Esaias. 7.
God with us, is he with us but as one man is with an other? And as my How God
by Christ is ever with us.
cote is with my back? Nav, he is an other ways with us, That is to redeem
us, to save us, to keep us, to defend us from all evil: yea and is with us,
that is, he is on our side, he holds with us, he speaks for us, he
excuses us, he makes our cause good: briefly he obtayneth all things for
us. Of what saynct can this be spoken? What do saints now for us? Also S.
John says, If a man do sin 1. John 2.
we have an advocate by the father Christ Jesus, what is this? he is our
advocate to the father? and here be none assigned but Christ Jesus, and by him
have we only remission of our sins.

Now what shall the Saints obtain Saints ca^ obtain nothing for us.
for us? what shall they desire for us? if our sins be remitted, then has
the father of heaven no displeasure against us, what shall they then pray for
us? Also S. Paul says. The spirit of God makes intercession mightyly for us
with mighty desires, that ca^ not be expressed with tongue. Mark how the
spirit of God desires and prays for us, and that no man should reckon that
we had need of other mediators, he says that he prays mightyly for us,
and with great ferue^cie that it can not be expressed.

Now is not he able to obtain all things for us, and has taken this office
on him for us? it were doubtless a great rebuke to him, that Saints should be
set in his stead, and joined with him in his office as though he were
insufficient. You think to do saints a great honor when you make them Gods,
and set the^ in Christ's stead: but you can not do them a great dishonor nor
displeasure, for they will be but Saints, and no Gods, yea and that by
Christ's help and not by their own. Also S. Paul faith, Christ sits Roma.
8.
on the right hand of the father the which does also pray for us, mark that
he prays for us, can the father of heaven deny any thing of his prayer? Does
not he ask all things necessary for us? And as Scripture says? He is our
wisdom, he is our 1. Cor. 1.
justice, he is our satisfaction, and our redemption made of God.

Now what rests for Saints to ask? what will you desire more then Christ is
all in all for us, and therefore we need not yt help o^ Saints.
wisdom, justice, sanctification and redemption? all these has Christ
obtained for us, yea and he alonely thereunto was ordained of God: which of
all the Saints can say that, but he? and if all saints and all the world
would say the contrary, yet he him self stands fast against them all, and
co^de^neth them for liars and blasphemers, saying, No John. 14.
man comes to the father but by me, note these words. First he says, no
man. etc. Ergo, as many as ever shall come to the father of heaven be here
contained: then adds he, but by Saints can not bring us to the father of
heaven, but it must be Christ only.
me, be not all saints, all your feigned mediators with merits and all other
things clean excluded in this word, but? wherefore it is plain that what so
ever he be yt makes any other mediator or goes about by any means (seem
it never so holy) but by Christ only to come to the father of heaven, first he
despises Christ, and if he despise Christ, he despises also his father
which has allowed him only to be John. 14.
our mediator and way to him, as it is written. I am the way only in the
father, therefore let the^ be sure yt seek any other way or any other
mediator, but Christ alonely to heaven, that they (according to the word of yt
verity which ca^ not lie) shall never come there, but as many as trust in him
only, let the^ not doubt but they shall not only obtain to come to heaven,
but also what soever they desire be side in his name according to his own
promise and word, which ca^ not deceive John. 16.
us, What soever (says he) you ask in my name the father shall give it you.
Mark these words, what soever, and that we should run to no other he
adds also, in my name.

Here is nothing excluded, but all things freely be given us, and that for
his names sake: not for no saints name, not for none of our holiness or
merits, but for Christ's name. Now what is it to run from this sweet
promise of our most loving Savior, redemer, and only mediator Jesus Christ,
to saints, and to other works, but a plain and an euydent token of our
infidelity, of our unthankfulness, ye that we think him untrue, and will not
fulfill his promise, ye that he is not able to do it, and to make him a liar,
and untrue in his word. Also S. Paul says. He has given his only son for
us, how can it be yt he shall not give all things with him? Mark he says
with him, and not with saints, he says all things, and not certain things,
he that faith all, excludes not the tooth ache, and leaves it to S. Appolyne.
etc. but he excludes nothing.

Now you Infidelles and mistrusters of Christ, what will you have of the father
of heaven? or what ca^ your hearts desire, that Christ is not able to obtain
for you? if you beeleeue him able. It is his office, and thereunto only
appointed of yt father, and none other, yea all other be excluded with manifest
If we ask in Christ's name we shall obtain but so shall we not in any other
name.
scriptures. Moreover, will you or be you so foolish to ask a thing of one yt
has it not to geeue, nor ca^ not give it, yea has need of it himself, and
leave him that has abundance, yea and that has made an open proclamation,
that freely without goulde or silver, or any merchandise, he will geeue the
self same thing to as many as come and ask of him, whatsoever they be. Now
the Lord has not alonely goodness, but he is all goodness himself: and all
Saints have sinned Luke. 18.
and need of his goodness: and he has made this proclamation by his blessed
and everlasting word, that whosoever comes unto him, shall have of his
goodness aboundauntly: now will you leave him and go to the saints? the which
if they ever had any goodness, they received it of the father, as S. James
says: All good gifts comes Iaco. 1.
from the father of light. Mark how he says all good gifts.

But here have you a distinction, yt only God is good of his own nature, and
Saints are good by receauinge goodness of him. Well to do you a pleasure, I
will allow your distinction to be good, for of it can you make no more with
all your subtlety, but that Saints have no more goodness then they have
received. Now the goodness Saints received Gods goodness for the^ selves and not
for us.
that they have received, was for themselves only, yea and they can geeue none
of it to you: for they received it not for you, but for themselves, yea and no
more then was necessary for them, and that but alonely of mercy, as it is open
in Mathewe in the parable of the five wise virgins, and the five foolish:
where as the wise vyrgins had not so much oil to lend the foolish virgins as
would kindle their lamps: finally, they had nothing at all that they could
spare them, and yet were they wise virgins, and yet were they Saints, and yet
were they admitted to enter into heaven.

Farthermore, do you not openly against God when you desire any thing of
saints, whether it be prosperity, wealth, health, remission of sins, or in
adversities consolatio^s, or comfortes, or any other thing? seeing that
Scripture only knowledgeth all these things to be received of him, and that
he is the only geeuer of them, yea and that all the prophets and fathers in
all their tribulation cried alonely to him, as David testifies of him self in
these words, When I am troubled, I will cry unto Psalm. 119.
the Lord and he will help me. He cried not to any Saint to speak to God
for him, but says: I will cry unto the Lord, yea and he doubted not that he
would not hear him because he was a man and a sinner, but faithfully said,
he will help me, as he testifies in an other place, saying: my help is of
God that has made heaven and earth. Psalm. 120.


Now will you run from God, and ask of Saints, comfort, prosperity,
health, or wealth, or any other thing? seeing it beelongeth alonely to God to
geeue? seeing he alonely is the fountain and auctor of all goodness? and not
Saints which have no more but their part, and that, that is geeuen unto them.
Also our M. Christ teaching al creatures to pray, bids them not to go to
any other thing, but alonely to the father of heaven, he makes no mention of
Saints, no not so much as to be a mean between them and the father, but
commands them that pray, to pray the^ selves to the father. The which thing
I doubt not but he would have done if he would that there should have been
other mediator, or geeuers of any goodness. Moreover is not this a mad manner
of prayer that men use to our Lady? O our father which art in heaven hallowed be
thy name. etc Thus do you learn men to mock A fond prayer made to our Lady.
our Lady when you learn them to say our Ladies Psalter. You infidels and
mockers both of God and man, are you not ashamed of these open blasphemies?
Doubt you not (if you call not for grace to yt Lord that you may amend yea and
that shortly) but God shall straightly aue^ge this blasphemy on you, he has
suffered long and no doubt but of his infinite mercy. Notwithstanding I will
never beeleue that he will much le^ger suffer, seeing that he has brought so
graciously his glorious verity into the world and that so openly, and so
clearly that you can not deny it nor withstand it, neither by reason, nor by
learning: but your own consciences be confounded and marked with hot yrons,
notwithstanding you persecute it by tyranny to the increase of your damnation.
Our Lord be mercyful unto you. But now that you may be known what you be,
when you deceive the people with these words fathers fathers, holy Doctors
holy doctors: I shall recite certain of your fathers and doctors sayings,
that you may be known not alonely open liars and blasphemers of God and his
blessed eternal word, but also of his holy saints and fathers, unto whom he
has reuelated by the Scriptures his verity.

First S. Augustine says these August. d^ vera relig. cap. vlti.
words. Let us have no devotion in honoring of dead men, for if they lived
well, they may not be counted for such men, as to desire such honors, but they
will that God shall be honored of us, by whose lightening they rejoice, that we
are made co^panio^s of their glory. Wherefore Saints must be honored by
following them, but not by honoring the^ of deuotyon etc. Be not these plain
The right honoring of Saints.
words? S. Augustine was a father and a doctor, And he says, yt saints will
not be honored of us, but that God shall be only honored. Secondarily, we
may follow their good living, and so honor them, but in no wise to pray to
them, or honor them of devotion. It follows in S. Augustine, wherefore we do
honor them, by love, or charity, but not by service, nor we build no temples
unto them. For they will not so be honored of us, for they know well that we (if
we be good) be the temples of God. Wherefore it is well written. That man was
forbidden of the angel to worship Apoc. 19. and. 22.
him, but all only to worship one God, under whom the angel was also a
seruanut etc. Can you desire any playner words then these? we ca^ no more do
but love saints of charity, but in no wise to serve them: we may also build
no temples to the honor of them. Mark also how he brings scripture for
him, how the Angel of God would not be honored of man. How ca^ you avoid
this saying of S Augustine, and his example of scripture? Also Chrisostomes
saying Mat. 15. tom 6. ho. de profect. ^nge.
on this text, woman thy faith is great. Do thou see this woman which was
unworthy, but by her perseueraunce was made worthy? will thou learn also, that
we praying unto God in our own persons, do more profyt, then when other men
do pray for us. This woman did cry, and the disciples came and prayed him
that he would speed her for she cries on us. But to them he answered, I am
not sent but unto the sheep which are perished of the house of Israel. But
when she came her self and did persevere crying and saying, Yes lord, for the
whelps do eat the cru^mes that An authority declaration that Christ hears
us for our selves and not the Apostles for us.
fall from their masters tables: then did he give her the benefyt and said, be
it unto the as thou will. Do thou not se how he did repelle her, when other
men prayed for her? but when she came her self and cried, he did grant her.
Unto them he said. I am not sent but unto the lost sheep. But unto the woman
he says be, it unto thee as thou will. etc.

Hear you not plainly how we do sooner obtain our petityon of God our own
self, the^ by any other midlers? Mark also how yt Apostles did pray for this
woman, and they repelled: and she was heard. Also the same Chri. To^ 6. ho. de
profect^ euangeliorum.
Doctor wrighteth these words. We have no need of Patro^s before God, nor need
of much process to speak fair unto other men, but though they be alone and
want a patro^, but prayest God by thy self, yet for all that shall thou
have thy desire. God does not so lightly grant, when other men pray for us, as
when we pray our self, yea though we be full of sins etc. Be not these We
need no patrons for God hears.
words plain, that we have no need of patrons? but God hears us sooner,
when we pray in our own persons, then when other me^ pray for us. Wherefore
they that make other mediators then only Christ, does mistrust Christ, and
believes that he is not omnipote^t God, nor merciful Lord, and therefore fly
they unto this Saint, and unto that Saint, trusting to find more mercy at
their hands, then they could find at Christ's. But a true Christen Exodus 20.
man leaves his fantesye, and remembers these words of holy scripture. Hear
thou man, I am thy God, and therefore he sets all his trust, and his
confidence, all his belief, all his hope, all his harton him only. And if he
will have any thing necessary to body, or soul of him, he asks it all only,
as the prophet David learneth us saying, I will pray unto the Lord, and in the
Psalm. 5.
morning thou shall here my voice, what is this in the morning but shortly,
quickly. Thou art so merciful, that thou will not prolong the time, but
shortly here me. And therefore when I am in any distres of body, or soul, to
thee I call for deliuerace, and trust to obtain it of thee only. For thou
Lord, rhou have set me, in thy hope only. Psalm. 4.


Thus does every good man pray and The Christen man puts his trust in God
that he will hear him.
trust in God, for he takes him not alonely for his God but also for his
merciful God, yea and for his father, which will deny him nothing. But
co^trarywise do the infidels and the fained Christen men, for they mistruste
him and reckon him to be a tyrant and a terrible and a fearful Judge, which
looks for much intercession, and that regards persons, and therefore run
they hither and thither, to seek an other mediator, to seek an other helper,
to seek an other deliverer then Christ: for with him be they not satisfied;
yea they recke^ him to be so proud and so stately, and so cruel and so high,
that they dare not speak first to him, nor desire him, for they clearly
mistrust him, that is the ^u^me thereof. And for that cause seek If we mistrust
not Christ, there is no cause why we should run a gadding to this Saint for
any thing that is necessary for us.
they to this Saint, and to that Saint, and desire of one riches, of an other
health: of one they will helped to heaven, and of an other they will be
delivered from hell. Of one they will have fre^dshyp of this world, of an other
long life, of one they will be saved from sickness, of an other they will be
made whole, and all this is because they mistrust Christ, and recke^ yt he is
either not able, or that he will not obtain these things for them. This is
the very ground of their hearts, let them lie with their mouths what they
will, and of this are they compelled to fly from Christ. Is not this making of
many Gods? S. Paul says that in covetousness is Idolatry, because that ma^s
heart is of his goods, how much more is here Idolatry whereas ma^s faith,
hope, and trust is set so much on Saints are holy, but yet are they no Gods.
creatures. Truth it is that Saints be holy, and worthy to be beeloued in
in Christ, and for Christ, but yet be they but creatures, and no Gods. I love
them as well as you do and praise and magnify them, but wherefore? because they
have Christ in them which is the author of all goodness which if he were away,
I would spit at them and despise the^. But I do not make them Christ (that is
my Savior, my redeemer, my co^forter my trust and my hope) because yt Christ
of his mercy and of his grace dwells in them, but I seek alonely to him yt
has made the^ holy, and has also alonely power both me and all men likewise
to make.

Wherefore dear brethren, if you will be Christ's, make him alonely Christ is
our only intercessor.
your mediator and your intercessour to the father of heaven, and all things
that you desire, desire them in his name only. Make him first your friend, and
then have you all Saints on your side. For they can not choose but be your
friends. Wherefore, set all your trust, hope and confidence in Christ only, and
direct all your desires, all your petitions, all your prayers unto him only.
And as for Saints, you shall love them, favor them, and magnify them, and
praise them for Gods sake, and to Gods honor: and where they lived well after
Christ's word, therein shall you follow them, but in no wise shall you
beeleeue, hope, or trust in them, or make any prayers unto the^, or desire any
petition of them: nor their living shall be any rule to live by farther then
they followed yt word of Christ, for you be cauled Christen men of Christ, and
not of Saints.

But now will I answer to their The Papists carnal reasons.
carnal reasons. First they have a law whose words be these: Christen men
do not call worshipful Images Gods, nor they do not serve them as Gods, nor
they set no hope of their salvation in them, nor they do not look for of them
the judgment that is to come: but they do worship them, and effectually pray
unto them in remembrance and recordation of the first fruits, but they do not
serve them, nor yet any other creature with godly honor. etc.

Let every Christen man consider God only is omnipotent and almighty.
well in his conscience the words of this law, and call also to remembrance
what God is himself? that is to say, how omnipotent he is, how liberal he
is, how merciful he is, how gracious he is unto us: and the^ I think he
shall well perceive, that this decree is neither made with faith, with
learning, nor yet with reason, but an open blasphemy against God, and a great
mistrusting of our merciful master Christ Jesus. Briefly there is nothing,
but an heap of blind and unfaithful words, inverted to beeguile simple men
thereby.

To the first word venerabiles, what faith, what learning, what reason will
that Images should be judged worthy veneration (this does yt lattin word
venerabiles signify) seeing they be but deaf, dumme and dead, what reason is
it then to call them venerabiles? Master Doctor Rydley will say that no man
is so mad to worship and to honor the stock and the stone, and yet his own
law caulleth them venerabiles, that is as much to say as worthy to be
worshipped and honored. Call you them one thing by name, and reckon them
unworthy in deed? It follows, Christen men call them no Gods, what need
these words? All the world knows that they be no Gods in deed: But then
why call you them venerabiles?

Farthermore, I would know of all my masters yt lawyers, why they be such
blasphemers of God, such infidelles, and such mortal enemies unto God, as fo
suffer, yea and to compel simple men, to geeue to those stocks and stones
such exterior honor, as beelongeth only to God, seeing you call them no
Gods? What makes it matter for ye name, so long as you geeue them the very
thing? Assign you what exterior worshipping The Papists geeue the saints yt
worship to stocks and stones that we should give to God.
and honoring beelongeth to God, or that we may do or can do to God, and I
will prove that ye compel men to geeue that same to stocks and stones, and
yet you think your selves sufficiently discharged, because that men call them
no gods. It follows: they set no hope in the^. Then what need men to pray
unto them? what need men to ask petitions of them? what need men to offer
unto them? what need men to vow to them? what need men to run to them
barefooted and barelegged, and to kiss them and lick them? do they ask that
thing of them which they have no hope to receive by them? then do they mock
them.

It follows, but they pray unto the^ and worship them, how think you by this?
You say they be no Gods and yet men pray unto them and worship them, add to
this that the Latin word signifies as much as to ask forgeuenes of them, and
fully and effectually to pray to them. If this stand with faith, and with the
honor of God, let every Christen man judge. But how stands it with your
decree, where in you call them no Gods? this is as much to say as you be very
hypocrites and dissemblers with God and man, for you say one thing in words
and compel the people to do the contrary in deeds, that is to honor them as
Gods* Is not this contrary to these words of Scripture, thou shall honor
thy Lord God and serve him only?

Mark the holy ghost says, Thou Math. 4.
shall serve God only. Here is the self Latin word, adorare, that your decree
has, Scripture will it shall all only be given to God, and you will give it
to your worshypfull Images. Mark also the occasion that our M. Christ spoke
these words. The devil required that he should fall down and honor him, he
required no faith nor no hope on him, nor yet that he should make any prayers,
or desire any petition of him, or lick or kiss his foot, or make any
oblation to him, but alonely to fall down, and so with exterior service to
honor him, but our master said that yt belongs alonely to God, and neither
to the devil nor yet to your woorshipful images. Now say of your conscience
do not you that same thing to your stocks and stones, that the devil required
of our master Christ? how can you avoid this? Glos^ de co^sec. Did. 3. c.
venerabiles.
but now comes your gloss with a distinction and will learn our master
Christ how that he shall honor the devil, and excuse him with an idle and a
damnable distinction, whose words be these: there is cultus latriae, which
includes three things in him, love, multitude of sacrifice, and veneration:
this beelongeth only to God says he. There is an other worshipping which is
cauled dulia, and this has but one thing in him, that is veneration, and it
has neither love nor multitude of sacrifice in it, and this beelongeth to all
creatures. etc. What be these but an heap of idle words without any sentence
invented of the devil to deceive simple men.

Here say you that Cultus Latriae which includes love, multitude of
sacrifyce, and veneration, belongs to God only. Tell me of your conscience,
are you not ashamed of these words? Fere you not the vengeance of God? that
thus mock and trifle both with God and man? There can be nothing The blindness
and ignorance of the malicious Papists.
more against you then these words be. For first do you not love your Images,
and your saints? Secondarilye do you not offer unto them? call you that no
sacrifice? yea it is so much that you can hang no more on them. Thyrdly, do
not you give veneratio^ unto them, yea, and that with all your hearts? or else
be you hipocrites and disse^blers. So that you give to your stocks and
stones, Cultum Latrie, which by your own distinction beelongeth to God only.
How can you now avoid Idolatry? Now to the second part of your distinction,
you say that you do to saints, and to all creatures yt worshipyng of Dulya,
which is without love, and without the multitude of sacrifice. What call you
this? what mean you by this? what worshipping is this that is without love,
and without sacrifice? Is not this open hipocrisye to honor a thing outwardlye,
and nether to love it, nor to fanor it inwardly? nor yet to offer any
sacrifice unto it? this is nothing else but open mocking, and I may well Math.
27.
compare you unto the wicked Jews that crouched, and kneeled unto Christ, but
they did it neither of love, nor favor, but of mockage, as you do honor your
saints, and Images. This comes all ways to the^ that will mock, and trifle
with gods holy word, that when they think to avoid it with a damnable
distinction, then is it most against them, so that all christian men may see,
that the hand of God is hear. Also an other baulde reason you have, which is
of M. Rychard. If saints when they were here, and De media villa. 4. sent
not confirmed in grace, did of their charity pray for us. Therefore now must
they pray much more, seeing they are now confyrmed in charity etc.

Is not this a goodly bauld reason to cast at a bishops cure? How can he prove
this? what scripture has he for him? I hear well his carnal reason, but I
hear no probation, I will make him a like reason. The saints when they wear
hear, did of their charity cloth naked men, and feed the A papistical reason,
well answered and confuted.
hungrey, and gave drink to yt thirsty, and visited them that were in prison:
therefore much more now, for they be confyrmed in charity, and these be
deeds of charity.

Likewise. S. Paul when he was hear, did of his charity, write epistelles to
declare the veretie, therefore now must ^ee much more write: so y^, where before
he wrote but one epistell, now must he at yt least write three, or else he is
not confyrmed in charity. and I think he did never a greater deed of
charity, then now to wright an epistell, and to declare his own pistels, for
all the world is at variaunce, for understanding of them. You blind gydes, who
has learned you to declare, wherein the charity of saints does stand? who
has given you authority, to give a deed of charity unto saints, that
scripture does not give. Wherefore is it a deed of charity for one to pray for
an other? is there any other cause then that the holy Ghost so declared it in
his word? Wherefore that is charity in this life, that the word of God byddeth
you do, and as for the works that charity shall have in an other life, it
belongs not to you to judge farther then the word of God.

Also you have an other reason, God shows miracles in this place, and in An
other Papisticall reason.
that place, to the honoring of this saint, and that saint, therefore we must
likewise honor them. I answer as to your miracles, though I have answered
to them before, yet will I add this unto it, that God is no God of
superstition, nor that favors one place more then an other, or that has any
affection to this place, more then to that, wherefore this is your superstition
invented of the devil, for God will neither be honored in the mountain, nor
yet in Jerusalem, but in men's hearts. And as to John. 4.
your myrakles the great Gods Diana did also myrackles, as you may Acts. 19.
read in scripture, consider her honor, that scripture speaks of, and
compare it to the honor of your Images, and you may see they do agree.
Farthermore Apollo, Castor, Aescu lapius and such other did also great
miracles, as stories do make mention, and also many men which were both wise,
well learned, and also many men of a great reputation and honor as you be,
yea and me^ of great holiness do bear witness of y^ same. Therefore by this
reason we must also honor them. Also an other reason you have out of Job.
Convert thy self unto some of the saints. Of Job. 5.
this you conclude that we must pray unto saints. I answer of this you may
conclude that you be blind, and dull Asses, and unlearned stocks, Papists
are wresters of the scriptures of God.
peruerters, tearers, renters, of holy scripture. I pray you what saints did
yt old fathers know before Christ's coming? whom did they reckon to be in
heaven before Christ's assention? why did they desyer so sore his cumming if
they believed that they should have ascended up to heaven? But this is the
sentence of that place, Elephas reproved Job, and says yt he is not Gods
servant, and therefore God punished him says he, and to prove this he
bids Job call to memory all holy men, and servant of God, and reckon one
if he can among them all, whom God did so punish: wherefore he concludes
that Job is not the servant of God, but a foolyshe man (which in Scripture is
the enemy of God) whom God shall slaye in his wrath. This is the sentence of
that place.

Fynallye you have an other reason, you shall praise God in his saints, Psalm.
150.
therefore saints must be honored. I answer is not this a good consequent?
I must praise God in Bears and Apes, therefore Bears, and Apes, must be
worshipped. Add that yt follows in ye text, you must praise God in timbrels,
in orgens and in pypes, therefore after your conscequent timbrels, orgens, and
pypes, must be A foolish and papisticall argument well answered.
worshipped, but if you wear learned in scriptures, you should find an other
sentence in the holy Psalm then this is for the very true text is Laudate
dominum in sanctititate sua. Praise God in his his holiness, but let us grant
that he says, praise God in his saints, do not you know that scriptures
say, blessed is God in all his gifts? out of this can not follow that we shall
worship, and pray to Gods gifts, but God shall be praised, and honored in
all his gifts, as in saint, man, and Angel.

An other reason you have of a similitude: A foolish reason of ye papists.
Like as a man can not come to the speech of a king, but that he must have
certain mediatoures, (as Dukes, Earls, and such men as be in favor between
him and the king) that may entreat his matter: So likewise before God. I
answer: you Infidelles and mistrusters of God, what will you make of God?
will you make him a fleshely and a carnal stock, full of passions and of
affections? Unto a mortal Prince you make mediators because he knew not
your heart, and because he is more affectionat to one man the^ to an other,
and because he judges after the sight of his eye, and after ye percialnes
and affection of his heart. But so does not God, but alonely of mere mercy and
grace. But to your similitude: you can not have no Dukes to speak for you,
except you geeue them rewards, except they have carnal affection to you:
therefore by your similitude you must likewise do to Saints.

But S. Ambrose answers clearly to this damnable reason of yours, saying: Men
are wont to use this Ad. To. c. 1.
miserable excusation, that by these things may we come to God, as we may
come to the king by Earls. I answer, we do come unto the king, by the
means of Dukes and Earls, because that the king is a man, and knows not to
whom he may commit the common wealth, but unto God (from whom nothing can
be hid) he knows all men's merits, we need no spokesman nor no
mediator but alonely a devout mind. etc.

Here are you clearly answered of S. Ambrose to your carnal reason. Item,
an other reason out of your law, that Images be unto unlearned De consec.
Did. 3. c. perlatum.
men, that same thing that letters and writings be unto them that be
learned, that they may thereby learn what they ought to follow.

If your Images be no more to unlearned men then writings be to learned men,
therefore they may no Images are no more to be worshipped the^ the books that
learned men read.
more do to them then learned men do to their letters: would you suffer
learned men to come and kneel, and offer to my book, and set up candels
before it, and to make vows to come yearly thereunto? and to desire petitio^s
before my book of those Saints yt be written therein? See how your own
example makes against you, and all thing that I can bring. Wherefore, if
there be any grace in you, or if there be any shame in you of the world, for
Christ's sake leave of this false* learning and coloring of Idolatry. For you
do not only deceive your simple brethren, but you do also blaspheme the
immortal God of heaven, which doubtless will avenge shortly this rebuke on you,
if you do not amend: whose violence and might you are not able to withstand.
Wherefore I exhort you in ye blessed name of Christ Jesus, that you repent in
time, and take upon you to learn the verity: which is, how God is only to
be honored, and only to be sacrificed unto, he is only to be prayed
unto, of him only must our petitions be asked, it is he only yt geeueth
wealth and prosperity, and he only must deliver and comfort us in all
adversities, and he only must help us out of all distress: unto whom as
Saint Paul says, be alonely glory and honor 1. Tim. 1.
for ever. Amen.

Now most excellent and noble Prince, I have here after the poor Doctor
Barnes conclusion.
gift that God has geeuen me set out unto your grace certain articles, which
though they seem at the first sight to be new, yet have I proved them
openly with the everlasting word of God, and that not wroonge, nor wrested
after my light brain, but after the exposition of clarkely doctors, yea and
that of the oldest and of the best. Wherefore most excellent Prince, most
humbly, and most meekely I beseech your grace, that I may find so great
indifferency at your graces hand, as that the Bishops shall not condemn
this book, after the manner of their old tyranny: except they can with open
Scriptures and with holy Doctors, refell it as I have proved it.

But I would it should please your grace to call them before you, and to
command as many as will condemn this book, every one of them severally
without others counsel, to write their cause, why they will condemn it, and
the scriptures whereby they will condemn it, and to bring them all to your
grace, and your grace may judge between both parties.

I do not doubt but they will bring your grace maruailous probations, and such
as were never heard. And if three of them agree in one tale (if they be
divided) let me dye for it, and that your grace shall well see. The father of
heaven and his most merciful son Jesus Christ, keep your grace in honor,
to his pleasure and glory.

Amen.
Of the original of the Mass and of every part thereof translated into English
out of his book
De Doctorum Sententijs. De consecratione. Did. 1. Cap. Iacobus ex 6. Synodo.
James the brother of the Lord, as cconernyng the flesh, unto whom was first
committed the Church of Jerusalem, and Basilius the Bishop of Caesaria gave
unto us the celebration of the Mass. Says the gloss, that is to say the
manner how to celebrate yt Mass. For the words by the which the body is
made, were delivered from the Lord him self. But afterward, others also added
some one piece, some an other, for comlynes, and solemnity. And thus much
says he.

God Christian reader what can these men, wholly addicted to lies, otherwise
do, but beguile and deceive. For this is their only endeavor, which although
it may be manifest unto thee by many of their deeds, not withstanding by this
one* (of yt which they so greatly boast) it is so manifest that none ca^ dony
it. To attribute the original of the Mass unto James the Apostle and to
Basilius ye bishop, is an error not to be suffered, for as much as it is most
false, as by that which follows shall appear.

Let them declare (if they can) what James made thereof, and what Bastill added
thereto? Let them bring A bold chal^nge of Doctor Barnes.
forth one of the Apostles that ever said Mass, and they shall have yt
victory. Ieames died about the year of our Lord 62. And of Mass (as they
understand it) there was no mention made in the Church by the space of 200.
years. Moreover then this, Basil The Papists lie manifestly displayed.
tied about the year after Christ 380. How then could he agree with James
about the Mass? But what Mass had the Church from after the death of James
unto Basiles time? and by what authority did Basil deliver to us ye mass?
Moreover these me^ do add their authority out of the vj. Synod, that their
lie might be the more notorious. Bring forth the vj. Synod in the which
these things be written. I pray you what was handled in the vj. Synod, The
manner of celebrating Mass? Or against whom was ye vj. Synod gathered
together? against those yt would not say Mass? Nothing less: but against such
as wickedly taught that there was one operation in Christ: Read the acts of
the Synod and you shall find it to be so. But let us grant in the mean
^eason that this was handled in yt Synod, what does it prove. We do not
contend what matters were entreated of in the Synod: but whether Ieames and
Basil delivered unto us the manner of celebrating the Mass. How does the vj.
Sinode prove this: Of this is our contention. Where hence was the vj. Synod
certified that James and Basil delivered the Mass? Their writings and
works James and Basil falsesied by the Papists.
remain amongst us, in the which there is not found one syllable to be
read as concerning the Mass. Moreover the vj. Synod was in Greece, who unto
this day do varye from our manner of celebrating. Wherefore it must needs
be that either we or they do err from the ordinance of S. James. But what
say you to this? The vj. Sinode was celebrated after the year of Christ. 674.
Before this time, of whom took you the manner of celebratyng? not of the
tradition of Ieames, for yt was as yet unknown to the world, and now first of
all was it by ye Synod opened to ye world. But that this matter may be the
better known unto all the world, I will set against you the authority of S.
Gregory who says that the Apostles had no peculiar manner in celebratyng the
Mass, but that they only said the Lords prayer. Whose words be In regist.
lib. ca. 63.
these. The manner of ye Apostles was, that only at the saying of the Lords
The simplicity of celebratyng the communion in the primative
prayer they consecrated* the Sacrament. Thus says Gregory; where is now the
tradition of Ieames? S. Gregory knew it not. Surely if you were Christians, you
would be ashamed at the lest wise (if you reverence not God) so to persecute,
tear, and slay your brethren for your wicked Mass, of which you boast that
Christ and all his Apostles were the auctors, when as you can bring forth not
one good man for a testimony thereof. For I speak of your Mass as it is pe^red
and not of thee words of Christ.

But that I may briefly finishe this matter. Because the mass is so dear
Gain and advantage makes the Mass to be the better loved of Papists.
unto you (and that for good cause, since by it you fill your bellyes, you
keep horses and dogs, you consecrate harlots to Venus, and many other such
kind of good works,) and yet be uncertain of the auctor, I will describe
unto you the authors of your patched Mass and that out of your own writers,
lest that you should object unto me that I am a Lutheran.

Cronic. cro. F^sci. temp.
First of all Pope Gregory, surnamed the Great, held a general Council at Rome
about ye year of Christ. 594. in the which he ordained the Entrance or
Introite of the Mass, to be begone with some Psalm. Introitus.


He added moreover that Kyrieleison should be song ix. times. Kirieleyson


He also added in the Cannon of the Mass, Diesque nostros in tua pace
disponas, unto these words, Per Christum Diesque nostros.
Dominium nostrum.

He likewise added Pater noster. Pater noster. Fasc. temp. Orationes. Tractus.
Cronic. cro. Gloria in excelsis.


Pope Gelasius adjoined the Prayers, Hymns, and Tractes about the year of
Christ. 482.

Pope Thelesphorus appointed that the Gospel and Gloria in excelsis, should
be song, about the year of Christ. 134.

Pope Symmacus enlarged Gloria in excelsis, for first they had nothing Cronic.
cro.
more then that was in the Evangelist. He lived about the year. 494.

Pope Marcus appointed that upon Cronic. cro. Fasci. temp.
Festival days immediately after the Gospel, ye Nicene Creed should be song
with a loud voice by the Quier Nicene Creed.
and the people, about the year. 334.

This prayer, Veni sanctificator omnipotens eterne Deus, which is said over
Bern. Abbas de officio Missa.
the host, was taken from the French order. Moreover these words, Suscipe
sancta Trinitas, was only taken by custom, and not by the ordinance of any
Pope.

Pope Sixtus yt first ordained that, Cronic cro. Fas^^. temp. Sanctus. Ratio.
di. Cronic. cro. Fasci. temp.
Sanctus, should be song iij. times in the Mass, about the year. 124.

Pope Gelasius ordained, Teigitur cl^issime pater, and appointed that the
Priests should say the Secrets, the Cannon, and the Prefaces with Doct.
Cra^tz.
their arms stretched abroad, he lived about the year. 482.

Pope Leo the great, added unto yt Fasci. temp.
Canon, Hanc igitur oblationem, and sanstum sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam,
Sanctum sacrificium.
about the year. 444.

Pope Gregory the third adjoined, Croni. cro. Fasci. temp. Quorum solemnitas.
Quorum solemnitas hodie in conspectudiuinae maiestatis tuae celebratur,
Domine, Deus noster, about the year. 754

Pope Celestine the first appointed Cronic. cro.
that the Psalms of David should be song in manner of an Antheme of all yt
people before the sacrifice which was not wont to be done. For after the
Epistle and Gospel were read the sacrifice was ended. He lived about the year
of Christ. 424.

Pope Alexander the first added, Cronic. cro. Ratio. diui. Qui pridi^ quam
pateretur. Fasci. temp. Agnus Dei.
Qui pridie quam pateretur. He lived about the year. 114.

Pope Sergius the first ordained that, Agnus Dei, should be song three times
whilst the Sacrament of Christ's body was in breakyng, about the year of
Christ. 694.

The first Latin Masses were song Cronic. cro.
by John Bishop of Portuence in the vj. general Council of Constantinople,
about the year. 674.

Behold Christen Reader, here now have thou their Mass as it is patched
together and the authors of every part thereof, which our Papists so
wickedly defend to be a sacrifice. Neither is it any marvel, if they do
with tooth and nail defend a thing so dear, so laborious and that has been
so long time a making. This I dare boldly affirm that that magnificent Temple
of Solomon was in a great deal lesser time builded, then this Isopes crow was
decked with his borrowed feathers. Neither yet would I have thee to forgette the
Decree of the Pope which proves that Mass was ordained by James and Basil.
I pray ^hee, take away all that which was added by these fathers and what
then is remaynyng to the Mass? What is left that James delivered, or that
Basil commended unto them? Nothing at all but the very words of Christ.
Thus do these good fathers set them selves against the manifest truth of God.
But what shall be their glory and reward thou shall see, if thou will
leasurably lysten and behold to the end of the tragedye. The Lord shall
speak with them in his anger and in his heat shall fear them. When he shall
wax hoate in his sudden displeasure, then evil shall it be with these
gyauntes, and well shall beefall to all that trust in the Lord who may
illuminat the heart of the faithful.

Amen.
A general collection out of Doctor Barnes Works of all the testimonies,
ancient fathers, Councels, and of the Popes own laws, alleged by him to
prove these articles following, in the manner of a Table or rather an Epitome of
all his works that he has made.
A Preface of T. G. to the Reader.
FOrasmuch as Master Doctor Barnes in the first Edition of his English
works, which were first corruptlye Printed beyond the Seas, had collected at
the end thereof all the testimonies of the Doctors, Councelles, and of the
Popes laws, which he had before alleged, and were confusely myngled with the
Table by the order of the Alphabete: and whereas it was thought more expedient
by the advice of the learned, and for the better edifying of the Reader, to
have those testimonies for every article collected severally by the^ selves: I
have therefore according to my simple skill, gathered this Epitome, and have
added also thereunto four other articles translated into English out of his
Book De Doctorum Sententijs, which be confirmed in the like sort only by
bare testimonies of scriptures, fathers, councils, and laws. Which four
articles, and the treatise before of the original of the Mass, were omitted
in his English works. But as for all the other testimonies in his book De
Doctoru^ Sententijs, he has in this volume of his works dispersedly alleged
most of them to his purpose, as he had occasion, which by this Epitome
following thou may perceive. Now have thou gentle reader to consider of these
ancient testimonies: desiring thee for the co^firming and establishyng of thy
doubtful conscience, to compare these sayings of Doctors, holy fathers, and
of the Popes own law, unto the saying of the Pope and his Papisticall bishops,
that be in these latter days, and to their late practices, where their power
is, or has been received: and then geeue sentence how they do agree. If
they do accord, then is it like they be of the true Church, whereof these
holy fathers were. But if they agree not, then may thou suspect, that they
have gone astray, and that the devil has transfigured him self into an
Angel of light, and that they are his ministers. Who notwithstanding have
fashioned them selves as though they were the ministers of righteousness, whose
end shall be according to their deeds.

That faith only justifies.
Ambr. ad Romans 3.
AMbrose says, they are iustefyed freely, for they doing nothing, nor nothing
deserving, all only by faith are iustefied, by the gift of God.

Fol. 230. col. 1.

Ambrose says, It was so decreed of God, that after the law, he should
require Ambr. super Romans 4.
unto salvation all only the faith of grace, he says, that they be blessed,
of whom God has determined wtont labor, without all manner of observation,
all only by faith that they shall be iustefyed before God. Blessed are they
whose sins are forgeuen Clearly: they are blessed, unto who^ without labor,
or without any work their iniquities be remitted, and their sins covered,
and no manner of works required of them, but all only that they should
believe. 231. col. 1

Athanasyus says, there are two manner of faythes, one is iustefying, as yt
Super Romans 2.
of the which it is spoken, thy faith has saved thee: An other is cauled the
gift of God, whereby miracles be done, of the which it is written, if you have
faith as a grain of mustard seed. 241. col. 1.

Athanasyus says, Now does the Apostle plainly show, that faith Atha. super
Galat. 3.
all only has virtue in him to justify: and brings Abacuke saying of faith
(and not of the law) shall a righteous man live. He adds well before God,
for before man peradventure they shall be reckened righteous that stick to
the law, but not before God. etc. 233. col. 1

Augustine says, those same works yt be done before faith, though they
Aug. in prol^. psalm. 31.
seem unto men laudable, are yet but vain, and I do judge them as great
strength and swift running out of the way. Wherefore let no man count his good
works before faith. where as faith is not, there is no good work, the
ententio^ makes a good work, but faith does guide the entention. etc. 233.
col. 2

Augustine says, we do gather that a man can not be iustefyed by the
precepts De spiri. and lit. cap. 12.
of good living, that is, not by yt law of works, but by that law of faith:
not by the letter but by the sprite, not by the merits of works, but by free
grace. 234. col. 1 ^3. quest. c. 76.


Augustine says, S. Paul affirms that a man may be justified by faith,
without any works going before iustifycation, but when a man is justified by
faith, how can he but work well, though yt he before working nothing
righteously, is now come to the iustifycation of faith, not by merytes of good
works, but by the grace of God, the which grace in him now can not be Idle,
seeing that now through love he works well. And if he depart out of this
world after that he believes, the iustifycation of faith abides by him, not
by his works going before iustifycation (for by his merits came he not unto
that iusteficatio^, but by grace) nor by his works that follow iustefycation,
for he is not suffered to live in this life. Wherefore Paul and James are not
contrary, for Paul speaks of the works that go before faith and James
speaks of the works that follow the iustefycation of faith. 238. col. 1

Augustine expoundinge the text of yt De spiri. and lit.
Apostle Roma. 2. The doers of the law must be justified, says, so must it
be understood, that we may know, that they can no otherwise be the doers of
of the law, except they be first justified: not that iustifycation belongs
to the doers, but that iustifycation does proceed of all manner of doing.
240. col. 1 Super can* ser. 67.


Barnarde says, I do abhor what so ever thing is of me, except
peradventure, that, that be mine, that God has made me his. By grace has
he justified me freely, and by that has he delivered me, from the bondage
of sin. Thou have not chosen me says Christ) but I have chosen thee: nor I
found any merits in thee, that might move me to choose thee, but I prevented
all thy merytes. Wherefore thus by faith I have married thee unto me, and not by
the works of the law. I have married thee also in justice, but not in the
justice of the law, but in that justice which is of faith. 233. col. 2

Popes law says, Cornelius centuno 2. quest. 7. non omnes Episcopi.
being a heathen man was justified by the gift of the holy Ghost. 240. col. 2

What the Church is: and who be thereof, and whereby men may know her.
De verb. Domi. ser. 50.
AVgustine says, of Christ is ye church made fair, first was she fylthy in
sins, afterward by pardon, and by grace was she made fair. 244. col. 1

August. ser. (...) de tempere.
Augustine says, The holy church are we, but I do^ not say we as one should
say we that be here alonely, that hear (...) now, but as many as be here
faith full Christen men in this Church, that is to say in this City: as many
as be in this region: as many as be beyond the Sea. etc. 245. col. 1

Lyranus says, The Church does not^stand in men, by reason of spiritual
^yranus in Mat. cap. (...).
power, or secular dignities: For many Princes and many Popes, and other
inferior persons have swarued from the faith. Wherefore that Church does stand
in those persons in whom is the true knowledge and confession of faith, and of
verity. etc. 245. col. 1

Augustine says, The whole Church August. de verbus Apostole. ser. 19.
says, forgive us our sins, wherefore she^ has spots and wrinckles, but by
knowledgyng of them, her wrinckles be extended and stretched out, by
knowledgyng, her spots are washed away. 246. col. 1

Augustine says, Our holy mother Augustinus
the Church throughout all the world scattered far and long, in her true head
Christ Jesus taught, has learned not to fear the cont^elyes of the Cross nor
yet of death: but more and more is she strengthened not in resistyng but in
sufferyng. etc. 250. col. 2

The Popes law says, Therefore is De con. D. D. 4. c. prima^gitur.
the Church holy, because she believes righteously in God. etc. 246. col. 2

The Popes law says, The whole De pen^. Dis. 2. Si in glos^. 23. q. 1. Arecta
and i^ glosa.
Church can not err. Also in an other place of the congregation of faithful
men must needs be, which also ca^ not err. etc. 247. col. 2

That the keys of the Church be the Word of God and not man's power.
HIerome says upon these words, I shall give thee the keys of heaven.
Hiero. in M. c. 16.
This place, the Bishops and the Priests not understanding have usurped unto
them somewhat of the Phariseis pride, so that they think that they may
condemn innocents, and loose them that be guilty: when before God, not the
sentence of the Priest, but the life of the guilty is regarded. etc. 257. col. 2

Augustine says, That must be called a key where by the hardness of our
August. ser. (...). de sane.
hearts are opened unto faith, and where by yt secretnes of minds are made
manifest. A key it is (says he) the which does both open the conscience to
the knowledge of sin, and also includes grace, unto the wholsomnes of
everlasting mystery. etc. 258. col. 1

This does Chrysostom well prove Chriso. in M. c. 15. D^ doctr. christia. li.
1. c. 15. and. 18.
in these words. The key is the word and the knowledge of Scriptures, whereby
the gate of verity is opened unto men. etc. 261. col. 1

Augustine does also witness the same saying. These keys has he given to
Super (...).
the Church, that what she byndeth in in earth shall be bound in heaven, and
what she loses in earth shall be loosed in heaven: that is to say, who
soever does not believe that his sins be forgeuen him in the Church, they
be not forgeuen him: But he that does believe, and auerte him self from his
sins, being within the Church by that same faith and amendment is he made
whole. etc. 261. col. 1

Origene upon these words Tu es Petrus. Origenes Super. M. H^. 1.
etc. The words were spoken unto Peter, unto all Apostles, unto all manner of
perfect faithful men (for all they are Petrus) and in all them is builded the
Church of Christ, and against none of them can the gates of hell pre^ayle.
Do thou recke^ that the keys of heaven were alonely given to Peter, and
that no other Christen man did receive them. etc. 261. col. 2

Augustine does also testify the same Super Joan. Tr^. 124. c. 21.
in these words. Wherefore the Church which is founded and grounded in Christ,
of him has received in Peter the keys of heaven, that is, to say power to
bind and loose. etc. 261. col. 2

Chrysostom says, The key bearers In M. c. 23.
are Priests, unto whom is committed the word to teach, and to interpret
Scripture. etc. 262. col. 2

Ambrose says, Sins be forgiven Li. de Cain and Abe^^.
by the word of God, whose interpreter is the Deacon. etc. 262. col. 2

Chrysostom says, Behold I see me^ Chriso. s. 6. de anathemate.
that have no true sense of holy Scripture: yea they understand nothing at all
thereof: and to pass over many things, for I am ashamed to call them mad men,
triflers and wranglers, they be such as know not what they say, nor of what
thing they speak, but alonely be they mighty and bold to make laws, and to
curse and condemn those things, of the which they know nothing at all. etc.
265. col. 2

The Popes* law says, If Peter 24. q. (...). Quod^u^que
have power alonely to bind and to loose, then does it not the Church: But if
this be done in the Church, then did Peter when he received the keys,
signify holy Church. etc. 261. col. 2

That free will of man, after the fall of Adam of his natural strength, can
do nothing but sin before God.
AVgustine says, Lest any man should Super Ioannem tract. lxxi.
suppose, that the branch of him self could bring forth, at yt lest ways, a
little srute, therefore says he, nor with out me, can you do a little, but
without we ca^ you do nothing. Therefore whether it be little, or much,
without him, can it not be done, without who^ is nothing done. One of two
things, must the branch needs do, either abide in the vine, or else burn
in the fire, if it be not in the vine, then is it in the fire. etc. 267. col. 1

Barnarde says, What shall we say? is this alonely all the merit of freewill,
Barnarde lib. arbit.
that he does alonely consent? yea doubtless. Not that, the same consent, in
the which is all his merit, is not of God, when that we can neither think
(the which is less, then to consent) any thing of our selves, as though we
were sufficient of our selves. These words be not mine, but the Apostles, the
which gives unto God, and not to his freewill, all manner of things, that can
be good, that is to say, to think, to will, or to perform. etc. 267. col. 2

Augustine says, What goodness can he do, that is lost, except that he be
In Enche. ca. 29.
delivered from his misery? Can he do good by his freewill? God forbid, for
man evil vsyng his freewill, did both loose him self, and also his freewil,
and as man being alive, does kill him self, and when he has killed him self,
he can not make him self alive again. So likewise, when we do sin by
freewil, and sin has the victory, then is freewill clean lost, for of whom
a man is overcome, unto him must he be servant. Doubtless, this sentence is
of Peter the Apostle, the which seeing that it is true, I pray you what manner
of freedom ca^ a bond servant have? except it be, when it pleases him to
sin. etc. 268. col. 1

Augustine says, O cursed freewill, without God, we have experience, what De
verbis Apost. ser^.
freewil can do without God, therefore are we miserable, because we have
experience, what freewill is able to do, without God. Behold, man was made
good, and by his freewill, was he made an evil man. When shall an evil man
by his freewill, forsaking God, make a man good, he being good, could not
keep him self good: and now, that he is evil, shall he make him self good?
when that he was good, he kept not him self good, and now, that he is
evil, shall he say, I make my self good? etc. 268. col. 2

Augustine says: He that feeds De verbis Demi ser. xv.
without me, feeds against me. etc. 269. col. 2

Augustine says, Thou will say, that can my will do, that can my freewill De
verbis Apost. ser. xiij.
do. What will? what manner of freewill? except that he guide thee, thou
fallest, except he lift thee up, thou lie still. How can thou then do it
by thy spirit, seeing that the Apostle says: As many as be led by the
spirit of God, be the children of God. Will thou do of thy self? Will thou
be led of thine own self to mortify the deeds of the flesh? what will it
profit thee? For if thou be not an Epicure, thou shall be a Stoicke? Whether
thou be an Epicure, or a Stoicke, thou shall not be among the children of God.
For they that be guided of the spirit of God, be the children of God: not
they that live after their own flesh: not they that live after their own
spirit: not they that be led of their own spirit: but as many as be
led of the spirit of God, they be the children of God. etc. 270. col. 1

Augustine says: If man do perceive, De temp. ser. lxiij.
that in the commandments, is any thing impossible, or else to hard, let him
not remain in him self, but let him run unto God, his helper, the which
has given his commandments for that intent, that our desire might be
styrred up, and that he might give help. etc. 271. col. 2

Augustine says, The Pelagia^s think, De lib. arb. cap. xvi.
that they know a wondrous thing, when they say, God will not command that
thing, the which he knows is impossible for man to do. Every man knows
this, but therefore does he command certain things, that we can not do,
because we might know, what thing we ought to ask of him. Faith is she,
which by prayer, obtains that thing, that the law commanndeth.

Briefly, he that says, If thou will, thou may keep my commandments.
In the same book, a little after says. He shall give me keepyng in my mouth.
etc. 272. col. 1

Augustine says, The Pelagians say, De lib. arb. cap. xvi.
that they grant how that grace does help every man's good purpose, but not
that he gives the love of virtue to him, that strives against it. This thing
do they say, as though man of him self, without the help of God, has a good
purpose, and a good mind unto virtue, by the which merit proceedyng before,
he is worthy to be helped of the grace of God, that follows after. Doubtless,
that grace that follows, does help the good purpose of man, but the good
purpose should never have been, if grace had not preceded. And though that the
good study of man, when it begins, is helped of grace, yet did it never
begin without grace. etc. 272. col. 2

Augustine says, The grace, which is given of the largenes of God, privily De
predest. Cap. 8.
into men's hearts, can not be despised of no manner of hard heart. For therefore
it is given, that the hardness of the heart should be taken away. Wherefore when
the father is hard within, and does learn, yt we must come to his son, then
takes he away our stony heart, and gives us a fleshly heart. And by this
means, he makes us the children of promise, and the vessels of mercy, which
he has prepared to glory. But wherefore does he not learn all me^ to come to
Christ? Because that those, that he learneth, he learneth of mercy, and
those, that he learneth not, of his judge meant does he not learn them. etc.
273. col. 1

Augustine says, The law was given that man might find him self, and not
August. de verb. Apost. sent. xiij.
to make his sickness whole, but by his preaching, the sickness increased that
the Physician might be sought. Wherefore the law threatnyng, and not fulfillyng
that thing, that he commands, makes a man to be underneath him, but the
law is good, if a man do use it well. What is that, use the law well? By the
law, to know our sins and to seek Gods help, to help our health. etc. 275.
col. 2

Augustine says: The disputation of them is vain the which do defend
August. Super Ioannem tract. lxxxviij.
the prescie^ce of God, against the grace of God, and therefore say, that we
were chose^ before the making of the world, because that God knew before that
we should be good, not because he should make us good. But he that says, you
have not chosen me, says not that. For if he did therefore chose us, because
that he knew before* that we should be good, then must he also know before,
that we should first have chose^ him? etc. 279. col. 1

That it is lawful for all manner of men to read the holy Scripture.
AVgustine says, My brethren, read August. ad fratres s. 38.
holy Scripture in ye which you shall find what you ought to hold, and what
you ought to fly. What is a man reputed without learning? what is he? he is
not a sheep, or a goat? Is he not Ox, or an Ass? Is he any better then an
Horse, or a Mule, the which has no understanding. etc. 288. col. 1

Athanasyus says, If thou will that In Epis. ad Ephesians. c. 6.
thy children shall be obedient unto the, use them unto the words of God, But
thou shall not say that it belongs all only to religious men to study
scriptures: but tather it belongs to every Christen man, and specially unto
him that is wraped in the businesses of this world: and so much the more,
because he has more need of help, for he is wrapped in the troubles of
this world therefore it is greatly to thy profit that thy children should both
hear and also read holy Scriptures, for of the^ shall they learn this
commandment: Honouour thy father, and thy mother. etc. 288. col. 2

Chrysostom says, I beseech you yt In Genesis c. 9 hom. 28.
you will oftentimes come hither, and that you will diligently hear the lesson
of holy Scripture, and not all only when you be here, but also take in your
hands when you are at home the godly Bibles, and receive the thing therein
with great study, for thereby shall you have great advantage. etc. 288. col. 2

Chrysostom says, Which of you all In Mat. c. 1. hom. 2.
that be here, (if it were required) could say one Psalm without the book, or
any other part of holy scripture, not one doubtless But this is not alonely ye
worste, but that you be so slow and so remiss unto spiritual things, and
unto deuillishnesse you are hotter the^ any fire, but men will defend this
mischief with this excuse, I am no religious man, I have a wife and children,
and a house to care for. This is the excuse wherewith you do (as it wear with
a pestilence) corrupt all thinges^: for you do reckon that the study of holy
Scripture belongs all only unto religious men, when they be much more
necessary unto you then unto them. etc. 289. col. 1

Hierome says, O Paula and Eustochium, if there be any thing in this life yt
In pro^e. In Epist. ad Ephesians. Li. 1.
does preserve a wise man, and does persuade him to abide with a good will in
the oppressions and the thraldomes of the world, I do reckon that specially it
is the meditations and the study of holy Scripture. etc. 289. col. 2

The Popes law says, If Christ (as Paul says) be the power and yt wisdom
Di. 38. cap. Si iuxta.
of God, then to be ignorant in scriptures, is as much as to be ignorant of
Christ. 289. col. 1

The Popes law says, in an other place. I will set my meditation in thy 7.
Sinod. c. Omnes et. di. 38.
iustifications, and I will not forget thy words, the which thing is exceeding
good for all Christen men to observe and keep. etc. 289. col. 1

That men's co^stitutions, which are not grounded in Scriture, bind not the
conscience of man under the pain of deadly sin.
S. Paul says, We are bought with yt price of Christ's blood, we will not 1.
Cor. 7.
be the servants of men. 298. col. 2

S. Paul says, In the latter days certain men shall swerve from the faith
1. Tim. 4.
applying them selves to the spirits of errors, and doctrines of the devil,
forbidding Marriage. etc. 298. col. 2

S. Paul says, meat does not commend us unto God. Also in an other 1. Cor.
8.
place, the kingdom of heaven is neither meat, nor drink. 299. col. 1

S. Paul says, We ought not to be led with the traditions of men, that say
Roma. 15.
touch not, taste not. etc. 299. col. 1

Augustine says by sitting in yt chair is to understand the learning of yt
law Super Joan. Tract. 46.
of God, and therefore God does teach by the^, but if they will teach their
own doctrine hear it not, do it not, for such me^ seek that is theirs, and
not Christ's. etc. 297. col. 2

Hilarious says, All manner of plants that be not planted of the father of
heaven, Hilarious in Mat. Cano. 14.
must be plucked up by the roots that is to say, the traditions of men, by
whose means, the commandments of the law be broken, must be destroyed, and
therefore cauleth he the^ blind guides of the way to everlasting life,
because they see not that thing they promise: and for that cause he says,
that both the blind guidds, and they that be led, shall fall into the dyke.
etc. 297. col. 2

Augustine says, Because that those Ad Paul. Epist. 59.
men by such observations were led from the verity, by yt which they were made
free, whereof it is spoken, the verity shall deliver you. It is a shame (says
he) and inconvenient and far from the noblenes of your liberty (seeing you
be the body of Christ) to be disceaued with shadows and is be judged as
sinners if you despise to observe these things. Wherefore let no man overcome
you (seeing you are the body of Christ) that will seem to be meek in heart in
the holiness of Angels and bringing in things which he has not seen. etc.
299. col. (...)

Augustine says, S^ing that we be Epi. ad r^. propo. 72.
made of soul, and of body, as long as we do live in this temporal life we
must use to the noryshing of this life, these temporal goods. Therefore must
we of that part that beelongeth to this life be subject unto powers, that is
unto me^ that do minister worldly things with some honor, but as concerning
that part, whereby we believe in God and be called unto his kingdom, we ought
not to be subject unto any man that will pervert that same thing in us that
has pleased God to give us to eternal life. etc. 300. col. 1

That all men are bound to receive the holy Communion in both kinds under the
pain of deadly sin.
CYprian says, How do we teach, or Ad Cornelium Papa^.
how can we provoke men to shed their blood for the confession of Christ's
name, if we do deny them the blood of Christ when they shall go to battle?
Or how dare we able them unto the victory of martyrdom, if we do not first
by right admit them to drink the cup of our Lord in the congregation. etc.
306. col. 2

Ambrose says, to yt Emperor Theodosius, Ecclesiastica hist.
how shall you lift up thy hands out of the which does yet drop unrighteous
blood? how shall thou with those hands receive the body of God? with what
boldness will thou receive into thy mouth the Cup of the precious blood,
seeing that through yt woodnes of thy words, so great blood is shed
wrongfully, etc. 306. col. 2

This does S. Ciprian learn us saying, what thing so ever it be that is
ordained by man's maddenes, where by the ordinance of God is violated, it is
whoredom, it is of the devil and it is sacrilege. Wherefore fly from such
contagiousnesse of men and avoid their words as a cancar, and as pestilence.
etc. 308. col. 1

The Popes law says, We understand De consecr* di. 2. c. comperimus.
that certain men receiving allonely the portion of the blessed body, do
abstain from the chalice of the holy blood, the which doubtless (seeing I can
not tell by what superstition they are learned to abstain) let them either
receive the whole Sacrament, or else let them be forbidden from the whole
Sacrament, for the division of one and of the same mystery can not be done
without great sacrilege. etc. 305. col. 1

The Popes law says, When the host is broken, and the blood shed out De
consecr. di. 2. c. cum frangimus.
of yt chalyce into yt mouths of faithful men, what other thing is there
signified, but the immolation of our Lords body on the cross, and the
shedding of his blood out of his side. etc. ^06. col. 1

The Popes law says, If that the blood of Christ be shed for remission of De
consecr. de. 2. c. Si quoc^es^umque.
sins (as often as it is shed) then ought I lawfully for to receive it. I
which do always sin, must always receive a medecyne. etc. 306. col. 1

That by Gods word it is lawful for Priests that has not the gift of
chastity to marry wives.
AThanasius upon the first Epistle of s. Paul to the Corinthians in the 7.
Athanasius super. 1. Cor. 7.
chapter says, that the Apostle would compel no man to keep virginity
against his will, nor he would not make virginity a thing of necessity. 314.
col. 1

Ciprian says, Thou do ask what we do judge of virgins, the which after
they have decreed to live chastely, are Ciprian Epist. 11.
afterward found in one bed with a man. Of the which thou say that one of
them was a Deacon. We do with great sorrow see that great ruin of many
persons, which comes by the reason of such unlawful and perilous co^paning
togtiher. Wherefore if they have dedicated them selves unto Christ, out of faith
to live purely, and chastely, the^ let them so remain without any fable, and
strongly, and steadfastly, to abide the reward of virginitye: But if they will
not abide, or else ca^ not abide, then is it better to marry, the^ for to fall
into the fire of concupiscence, and let them give unto the brethren and
sisterne none occasion of sclaunder. etc. 318. col. 2

Augustine says, Certain men do Aug. de bono coniugali ad Iulianum.
affirm those men to be aduoulterers, that does marry after they have vowed
chastity: but I do affirm, that those men do grievously sin, ye which does
separate them. etc. 319. col. 1

Also blessed S. Ambrose, writes of Ambro. 32. quest. cap. 1 Integri^as.
virginity in this manner: Chastity of body ought to be desired of us. The
which thing I do give for a counsel, and do not command it imperiously. For
virginity is a thing all only, that ought to be counsayled, but not to be
commanded* it is rather a thing of voluntary will then of precept. etc. 319.
col. 2

S. Hierome also says, Let Bishops Hie. d. 37. cap. Legans
and priests read this thing (he speaks against mispending of goods, yt
is offered to help poor men with) the which does teach their children
profane letters, and makes the^ to read commedies, and to sing baudy songs
of iesters* and these children they find of the charges of the church. etc.
319. col. 2

The Council of Nicene, willing to Ex tripertita historia. Did. xxxi. ca.
Nice^a.
reform the life of men, did set certain laws, the which we call Canones:
among the which certain men would have had a law to be brought i^ that
Bishops, priests, Deacons, and subdeacons, should no^ lie with their wives,
which they had married, before their consecration. But Paphnutius a confessor,
did withstand them and said, that their marriage was honorable, and it was pure
chastity for them to lie with their wives. So that the couns^as persuaded, not
to make any (...) law, affirmyng it for to be a gre^us occasion both unto
them, a^ a^ unto their wives of fornication. (...) this thing did Paphnutius,
though that he him self was vnmary^. The Council did allow this sentence. So
that nothing was decreed, as concerning this thing, but every man was left unto
his freewill, and not bound of any necessity. etc. 320. col. 1

The Popes law says, If any man Canon Apost.
does teach, that a Priest by the reason of his order ought to forsake his
wife, cursed be he. etc. 321. col. 1

We read in the counsel of Gangrens, Consilium Gangrens. Canon. 4.
how they mo^e this decree. If any man does judge or condemn a Priest that is
married, that he may not, by the reason of his marriage do sacrifice, but will
abstain from his mass by the reason thereof, cursed be he. etc. 321. col. 1

We do read in a counsel, that is 6. Sinodus.
called the sixth Synod, these words: Considering that it is decreed amongst
the laws made by them of Rome, that no Deacon, nor Priest, shall company with
their wi^es. Therefore we notwithstanding that decree, following the rules of the
Apostles, and the constitutions of holy men, will that from this day forth,
marriage shall be lawful, in no wise dissoluing the matrimonye between them,
and their wives, nor depriuyng them of their familiarytie in time convenient.
Whosoever therefore shall be found able of the order of Deacon, Subdeacon, or
of Priesthode, we will that no such men be prohibited to ascend the dignities
aforesaid for the cohabitatio^ of their wives: Nor that they be constrained at
the receite of their orders, to profess chastity, or to abstain from the
company of their lawful wives. etc. 322. col. 1

The Popes law says. It is open yt neither Deacons, nor subdeaco^s, ought
Did. xxviij c. Diaconi.
to be forbidden from marriage. etc. 322. col. 2

Pope Innocent the third, writes in his decretalles, on this manner: Those De
vita and honest. clericorum.
Priests that after the manner of the country, has not forsaken the
conjunction of marriage, if they do break their wedlock, ought grievously to
be punished, seeing that they may use lawefully matrimony. etc. 322. col. 2

The master of sentences, writes on this manner: Our weakness is prone Magister
Se^tentiarum. lib. ij. Did. xx.
to fall into filthynes, but it is helped with honest marriage. And the thing that
is unto whole men an offense, is unto sick men a remedy. etc. 323. col. 2

Ex lege Papal. Thou do ask of us Extra. lib. i de filijs presbyterum. c.
Ad hac.
(says the Pope, to the Bishop of Cassell) whether that these men that has
Priests to their fathers, may be promoted to holy orders or not, if they be
of good, and honest demeanor, and well learned. To this we answer (says the
Pope) that if they be gotten of lawful marriage, and there be none other
Canonical impediment, then may they lawfully be promoted unto holy orders, and
may enjoy that same benefice, which their fathers had before. etc. 324. col. 1

Also in that same title, the Pope says we have understood, that N. Borne
Ibidem. cap. Litteras.
and gotten in Priesthod of a lawful wife, has always had an affection to
serve God in the office of a spiritual man. etc. 324. col. 1

The Emperors law says of priests wives. We will (says he) that all
Imperator Constan. lege. Omnis Pa. Ad perangariam. Codice de Epis. and ^le.
manner of spiritual men shall have this prerogative, that their wives, and
their children, and their servants, that is for to say, both male, and
female, shall be free from an homage, which is called Perangariam. 324. col. 2

We do read in Tripertita Historia, these words: All Priests in yt oriental
Ex tripertita historia. lib. 9. cap. xxxviij.
Church does abstain with a free will, and of no necessity from wives. For
many of them, in time when they be Bishops, have had of their lawful wives
children. 325. col. (...)

We do read in Ecclesiastica Historia, Li iiij. ca. xxiij.
that Penitus, Bishop of a city called Gnoseos, would have made a decree, that
priests should have vowed chastity, Penitus. Dionisius.
But Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, wrote agynst him, and required him, that he
would not lay no necessity of co^pulsed chastity on other men's necks,
Penitus, followed his counsel. 325. col. 2

Policrates, Bishop of Ephesum, does Eccle. hist. lib. v. cap. xxiiij.
show, that seven of his parents lynially were Bishops in order before him,
and he him self was the eight. 325. col. 2

13. Popes, were Bishops, Deaco^s and Priests sons, which is sufficiently
proved. 326. col. 1

That it is against the holy Scripture to honor Images, and to pray to Saints.
THou shall make to thy self no graue^ Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. Esaias. 44.
Images. etc. 340. col. 1

A man did plant a pinaple tree, and the rain did nurrish it. etc. as it is
more at large. 340. col. 2

Their stocks be polished of the carpenter, Abacuc. 6.
and they be gilded, and siluered, but they be false, and can not speak. etc.
as it is more at large. 343. col. 2

Moses says, If the^e arise in the midst of thee a Prophet, etc. as it is
more at Deuteronomy. 13.
large. 344. col. 2

Clement says, We do honor vysible Images to the honor of the invisible
Libro 5. ad Jacob.
God, the which is a false thing: but if you will honor the Image of God in
doing well to man, in him shall you honor the true Image of God. Wherefore if
you will truly honor yt Image of God, we will open that thing unto you that
is of truth, so that you must do well unto man the which is made unto the
Image of God: geeue him honor, and reverence: give him meat when he is
hungrye: geeue him drink when he is thyrsty: Cloth him when he is naked:
serve him when he is sick: geeue him lodgyng when he is a stranger: and
when he is in prison minister to him necessaries. This is the thing that shall
be counted to be given God truly. What honor is this of God to run about
foolishly to stonye and woody Images, and to honor as Gods Idle and dead
figures, and to despise man in whom is yt very true Image of God. Wherefore
understand you that this is this the suggestion of the Serpent that lurketh
within the which does make you believe that you be deuouce when you do honor
in sensible things. And makes you to believe that you be not wicked when you
hurt sensible and reasonable men. etc. 346. col. 1

Clement says also in an other place, Clemens in codem libro
What thing is there so wicked and unthankful, as to receive a benefyte of
God, and to give thanks unto stocks and stones? Wherefore wake and understand
your health. etc. 346. col. 2

Augustine says, Let us not love any visible spectacles, least by erring from
De vera reli. ca. vlti.
the verity, and by loving shadows we be brought into darkness: let us have
no devotion to our fantasies. It is better to have a true thing what so ever
it be, then all manner of things yt may be feigned at our own pleasure. etc.
346. col. 2

Hierome, Be it known unto ye King etc. The properties of the words be to
Super Dani.
be marked that he says. We will not worship thy Gods, nor yet honor thy
Image, for neither of both become the servants of God to do. etc. 346. col. 2

God for us all has given his son, and shall he not give us all things with
him? Roma. 8. That we ought not to pray to Saints.
347. col. 1

There is one mediator between God, and man, the man Christ Jesus, the which
has given him self for the redemption of all men. 347. col. 1

S. John says, If a man do sin we have an advocate by the father Christ
Jesus. 1. John. 2.
347. col. 2

S. Paul says, The spirit of God makes intercession mightily for us, with
mighty desires, that can not be expressed with tongue. etc. 347. col. 2

Roma. 8.
Also S. Paul says, Christ sits on the right hand of the father, the which
does also pray for us. etc. 347. col. 2

Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.
He is our wisdom, he is our satisfaction, and our redemption made of God.
etc. 347. col. 2

S. John says, No man comes to the father, but by me. etc. 348. col. 1
John. 14.


S. John says, I am the way only in the father. etc. 348. col. 1 John. 14.


John. 16.
S. John also says, Whatsoever you ask in my name, the father shall give it
you. etc. 348. col. 1

S. James says: All good gifts comes from the father of light. 348. col. 2
Iaco. 1.


Psalm. 119.
David says, When I am troubled, I will cry unto the Lord and he will help
me. etc. 349. col. 1

David says, Psalm. 120.
My help is of God that has made heaven and earth. 349. col. 1

August. de vera relig. cap. vlti.
Augustine says, Let us have no devotion in honoryng of dead men, for if they
lived well, they may not be counted for such men, as to desire such honors,
but they will that God shall be honored of us, by whose lightenyng they
rejoice, that we are made companions of their glory. Wherefore saints must be
honored by following them, but not by honoryng them of devotion. etc. 349. col. 2

Apoc. 19. and. 22.
That man was forbidden of the angel to worship him, but alonely to worship
one God. etc. 350. col. 1

Mat. 15. tom. 6. ho. de profect. Euange.
Chrysostom says, Do thou see this woman which was unworthy, but by her
perseueraunce was made worthy? will thou learn also, that we praying unto God
in our own persons, do more profit, the^ when other men do pray for us.
This woman did cry, and the disciples came and prayed him that he would speed
her, for she cries on us. But to them he answered, I am not sent but unto
the sheep which are perished of ye house of Israel. But when she came her
self and did persevere crying and saying, Yes Lord, for the whelps do eat
the cru^mes that fall from their masters tables: the^ did he give her the
benefit and said, be it unto thee as thou will. Do thou not see how he
did repel her, when other men prayed for her? but when she came her self and
cried, he did grant her. Unto them he said. I am not sent but unto the lost
sheep. But unto the woman he says, be it unto thee as thou will. etc. 350.
col. 1

Also Chrysostom says, We have no Chri. To. 6. ho. de profectu enangeliorum.
need of Patro^s before God, nor need of much process to speak fair unto
other men, but though thou be alone and want a patron, but prayest God by
thy self, yet for all that shall thou have thy desire. God does not so lightly
grant, when other men pray for us, as when we pray our selves, yea though we
be full of sins etc. 350. col. 1

Ambrose says, Men are wont to Ad To. c. 1.
use this miserable excusation, that by these things may we come to God, as
we may come to ye king by Earls. I answer, we do come unto the King, by
the means of Dukes and Earls, because that the king is a man, and knows not
to whom he may commit the common wealth, but unto God (from whom nothing ca^
be hid) he knows all men's merits, we need no spokesma^, nor no mediator
but alonely a devout mind. etc. 354. col. 1

That Councels may err.
PAnormitanus says, That Councels De electio. (...). significa.
may err as they have erred, as concerning that contract of Matrimony, Inter
raptorem and rapta^, and the saying of S. Hierome was afterward preferred above
the statuteof the Council as it is proved. 36. q. 2. Tria, for in things
concerning the faith is the saying of a private person to be preferred before
the saying of the pope, if he have better reasons and scriptures of the new,
and of the old Testament for him then ye Pope. Nor it can not help, to say
that the Council can not err, because that Christ did pray for his Church
that her faith should not fail* For I answer to this, that though the
general Council do represent the whole universal Church: nevertheless in
very deed there is not the very universal Church, but representative. For the
universal Church stands in the election of all faithful men: and all faith
full men of the world make that universal Church, whose head and spouse is
Christ Jesus, and the Pope is but the Vicare of Christ and not the very head of
the Church, this is the Church that ca^ not err. etc. 248. col. 1

Augustine says, Those Councels that be gathered in every Province Augustinus
de bap. li. 2. c. 3. contra Donatistas.
must without doubt give place to the authority of the full Councels which
be gathered of all Christendom: and also those full counsels often times must
be amended by the full counsels that come after: if any thing be opened by
any experience that was before shut, and if any thing be known that was
hidden. And this may be done without any shadow of superstitious pride, with
out any boasted Arrogance, without any contention of malicious envy, but with
holy meekenes, with holy peace, and with Christen charity, etc. 248. col. 2

That the spiritualty is subject to temporal power and laws, and ought not to
resist by violence.
THe holy Church of God has no xxxiij. q. ij. Inter haec.
sword, but the spiritual sword, with the which she does not kill, but
quicken. etc. 191. col. 2 ^iij. q. viij Conueniter.


Likewise blessed S. Ambrose, says, willingly will I never forsake you but if
I be compelled I may not resist, I may sorrow, I may weep, I may wail Against
weapons, against soldiers, against the Bothans, my tears are my weapons. For
such things be the defense of a Priest, otherwise ought I not, nor may not
resist. etc. 191. col. 2

Testimonies proouyng also the same taken out of his first Edition. Fol. 15.
and 16.
ORygene upon this text, Omnis anima says on this manner. All manner of Origene
Romans 13.
sins that God would have punished, he would have them punished not by the
bishops, and rulers of the Church, but by the Judges of the world. etc.

The mediator between God and Did. 10. ca. Quoniam.
man Christ Jesus, has divided the offices of both powers into their proper
acts, and into distinct dygnities, willing by his own medicinal meekenes
that men's hearts should be lyfted up, and not with man's pride again to be
drowned in these inferior things: so that Christen Emperors (as concerning
eternal life) should have need of Bishops, and likewise the Bishops, for the
course all only of these temporal goods, should use the Emperors laws, so
that yt spiritual ac^ should be distincted from the worldly courses, and he
that should serve God should not wrappe him self in worldly busynesses.

That the true observation of the sabbath, consists not only in abstaining
from bodily labors: and that to a Christen man, every day is the Sabbath, and
not only the seventh day.
HIerome says, Therefore be certain days assigned, yt we should come to
Super Gulat. 4.
gither, not that, that day, in the which we come together is holier the^ an
other but all days be like, and equal. And All days be a like.
Christ is not all only crucified in Parasceden, and risen only on the
sunday, but the day of resurrection is always, and always may we eat of our
lords flesh. etc. 206. col. 2

Augustine says, we must observe the Epist. c. 19.
sabbath day, not that we should reckon our self not to labor, but that all
thing that we do work well, must have an intention to the everlasting rest.
Wherefore we must observe the holy day, not by corporal idleness, and unto the
letter, but spiritually must we rest from vices, and concupiscences, wherefore
among all the ten commandments, that, of the Sabbath day is all only
commanded to be figuratively observed. etc. 206. col. 2

Also Tertullian says, The carnal Circumcision is put away, and extincted
Aduersus Iudeos.
at his time. So likewise the observation of the Sabbath day is declared to be
for a time, for we must keep the Sabbath day, not alonely the seventh day, but
at all times, as Esaias says. etc. 206. col. 2

Augustine says, It is come unto me, De consec. did. 3. cap. peruenit.
that certain men, which be of an evil spirit, have sown certain evil
things among you, and contrary to the holy faith, so that they do forbid,
that men should work on the Sabbath day. The which men, what other thing
shall we call them, but the preachers of Antichrist, the which Antichrist
shall make the Sabbath day, and the sunday be keept from all manner of work.
etc. 207. col. 1

Testimonies procayng the same article translated out of his book De Doctorum
Sententijs.
ANd it shall come to pass that from Moon to his Moon from Sabbath Esaias the
last.
to his Sabbath all flesh shall come to worship before me. etc.

For the son of man is also Lord of the sabbath. etc. Math. 12.


Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in part of an holy
Collos. 2.
day, or of the new moon, or of the saboth days etc.

You observe days, and times, months, and years, etc. Galat. 4.


S. Ambrose ad Irenae. Epist. 72.
The Jews were commanded to celebrate the holy sabbath, one day in the week,
that they should be subject to no burden: because they being losed from
worldly business, I would they had so passed, that they might not carry with the^
no burden of grievous sins unto the everlasting sabbath of ye world to come.
Let the synagoge of yt Jews observe the day, Let the church observe it to
immortalytie. In the law therefore was a portion, in the Gospel is the
perfection. etc.

S. Augustine, de spiritu and lit. cap. 14.
Because whosoever observes that day, hither unto as the letter sounds he
judges carnally.

S. Augustine, ad Bonifa. lib. 3. Cap. 4. contra 2. Epist. Pelagia.
For if Christ has taken from us that grievous yoke of many obseruances, that
we should not be carnally circumcised, that we should not offer sacrifice for
our sins, that on the sabbath of the seventh day, we should not abstain
from necessary business, and other such like, if we observe them being
spiritually understand, and setting a side all shadows, signifying the true
light of those things: Let us take heed whether we shall therefore say that it
pertayneth not unto us which is written? that, whatsoever one finds of an
other man's, he restore it again to him that lost it: and many other such like
precepts, where by we learn to live well and godly, and especially, that
Decaloge, which is contained in the ij. tables of stone, the carnal
observation of the sabbath only excepted, which signifies a spiritual
sanctification and rest. etc.

S. Augustine upon S. Paul's epistle to the Galath.
First must a man know yt the works of the law be of too sorts. For they
partly consist in sacraments, and partly in morrall precepts. Unto the
sacraments are referred, the circumcision of the flesh, the temporal sabbath,
the new moon, the sacrifices, and all such like innumerable obseruances. Unto
moral precepts are referred these. Thou shall not slaye, Thou shall not
commit adultery, Thou shall not bear false witness, and such other like.

S. Augustine upon John Tractat. 17.
Take up thy bed. etc. Here is a manifest corporal work of yt body done: not
the healing only of the body, but a plain bodily work.

That Christians ought not to seek spitfull reuengement by extremity of the
law.
NOw is there utterly sin among you (says Paul) because you go to (...).
Cor. 6.
law one with an other: why rather suffer you not wrong? why rather suffer ye
not your selves to be robbed? Also Math. 5.
our master says, If any man will sue at the law, and take thy coat from
thee, let him have thy cloak also. 208. col. 2

Athanasius, on this text of Saint Paul says: There is utterly sin among
Athanasius.
you, that is to say, It is to your condemnation, and to your ignominy that
you do exercise judicials among you. Wherefore do you not rather suffer
wrong? etc. 209. col. 1

Also S. Hierome says, It is ^inne unto you that you do against the com S.
Hiero. ad Cor. 6.
maundement of Christ, that you have judgments among you, the which ought
always to keep peace, yea, though it were with the loss of your temporal
goods. Wherefore do you not rather suffer wrong? Where as ye ought by the
commandment of the Gospel, and by the example of yt Lord patiently to
suffer, there do you the contrary, not all only not suffer, but you do wrong
unto them, yt do no wrong etc. 209. col. 1

Haymo says: It is offense and sin in you, that you have Judicials. For
Haymo ad Cor. 6.
accusation engenders strife, strife engenders discord, discord engenders
hatred. And least peradventure they would say, this is no sin, to require
mine own: Therefore says yt Apostle Truly it is sin unto you, for you do
against the commandment of yt Lord the which says: He that takes away
Luke. 6.
thy good, ask it not again. Wherefore do you not rather suffer loss? that
ye might fulfill the commandment of the Lord. etc. 209. col. 1

That Auricular confession is not necessary to salvation translated into
English out of his book De Doctorum Sententijs.
De Poenitentia Did. 1. Cap. Conuertimini.
TVrne unto me with all your heart and I will turn unto you. By turnyng is meant
the turnyng vpsidedowne of the heart. For if our heart be turned thoroughly from
evil unto God, it forthwith deserves the fruit of conversion, that God being
turned from wrath to mercy, may pardon our offenses, which before he intended
to revenge. Whereby it is given us to understand that without any confession of
mouth we may be forgeuen. By this means also these leypers whom the Lord
wylled to show them selves to the priests, were made whole and sound in the
way before they came to the Priests. By which fact it is given us to
understand, that before we show our faces to the Priest, that is before we
confess our sins, we are cleansed from the lepry of ^inne. It follows: by
this also that the Lord would declare, that not by yt sentence of the Priest,
but by the gift of divine grace, the sinner is made clean. He cle^sed the
lepour by touching, and afterward according to the law commanded him to offer
sacrifice. It follows, but before he came to the Priest he is cleansed,
whilst that by the contrition of his heart, before the confession of the mouth,
remission of sin is granted. Therefore only co^trition in the which is made
a reviving, takes away sin. He has therefore his reuiuour present with him,
and dwelling within him.

In the same place. Cap. Scindite.
REnt your hearts and not your garment etc. Showing that in the contritio^ of
the heart, which is understood by the rentyng thereof, sins were forgeuen,
and not by confession of the mouth, which is a part of exterior satisfaction,
which he calls the rentyng of our garments, by a part understanding the
whole.

In the same place. Cap. Facilius.
IN what hour soever a sinner shall be converted. etc. For it is not said when
soever he shall confess with his mouth, but only when he shall be turned
and shall be sorry for his sins, he shall live and not dye.

In the same place. Cap. Facilius.
THey do more easily purchase gods favor, which being not convicted by man's
judgment, but of their own accord acknowledge their faults, which do either
by their own confessions bewray the same, or else when other me^ know not what
priuye offenders they be do condemn them selves to voluntary
excommunication, and seperating them selves from the altar whereon they
ministered, not by compultion but willingly bewail their life as no life,
being sure that they being reconciled by the fruits of effectual penite^cy
they do not only recover things that were lost from God, but being also made
Citizens of the everlasting habitation they may come to joy everlasting.

Chrysostom upon the Psalm. Miserere mei. Homi. 11.
Confess thy sins that thou may blot them out, if thou be abashed to
confess that thou have offended, confess them daily in thy soul. I do not
say that thou should confess to thy companion or fellow servant, who may
obrayed thee: declare the^ to God who has regard of them. But if thou declare
them not, is God ignorant of them? or will he learn them by thee? When thou
did the^ he was at hand: when thou co^mittest them he had perfect
knowledge.

The same Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the Hebrews.
LEt us therefore persuade our selves that we have sinned, nor let the tongue
only pronounce it, but the inward conscience also: Neither let us only say
that we be sinners, but let us specially account every singular offense. I
do not say yt thou should, bewray thy self publikly, neither that thou
should accuse thy self to others, but I would have thee obey the Prophet,
saying: Reuele thy way unto the Lord. Psalm. 31.


S. Ambrose De Poenitentia Petri Sermo. 46.
PEter brust forth into tears, askyng nothing with his voice. I do find that
he wept, but I find not what he said. Of his tears I read, but of his
satisfaction I read nothing.

S. Augustine lib. 10. confession. cap. 1.
Therefore to thee Lord am I manifestly known what soever I am, and what
profits me then to confess my self unto thee. Neither do I it with words
of the flesh or with voice, but with the words of my soul and with clamor of
my thought which thy ear understands. For whereas I am evil, to confess my
self unto thee, is nothing else but to mislike of my self. And when I am
godly, to confess me unto thee, is nothing else, then not to attribute the same
to my self. Because thou Lord do bless the just, but first thou do
justify him being wicked. My confession therefore my God, in thy sight, is
made unto thee both secretly and not secretly. For it is secret in speech, but
cries out in heart. Neither do I say any good thing unto men which thou have
not first heard of me, neither thou also shall hear any such thing of me,
which thou have not first showed unto me. What therefore have I to do with men
that they should hear my confession, as though they should heal all my
sorrows and griefs, who commonly are wont to be curious to know an other man's
life, and slow to amend their own. Why demand they of me to hear what I am,
which will not hear of thee who they them selves are? And how know they that
they hear of me to be true? Forasmuch as no man knows what is done in man,
but the spirit of man that is in man.

De Poenitentia Distinc. 1. Cap. Quinatus.
FOrasmuch therefore (as it is proved) that before our confession we are
quickened by grace and made the children of light, it manifestly appears that
only by the contrition of the heart without confession of the mouth sin is
remitted.

In the same place. Cap. Omnes qui.
Therefore confession is made for the vtteraunce, and not for obtaynyng of
pardon. And even as Circumcision was given to Abraham as a sign of justice and
not as the cause of justification: So the confession to the Priest is offered
as a sign of pardon already had, and not as a cause of remission to be
received.

S. Ambrose upon the. 1. Cor. 2.
TO remit sins, and to give the holy ghost, is only in Gods power. If God
therefore gave the effect of our salvation, man has nothing in this behalf to
glory of.

5. Beda in Lucam Lib. 5. cap. 68.
Go your ways and show your selves unto the Priest. And it came to pass that
as they went they were made clean. It is not found that the Lord sent any of
those, to whom he showed these corporal benefits, unto the Priests, but
only lepers: soothly because the Priest hode of the Jews was a figure of the
regal Priesthode to come, which is in the Church, by the which all pertainyng
to the body of Christ, the highest Priest and Prince of all others, are
consecrated. And who soever from heretical A public offender ought to make
public satisfaction.
malice, or gentilical superstition, or judicial, treachery, or else with
brotherly discord, as from the spotted coullour of leprosy, shall be cleansed
by the grace of Christ, it is necessary for him to come to the Church and there
show the Secret offenses require no secret confession, for remission of them,
to necessity for salvation.
true coullor of his faith which he has received. But other vices, as it were
diseases of the members of the soul, and the senses, ye Lord by him self
inwardly in the conscience and understanding does heal and correct them.

S. Chrysostom Tomo 6. Sermon de confessione.
But now is it not necessary that our Auricular confession is not necessary to
salvation.
sins should be confessed before witnesses. Let thy offenses be searched out
in thy inward thought, and let that showing be without a witness, and let God
only hear thy confession. God (I say) that obbraideth not thy sins, but
loses them, because of thy confession.

S. Jerome upon Math. 16.
TO thee I will give the keys etc. This place the Bishops Is not this offensive
to godly ears: slanderous, seditious, and contumelious against our fathers of
the Church? What is a reproach if this be not? Do not the Bishops and
Priests understand this place so manifest. But pride and worldly pomp and
Judas gain, makes them as blind as bittles to see any truth. To the fire, to
the fire with him, without any farther hearing, for we must not dispute with
heretics.
and Priests not understanding, do arrogate unto the^ selves some thing of
the Phariseis pride: forasmuch as they think they may condemn innocents, or
release sinners: Where as before God the se^te^ce of the priests is not
regarded, but the life of the offenders is considered. We read in Leuiticus of
the lepers, where as they are willed to show them selves to the Priests. And
if they had the lepry then by yt priest were they made unclean: not that the
Priests did make men lepers and unclean, but because they had the knowledge
who were lepours, and who were not, and could discern who were clean, and who
were unclean. Like as therefore the Priests did there make the lepour clean,
or unclean: so does our Bishop or Priest loose, or bynd, not those which be
sinful or innocent, but according to his office, when he has heard the
varieties of the sins, he knows who is to be bound, and who is to be
losed.

S. Origin in Math. Homel. 1.
IT was therefore truly said to Peter. Thou art Peter. And this fellow is an
notorious heretic, for he says that all ye faithful be Peter's
successors, which if it should be so let pass, yt Christians will come and
take away your place and dignity. Wherefore you will deny him in this place,
because he teaches against the determination of the Church.
etc. Notwithstanding it seems to be said also to all the Apostles, and to
all perfect faithful men, because they be all Peter's and rocks and upon
them all is the Church of Christ builded, and against no one of those that be
such, shall the gates of hell prevail. Notwithstanding by that which follows
let us see farther. Do thou think that to Peter only were given the keys
of the kingdom of heaven? and shall no other of the blessed Saints receive
them? If it be common to all, that was said, I will geeue thee the keys, why
should not all that was referred to Peter before, seem to be common to all
the Apostles. For in the Gospel of S. John, Jesus geuyng the holy Ghost to his
Disciples by breatnyng, said these words, Receive the holy ghost. etc. as
though he said it to all such so affectionated as Peter was. For all which be
folowers of Christ in like manner are named rocks Thou art Peter etc. But
because they which do challenge the place of a bishop do use this text as Peter
did, and teach us that they have received the keys of the kingdom of heaven
from Christ, because that who soever be bound by them, they be bound in
heaven also, and they which be loosed by the^, ye is, have received remission
of their sins, be loosed in heaven also: We must say that they say well, if
they have those good works for the which it was said unto Peter, Thou art
Peter: and if they be O you Inquisitours of heresy, awake, it is brode^ day,
you sleep to long.
such as Peter was, that on them may be builded the Church of Christ, if the
gates of hell shall not prevail against the^. Otherwise it is a vain jest to
say, that he which is tied with the bonds of sins, and draws his sins
after him as a long rope, and his iniquities be as the hoofes of a calfe, for
that only, that he is a called Bishop should have such power, that they which
be loosed of him, be also loosed in heaven, or who so be bound in earth by
him, be bound also in heaven. Let the Bishop therefore which does bind, or
loose an other man, be irreprehensible him self. He that is worthy to bynd
or lose in heaven, must be the husband of one wife, sober, chaste, comely
apparelled, a lover of hospitality, apt to teach, not given to over much wine,
no striker, nor greedy of filthy lukre, but gentle, no quareller, abhorryng
covetousness, one that rules well his own house, having children in
subjection, in all chastity. If he be such a one he shall not unjustly
bind upon earth, neither shall he lose without good aduisement. For if there
shall be as (I may say) a Peter, and has not these gifts here mentioned, as
it we^e to Peter, and shall think, that he can so bind sins, that the same
shall be bound in heaven, and so lose the^, that they shall be losed in
heaven, he deceaueth him self, not understanding the meaning of the
Scripture, but puffed up, he falls into the judgment of the devil.

Tripartita historia lib. 9. cap. 35. Verba Sozemeni.
BEcause it is known to be a divine thing and above ma^s nature never to
sin, God commanded remission to be given to sinners that do repent. But
they which refuse to acknowledge their sins, they heap unto themselves Here
you have the original of your secret confession which the Church of God knew
not by the space of 300. years I say not this as utterly condemning it: yea
rather as approuyng it: but I do teach it not to be necessary to our
salvation.
a greater burden of sins. Wherefore it seemed good to the au^cie^t Bishops,
that as it were upon a stage under the testimony of the Ecclesiastical people
their sins should be opened. And for this purpose they appointed a Priest of
good conversation, a wise man, and a keeper of secrets, unto whom they coming
that had offended confessed their own sins. But he according to every ma^s
offense assigned a penalty. Which custom also hitherunto is observed in the
Weasterne Churches and especially at Rome, where there is also a certain place
appointed for repentaunt sinners. For the offenders stand amongst the
penite^tes and morners. For when as the holy celebration is a doing, they not
participating the communion, prostrate them selves upon the earth with morning
and lamentation, unto who^ the Bishop repayring, he also prostrateth him self
with spiritual tears and gronyng, and all the common multitude in the Church
fall on weeping. After this, first arises the Bishop and takes up those which
lay on the ground. The^ when he has competently prayed for them which have
repented, he demisseth them all. But they of there own accord afflictyng
them selves, either with fasting, or abstinence from washing, or forbearyng of
meats, or by other like things which they be commanded, do look for the
general day which the Bishop assigns. The time being appointed and they
having as it were fulfilled certain duties and tendered the penalty for their
sin, then are they admitted to communicate with the people. And this custom,
the ancient bishops of Rome have observed even until our days. Moreover at
Constantinople there was a minister appointed to attend upon the penitent
until that time, that a certain noble woman, when she had confessed her
sins, and the minister had commanded her that she should fast and pray unto
God with good works, when she had this observed, she confessed that she had
often times leyen with the Deacon. When the people A notorious example what
mischief comes by the single life of the Clergy men.
understood this they raged at the Priests as though they had been injurious
to the Church. Then Nectarius the Bishop removed the wicked Deacon, and
certain persuadyng him, that he would leave free for every man's conscience to
communicate when they thought good, appointed no more any Deacon to attend on
the penite^ts. And from that time, that ancient custom was taken away. When
as I think less offenses were committed for the shame of confession and the
subtle examination.

That Monks be no holyer the^ lay men by reason of their coule or place:
translated into English out of his book De Doctor. Sent.
S. Gregory in Ezech. Home. 10 lib. 1.
FOr often times we see certain, as it were stricken with remorse by the Does
he not here lively set forth our holy Monks.
voice of the preacher, to have changed their habit, and not their mind: so
that they would take unto them a religions garment, but they would not tread
under foot their former vices, but were styrred outragiously with the pricks
of anger, or waxyng whote with grief of their neighbors, become proud with
certain good gifts showed in the sight of me^, gape after the gain of this
present world and have only a confidence of holiness on their outward habit,
which they have taken. For it is of no matter of any merit, to regard what is
outwardly done in our body, but we must be very careful what is done in our
mind.

S. Gregory in Ezech. Home. 9. lib. 1.
FOr often times we complain of our neighbors life, we endeavor to change
our dwelling place, and to choose a secret place for a solitary life, not
considering that if Gods spirit be wantyng, the place helps not. Loath went
out from the Sodomites holy, but in the mountain he sinned. But that the
place does not strengthen the mind, the first father of all mankind does
witness who fell by transgression in Paradise. For if the place could have
saved, Satan had not fallen from heaven.

The Council of Gangrens.
IF any man shall think it requisite according to his vow or purpose of
contine^cy to wear a coule, as thereby to attain righteousness, and does
reprehend or judge others, who with reverence do wear a lay man's weed, or
other common garments used of the lay people, let him be accursed.

Out of the same Council.
IF any sons, shall forsake their fathers, especially being faithful
Christians, upon the pretense of religion, thin king it lawful, and will not
rather yield due reverence to their pare^tes, that they may in them worship
God, for that they be faithful, be they accursed.

S. Barnard ad Guilhelmum Abba.
THe kingdom of God is within you, that is, not outwardly in your apparel, or
nourishments of the body, but in the virtue of the inward man. Whereof ye
Apostle says, the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Distinctio 40. cap. Non loca.
NOt our place, and orders does make us nearest unto our creator, but our good
deserts does either join us unto him, or our evil deserts does separate us
from him.

In the same place.
THey are not the sons of saints, which possess the place of Saints, but
they which exercise their good works.

In the same place. cap. Multi.
THe place does not sanctify the man, but the man sanctifies the place. Every
Priest is not a holy man, but every holy man is a Priest. He that sits well
on the chair, receaueth the honor of the chair, but he that sits euilly
is injurious to the chair.

In the same place the words of S. Ambrose Cap. Illud autem.
But mark this one thing, that the man was made out of Paradise, and the woman
in Paradise, whereby thou may note, that not by the worthiness of yt kindred or
place, but by virtue every man does purchase to him self the favor of God.
Finally, out of Paradise, that is in an inferior place, the man was made which
proved the better, and the woman which was made in the worthier place, (that is
in Paradise) is the inferior creature.

In the same place. Cap. Quaelibet.
NO secret places without grace, can preserve the soul, which we have
eftsoons perceived in the faults of yt elect. For Loath in that peruers City
was just, but on the mountain he sinned. But what speak we of this, when as
we have greater examples. For what was more pleasant then Paradise? What was
more saffer then heaven? and yet notwithstanding, man fell out of Paradise and
the angel from heaven.

Distinctione 41. Cap. Clericus.
Whosoever, despising those things whereby he presently lives does seek
either more delicate, or more hom liar apparel or food then otherwise is
commonly used, he is either intemperate of him self, or superstitious.

That the fasting of Christians does not co^siste in choice or difference of
meats, translated into English out of his book De Doctorum Sententijs.
Distinct. 41. Cap. Quisquis. Verba Augustini.
WHo soever does use things present What manner of fast is yours, who fare so
de^tely with your fish? who would not rather, fast with you, and to eat of a
turbate, the^ with us to eat porke or baken? compare one excess to the other
and yet forsooth do you seem to fast
more straightly then the manners of them is with whom he lives, is either
intemperate or superstitious. And who soever uses the^ in such sort that it
passes yt bounds of good men's usage with whom he lives, he either does it
to some special purpose, or else is he a wicked person. For in all such cases,
not the use of things, but the carnal lust is in fault. What therefore is
agreeable, to place, times, and persons, we must diligently mark: neither let
us rashly reprehend offenses. For it may come to pass, that a wise man may use
a most precious and delicate meat, without any greedy lust or glotony, and
that an unwise person may have an insatiable appetite to some gross food: and
that some man after the manner of Christ had leyther feed of fish, then fine
brothe, as did Esau Abrahames nephew, or on coren as cattle do. For we do
not account the most part of brute beasts to be more continent the^ others,
because they be nourished with vilder food. For in all such kind of things
which we use, not so much by consideration of their nature, as of the cause of
vsyng the^, or the manner of desiryng them, we either allow or improoue them.

S. Augustine. ad Ianuar. Epist. 12.
WHereas the Friars be so precise from eating of flesh, that they think them
unclean, which do cate, it is most manifestly against faith and sound
doctrine. I am sure that in two precepts of God all things be contained, and
that the end of the precept is love proceedyng from a pure heart, a good
conscience, and an unfeigned faith. What soever therefore is ordained over and
besides custom, that it shall be observed as though it were a Sacrament, I can
not allow it: albeit because I would not be an offense, to any holy or weak
persons I dare not freely disalow many such things.

It follows: true Christian religion (which the mercy of God would have free,
only with the celebratio^ of a few and manifest Sacraments) they oppress
with servile burdens: so that the state of the Jews is more tolerable, then
ours, who although they knew not the time of liberty, were but subject unto
the b^ens of the law, and not to man's presumptions.

I* Distinct. 41. cap. Delitiae.
ALl kind of delicate meats, if they be taken without any greedy desire be
not hurtful: and vilde meats greedely received do hinder the fruit of
abstinencye. For David powered out water that was euilly lusted, and Helyas did
eat flesh.

In the same place. cap. Quod dicit.
AS concerning that the Lord says in the Evangelist, wisdom is justified of
her children, he declares, that the sons of wisdom, understand, that
righteousness consists neither in abstainyng, nor in eating, but in the
pacient sufferyng of scarcity, and in temperau^ce, not to corupt them selves
by toe much abounda^ce, and in convenient taking, or not taking of those
things, whereof the gredy lust is reprehended, and not the simple use. For it
forces not at all what nurrishments thou receaust, to the necessary
sustinaunce of thy body, so that it be agreeable to those kind of
nurrishmentes, by the which thou may live.

Out of the general counsel of Pope Martine, Destinct. 30. Cap. Si quis.
IF any man do abstain from flesh Behold how manifestly by this Council,
not yt eaters of flesh but the superstitious abstainers are counted heretics.
not for abstinaunce, but for the abhorring of the meat, it is willed by yt
counsel that he do first taste it, and then if he will let him abstain.
But if he so despise it, so that he will not taste of the porrage wherein the
flesh was sodden, this man, if he be not obedient, and remove not from him
self the suspicion of heresye, let him be deposed from the order of the
clergy.

Origin in Leuiti. Home. 10.
THou therefore, if thou will fast, fast according to the precept of the
gospel, and keep in thy fast, the laws of the gospel, in the which the Lord
commands of fasting in this wise. When thou do fast annoynte thy head.
etc. Would thou that I should yet show thee what kind of fasting thou
ought to fast. Fast from all sin, take no meat of malice, make no
bankeres of pleasure, wax not to whot with wine of sensualytye: fast from
evil arts, and practices, abstain from evil talk, stay thee from evil
thoughts: Touch not the stolen bread of peruers doctrine, and thou shall not
lust after the deceauable food of philosophy, which may seduce thee from the
truth. Such fast does please God. But to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received of the faithful with thanks giving (and this to do
with them that crucified Christ) can not be acceptable to God. The Phareseys
on a time were offended with our Lord, because his disciples did not fast: unto
whom he answers, that the children of the bridegroom can not fast, as long
as the bridegroom is present with them. They therefore do fast, who have lost
ye bridegroom. We yt have the bridegroom with us can not fast. Neither yet not
withstanding do we say this, to let lose the bridle of christian abstinencye.
For we have the time of Lent consecrated to fasting, and we have the fourth,
and the sixth ferye of the week, in the which we do solemnlye fast. But
Christians have liberty to fast at any time, not by superstitious obseruances,
but by the virtue of continency.

De consecra, distinc. 5. Cap. Ieiunium
THe great and general fast is to abstain from iniquities, and from unlawful
pleasures of yt world, which is the perfect fast in this world etc.

Athana. upon S. Paul's Epist. to the Hebru. Cap. 13.
IT is good that the heart be stablished with grace, and not with meats, etc.
He reprehendeth those which brought in the judicial abstinence, and
observance of meats. For you (says he) are to be stablished by faith, and to
be certified that nothing is unclean, and that to the believing all thing is
pure. Therefore this faith, and not the obseruaunce of meats is necessary. For
they which have sinned through meats, yt is, which be always busyed in such
obseruances of meats, it is manifest that these have nothing profited. etc.

That the unjust excommunication of the Pope does not hurt the excommunicated:
translated into English, out of his book, De docto sent. 11 Quest. 3. Cap.
Illud plane.
THey said not that without good aduisement, that if any of the faithful shall
be unjustly excommunicated, it shall be rather hurtful unto him that does,
then to him that suffers the injury. For the holy ghost dwelling in the
saints, by whom every man is bound or losed, does punish no man wrongfullye,
for by him is love poured into our hearts, which does not amiss. The peace of
yt Church forgeueth sins: and can he that is out of the peace of the church,
detain his sins? Not according to the sentence of men, but according to the
will of God, the rock retains sins, and the rock remytteth Prou. 26.
the^. The dove retains, and the dove forgeueth. In like manner says Solomon
even as a bird flying to an uncertain place, and as any sparow flying in the
air, so a curse in vain cast out, comes on him, who sent it.

In the same place, Verba Augustini cap. qui
He that is just, and is unjustly cursed, to him is it turned for a reward

In the same place. Cap. Cuiest illata. Gela.
ON whom sentence is given, let him give over his error, and it is voyded:
but if the judgment be unjust, for so much he need not to care, for as much
as before God, and in his church wrongful judgment can ^urt no man. Therefore
let him not desyer to be absolved of that, whereby he persuades him self to
be nothing bound.

In the same place. Cap. Cepisti. verba Aug.
THou have undertaken to account thy brother as a publican, or infidel and thou
bindest him on earth: but see that thou bind him justly, for justice will
break unlawful bonds.

In the same place, Cap. Temerarium iudicium, Verba Augustini.
Rash judgment for the most part never hurts him which is rashlye judged:
but to him that judges rashly, his rashness must needs be hurtful.

In the same place. Cap. Quid. Verb. Aug.
WHat harm is it to a man, though humane ignorance does blot him out of that
table, if his wicked conscience do not blot him out of the book of life?

In the same place. Cap. Et si. Verba Aug.
ALthough for a time thou be condemned So you d^ here condemn those for
heretics who^ Christ crowns for saints.
of a man, and the proco^sull has given judgment upon Ciprian, the earthly
seat is one thing, the heavenly judgment seat is an other: from the inferior
seat he has received judgment, from the superior, he receives a crown.

11 Quest. 3. Cap. Custodi. verba Augusti.
Keep thy innocencye secret unto thy self, when no man does oppress thy
cause: false witness shall prevail against thee, but that only with men: for
shall it be of any force before God, where thy cause is to be heard? When
as God shall be the judge, then shall be no other witness then thy
conscience, between the just judge and thy thy conscience: therefore fear
nothing but thy own cause.

24 Quest. 3. Cap. Si quis. verba Hiero^imi.
IF any man be excommunicated with unrighteous judgment of the^ which be
rulers of the Church, if he before has not gone out thereof, that is if he
has not so done that deserved to be excommunicated he is nothing hurt in that
he seems to be expelled of men by unjust judgment: and so comes it to
pass that sometime he which is cast out, is within, and he is without which
seems to be kept within.

24. Quest. 3. Cap. Non in. verba Rabbani.
We are not perpetually damned when as we are unjustly judged according to the
saying of David, Neither shall he damn him when he is judged. Many of the
Priests do profess, yt they persecuted a fault of a zeal to God ward: but
whilst that this is indiscreetly done, they incur the wickedness of sacrilege
and whilst they ru^ne hedlonge to amend others, they them selves do also much
rather fall into a worser mischief.

In the same place. Cap. Cum aliquis. Verba Orige.
WHen as any man does go out from the truth, from the fear And you only
cast out yt faithful, and beleeuyng: but whoremo^gers, and adulterers you
bless. For if you should cast out all the^, your church would be but small.
of God, from faith, and from charity, he goes out of the tents of yt
Church, although by the sentence of the Bishop, he be not cast out. So
contrary wise one is with vmust judgment cast forth, if before he has not
gone out of him self, that is if he have not by his doing deserved to go
forth, he is no thing at all harmed. For sometime he that is east forth is
within, and he that is without, it seems that he is within.

The council of Meldens 11. Questi. Cap. Nemo Episcoporum.
LEt no Bishop (without certain, and manifest cause first known) forbid any
man the ecclesiastical communion. And let no man accurse any one, without the
knowledge of yt Arch bishop, or Bishops, but so far as the Canon auctoritye
does teach, because a curse is eternal damnation of death, and it ought to
be enjoined, but only for a deadly sin, and upon those which could not
otherwise be amended.

The end of the works of Doct. Barnes.
A brief and necessary Table, of all particular matters and words to be noted
in these works of Master Doctor Barnes.
A.
ALexander the third condemned a Decree made by king Henry the ij. 192
Antechrist a subtle crafty merchant 186 Antichrist, who he is. 301
Antechrist declares him self to be against Christ. 303 Antechrist his
doctrine. ibid em Apostles forsake not their wives. 318 Articles against
Fridericke the Emperor. 191 Articles set forth by the authority of the king,
made heresy by the pope. 201 Articles for which Barnes was condemned. 205
Authorities to prove that the Scriptures ought to be in the mother tongue. 287
B.
BArnes was not grieved with the Clergy. but with the devil that reigned in
them. 190 Barnes earnest zeal in the truth. 201 Barnes and Cardinal Wolsey
reason together. 210 Barnes disputation with the Bishops. 217 Barnes arested by
a Sergeant of arms. 221 Barnes threatened to be burned. 222 Barnes examined
at Westminster. ibidem Barnes forbidden to preach. 223 Barnes cruelly
persecuted by the papists. 225 Barnes lived sole and unmarried. 330 Baruck the
Prophet against Idols and Images. 343 Barnes makes a bold challenge. 356 Bilney
a virtuous and godly man. 193 Bilney a counsaylour to Barnes. 221 Blasphemy
against Christ and his Apostles. 317 Blind reasons of Papists. 308 Byndyng
and losing what it is. 259 260. 261 Bishops Court, no man can be found
innocent. 183 Bishops govern tyrannously. 183 Bishops worse then yt great
Turk. 284 Bishops Captains of rebels against the Prince. 188 Bishops holy
works what they are. 196 Bishops have lofty minds. 191 Bishops commit
perjury. 198 Bishops assoyled of their oath to their Prince, but never of
their oath to the Pope. ibidem Bishops swear to visit the Pope yearly. 203
Bishops myters come from the Jews. 213 Bishops use vain ceremonies. 214
Bishops Crosier staff what it means. ibidem Bishops pride and lewd living
is to be cried out upon. 217 Bishops compared to popettes and stage players.
266 Bishops burners and murderers of yt lively images of God, but of their
worm eaten Images, they burn none. 346
C.
Cardinal Wolsey and Doctor Barnes reason together. 210 Cardinal Wolsey well
pleased with his pillars and pollaxes. 215 Charity may be deceived, but faith
cannot. 250 Charity is Gods gift. 313 Chastity compelled is against the in
stitution of the Gospel. 328 Chastity of Papists most abominable. 328. 329.
330 Children of God, who they are. 270 Clement Pope excommunicated king Henry
the viij. 198 Clement the pope the son of a Curtisan. 199 Clement Pope
against Vrbane Pope. 193 Clergy may not be reproved. 183. 184 Clergy may not
be hindered by power or potentate. ibidem Clergy the enemies of truth. 189
Christ submitted him self to the higher powers. 185 Christ and his Apostles
overthrow the Popes doctrine. 187 Christian man may not extremely and
uncharitably sue and vex their brethren. 207 Christie^ man may lawfully
demand their debt by the law. ibidem Christ only has wrought our redemption.
227 Christ is all in all. 226. 230 Christ is our example to suffer persecution
patiently. 296 Christ's institution of the Sacrament. 303 Christ's blood is to
be received as well of the layetie as of the spirituality. 304 Christ is the
only mediator between God and man. 347. 351 Christ only brings us into
the favor of almighty God. 348 Church, why it is called holy. 246 Church of
God is the treasures of God without spot or wrinkle. 246 Church, how it is
known. 249 Church that is true is a sufferer and not a persecutour. 250 Church
truly declared. 253. 254. 256 Counsels have erred and may err. 255 Council
of Constance forbad the Sacrament in both hyndes. 302 Counsel of Nice thought
it meet for a Bishop to have a wife. 320
D.
Days are no one better nor higher then an other. 206 Doctors of the law give
evil counsel. 208
E.
ENemy to a true man is a thief. 189 Extreme law is extreme miustice. 208
F.
Faith only justifies. 226. 235 Faith without works justifies. 228 Faith is
accounted for righteousness. 231 Faith in Christ attayneth salvation. 231 Faith
brings forth good works. 236 Faith that brings forth fruit is the faith
that justifies. 238 Faith justifies before God, and good works declare our
justification to the world. 239 Faythes are of two sorts. 241 Faith that
justifies is given us freely of God. 241 Faithful believers in Christ's
merits are the right holy Church of God. 244 Faithful congregation cannot
err. 247 Faith is the mere gift of God. 277 Fisher Bishop of Rochester sworn
to the Pope. 197 Flock of Christ is little. 247 Fleshly reason, refoned
frowardly. 270 Fridericke the Emper our deposed. 191 Freewill of man without
Gods grace can do no good. 266. 267. 268 Freewill without grace is sin. 269.
270 Freewill wherein it consists. 276 Fruits of faith. 235
G.
GErmayne a Popes Saint, a strange hystory. 190 George Stafford a learned
man. 221 God only is omnipotent and almighty. 351 God is to be obeyed before
men. 295 God does wonderfully work to save his flock. ibidem Gods
commandments are impossible to our nature to be kept. 272 Gods mercy is the
only cause of our salvation. 179 Good counsel given to the Bishops 215 Good
works, what goodness is in them. 229 Good works cannot deserve remission of
sins. 235 Good works are to be done though they justify not. 237 Good
works are the fruits of good faith. 249 God disposes his mercy to whom it
pleases him. 278 Gospel preaching is no cause of insurrection. 184 Gospel
profitable to England. 194 Grace without deseruyng. 224 Grace finds our
hearts stony. 273
H.
Herod kept his brothers wise. 188 Hypocrisy abominable. 189 Holy days, why
they were ordained. 205 Holy Church truly defined. 243 Holy church, that is
the true church of God is to the world invisible. 244 Holy Church is the
ground and pillar of truth. 245 Holy Church is built upon the Apostles and
Prophets. 250
I.
Jacob is elected and Esau rejected. 178 Idols and Images described. 344 Idols
and Images are all one. ibidem. Ignorance made us worship stocks and
stones. 341 Images are neither to be honored nor worshypped. 340 Image of God
is thy poor Christian brother. 345 Images or Idols are not the workers of any
miracles, 345 Insurrections whereof they came. 192 Indifferent things are to
be obeyed. 298 John king of England cruelly handled by the Clergy of England.
189 Justification is not by the law of of works but by the law of faith. 234
Justification, how it comes. 236 Justified persons cannot abstain from
doing of good works. 240
K.
Kings ought not to be deposed though they be wicked. 187 King John was
cruelly handled of the Clergy of England. 189 King John poisoned. 189 Kings
brought by violence under the Popes foot. 195 Kings of the kingdom of heaven
what they are. 257. 258 Keys of Christ abused by the Bishops. 262. 263
L.
LAw, why it was given. 275 Liberties of holy Church may not be impugned. 217
Losing and byndyng, what it is. 259
M.
MAn is Lord over all creatures. 274 Man's dominion restreyned. 275 Man is the
lively and true Image of God. 346 Marriage of Priests is allowed of God. 317
Marriage has a greater cross then virginity. 313 Marriage of Priests is
neither against Gods law nor man's law. 328 Marriage is all one before
Priesthode and after Priesthode. 336 Mass made of many patches. 357 Mass
well-beloved of the Papists for gaynes sake. ibidem Ministers of the Church
ought to be no Lords. 262 Money is the popes best merchant. 265 Monks of
the Charterhouse and their superstition. 299 Mores holy Church, are the Pope
Cardinals and Bishops. 252 Moses chair what it is. 297
N.
Natural reason is a blind judge of the Scriptures. 307 Naturally all men
desire Marriage. 323
O.
OBedience to the higher powers taught by Christ and his Apoles. 185 Obedience
to the Prince we owe with our bodies, and to God with our souls. 300 Officers
are Bishops hangme^. 211 Offenders of the common weal may not break prison,
but patiently suffer that the law does determine. 293 Orders in the Clergy has
two significations. 202 Oath the Bishops made to the Pope. 195 Oath to the
Pope last made by the Bishops. 200
P.
Papists and Schoolmen pervert the Scriptures. 180* Papists charge the
Preachers of Gods word with heresy. 185 Papists teach disobedience to
Princes. 185. 186 Papists shameless doings. 186 Papists and Protestants
wherein they differ. 191 Papiste is an unnatural subject against his
sovereign Lord and Lady. 202 Papists are arrogant and proud. 209 Papists
are crafty iugglers. 223 Papists cruelty. 225 Papists are trappers of
innocents. 223 Papists are tyrants. 224 Papists are blasphemers of Gods holy
word. 286 Papists preach lies. 287 Papists and S. Paul are contrary. 285
Papists are the norishers of ignorance and darkness. 290 Papists find fault
with gnattes and swalow Camelles. 308 Papists make blind reasons. 308. 309
Papists carnal reasons. 351 Papists, worshyppers of stocks and stones. 352
Papists, blind and malicious. 353 Papists foolish arguments soluted. 354
Paul dispenses with unlawful vows. 314 Peter the Apostle had a wife. 325
Petition of Doct. Barnes to king Henry the viij. 205 Philip the Evangelist was
married. 325 Popes depose kings. 186 Popes shameless arrogance and tyranny.
ibidem Popes dispense with oaths that subjects make of obedience to their
Princes. 188 Popes procurers of war and destruction of people. 193 Pope
against Pope one cursing an other. ibidem Popes alter the Bishops oaths as
seems best for their purpose. 195 Popes and their lewdenes truly described.
197 Pope, how he comes by the name of Lord. ibidem Pope Clement
excommunicated king Henry the viij. 198 Popes what manner of men they are that
are chose^ to that dignity. 199 Pope Clement the son of a Curtisan. ibidem
Pope a monstrous hypocrite. 198 Pope and his laws agree not. 199 Popes are
not chosen after Saint Paul's rule. ibidem Power of kings is immediately of
God. 202 Popes Saints work strange miracles. 190 Pope absolueth all
rebellion against Princes, but pardons none that has been against him
self. 201 Popes regalles. ibidem Pope calls Councelles as it pleases him.
202 Pope has liberty to say and do^ what he list. 204 Popes pardons have
been good marchaundise in England. 212 Pope may not be controlled of any man.
213 Popish law is tyrannous. 218. 219. 220 Pope and the true holy church, how
far they differ. 242 Pope and his manners agrees nothing with the holy
Church. ibide^ Pope shamefully abuses the holy Church. 243 Popes Church glory
in trash. 251 Popes Clergy is condemned by S. Augustine as heretics. 264 Pope
and Christ are contrary. 284 Pope and his Clergy are the very Antechristes.
288 Pope a persecutour of holy church. 242 Pope sells God and all his
ordidinaunces. 265 Popes condemned for heretics. 247 Popes own laws both
against him self and his Clergy. 305 Pope defameth Priesthode. 324 Pope and
his Clergy fear not to break Christ's institution. 306 Pope forbyddeth
marriage. 315 Pope accompteth whoredom and matrimony to be all one. 321 Popes
doctrine condemned by a Counsel. 322 Popes laws against marriage of Priests.
316 Pope allows yt keeping of whores. 317 Pope will not suffer any persons
married to be Bishops. 320 Pope is a renter and tearer of the Scriptures. 334
Pope makes a hotchpot of marriage. ibidem Pope accompteth whoredom better then
Matrimony. 335 Pope a blasphemer of God. ibidem Practice of Prelates. 203
Practices of Papists to cause Images to work miracles. 343 Preachers of true
doctrine teach obedience. 185 Preachers of true doctrine are sufferers. 184
Preachers of false doctrine are persecuters. 184 Preachers against the Pope are
accounted heretics. 205 Prelates cannot use obedience to their Prince. 202
Prelates are blind guides. ibidem Prelates will obey the pope, but not the
Prince. 203 Priests rore and mumble out their Diriges and Masses. 216 Priests
may marry wives by the law of God lawfully. 309 Priests must marry for
auoydyng of fornication. 310 Prophets never styrred the people against the
Prince. 184 Protesta^tes and Papists how they differ. 191 Power temporal
described. 292
R.
REason and devotion that is against the will of God is mere blyndnes. 307
Righteous man lives by faith. 233 Rochester against Winchester. 206 Rochesters
great judgment. ibidem Rochesters vain distinction. 237 Rochesters rule to
know the difference between the Pope and the Council. 247 Rochesters words
upon Christ's words. 303
S.
SAcrament forbidden to be received in both kinds. 301 Sacrament under both
kinds. 305 Saints can obtain nothing for us. 347 Saints, how they ought to
be honored. 349 Saints are boly, but they are no Gods. 351. Scriptures are to
be read of all men 182 Scriptures in the common tongue teach all obedience. 184
Scriptures judge the true Church. 250 Scroupe Richard Archbyshoppe of york a
rebel. 188 Scriptures are the judges of Councels. 248 Scriptures not suffered
by the Popes Clergy to be in the mother tongue. 283 Scriptures teach the
commandments of God. 288 Scripture is profitable to be read. 289 Scriptures
is to be made known to all men. 291 Solutions and arguments to the
Scriptures. 236 Spirituality ready to help the pope. 194 Spiritual power. 297
Stafford George a learned man. 22^ Stokesly Bishop of London a foolish and
malicious Papist. 291 Stocks and stones the Papists honor as Gods. 342
Subjects must obey, and in what manner. 294. 295 Supplication made by D. Barnes
to king Henry the viij. 183 Supers^^tion of the Monks of the Charterhouse. 299
T.
TRaditions against God are to be rooted up by the roots. 298 Tunstall Bishop
of London. 215
V.
Virginity is a state indifferent. 313 Uncharitable suits are to be reproved.
209 Universal Church is not a general Council. 248 Vows that have unlawful
conditions are not to be observed. 319 Vrbane Pope against Clement Pope. 193
W.
Works, which be of greatest value and are accounted for the best. 228 Works
are good and help to justification. 231 Works without faith are but sin.
233 Works of the new law. 234 Whoredom is lawful in no case. 311
FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by John Day, and are to be sold at his shop under
Aldersgate. An. 1572.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

A lively picture describyng the authority and substance of Gods most blessed
word, weyghing against Popish traditions.
Judgment indifferent.


How light is chafe of Popish toys, if thou desire to try,
Lo Justice holds true beam without respect of partial eye:
One balance holds Gods holy word, and on the other part,
Is laid the dregs of Antichrist, deuisde by Popish art:
Let Friars and Nuns and baldpate Priests, with triple crown of Pope,
The Cardinals hatt, and devil him self, by force pluck down the rope:
Bring bell, book, candle, cross, and beads, and mitred Basan bull,
Bring bulls of lead and Popes Decrees, the balance down to pull:
Yet shall these tares and filthy dregs, invented by man's brain,
Through force of Gods most mighty word, be found both light and vain.
Magna est veritas and preualet, Great is the truth and preuayleth. 3. Esdra.
4.

