THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN PRACTICE.

Containing the Institution of a Christian man, in twelve heads of Doctrine:
which are set down in the next side.

By THOMAS TAILOR D. D. and late Pastor of Aldermanbury London.

Perfected by himself before his decease.

Cypr. de zel. and live. Christi nomen ind^ere, and non per Christi viam
pergere, quid aliud quam praevaricatio est divini nominis, quam desertio
i^meris salutaris?

LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for J. Bartlet, in Cheap Side at the Golden-cup in
Goldsmiths Row. 1635.

The Principles of Christian Practice: Containing the Institution of a
Christian Man, or of a Disciple of Christ:
In these chief heads of Doctrine.
1. Self-denial. 2. Taking up the Cross. 3. Imitation of Christ. 4. Life
temporal and eternal. 5. The worlds worthlesnesse to a soul. 6. The last
judgment. 7. The kingdom of Grace. 8. The Christan race. 9. The divine
Teacher and Scholar. 10. Epicurisme described and disgraced. 11. Abuse of the
Creatures, unlawful. 12. The Physician of souls.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, SIR EDWARD CLERK Knight, one of the Masters of his
Majesty's Court of Chancery, and Steward of the Town of Reding: And to his
worthy Consort, the Lady ANN^ CLERK: all Happiness.
HONORED Friends: By your experienced kindness I have emboldened my self at
this time, to present you with a few papers of our ancient friend, Reverend
Doctor Tailor, whom alive you heard gladly. The subject of them is, the
Principles of Christian Practice. All Philosophy says: such as the Principles
are, such are the Affections, and the Conclusions. The world sees it in those
famous divisions, of Gentilisme, Judaisme, Mahometisme, and Christianisme:
wherein, as any is more thoroughly grounded, so he is more resolved in himself,
and divided from others. The Church also sees and bewaileth it in her woeful
divisions. To let pass the Theorie, and consider the Practice (wherewith we
have now to do:) we shall easily observe in the course of Christians, that,
as they lay down their Principles, and frame their plots and projects, so
their lives also, and particular passages thereof, are framed.

The maine aim and plot of a true Christian is, to please God and save his
soul howsoever. Accordingly he resolves to deny himself, that he may give
up himself wholly unto God: he seeks out after Christ, and will get this
great pearl, though he sell himself out of all his worldly endowments and
comforts: he means afterward to follow Christ, even through thick and
thin, and though he be daily compelled to take up his cross in following
him: He knows, that by overmuch daintiness and delicacie in the way of holy
obedience, he may hazard his soul, which, if he had lost a a temporal
life, he might have received again in life eternal. He considers, that if
he could get or hold never so much of these worldly comforts, yet all would
be mere loss upon the loss of his soul: and, if his soul be once lost, it
can never be recovered again. And howsoever he may cheer up himself for a
while with those vanities, yea perhaps for a long while, yet in the day of
judgment at farthest; when Christ comes to reckon' for every man's talent and
employment; he knows he must rue the time of his former security, or
licentiousness; whenas only those that have aimed aright, and rightly steared
their course for God and heaven, shall (though with much hardship) arrive at
the wished haven of rest and glory. Hereupon it is, that many a poor
Christian wades against the stream, and labors still to approve himself unto
God, by 2. Cor. 6. 4.
honor and dishonor, by good report and bad report, by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand, and on the lest. So that he may obtain that
incorruptible crown of life, which is set before him, he cares not what pains
he takes in running, nor how hard censures he endures from carnal
spectatours. That he may not mistake his way, through blindness in himself,
or false guides abroad, he uses the means of sound and heavenly knowledge,
and in them all entreats the Lords help and guidance, who alone is able to
direct, comfort, and strengthen him in his pilgrimage: and, when he obtaines
this, he soots it lustily along, till in the strait way, though rough, and
full of crosses, he gets into his Fathers house, where is bread enough, and
comfort, and glory. And whereas in his traveling he espies a number of
sensual men, who are wholly taken up with Jude 19.
their pleasures, treasures, honors, friends, seastings, or other trifles,
these he pitieth, and prays for them, and resolves for his own part, not
to entangle himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who
has chosen him to be a soldier. 2 Timothy 2. 4.


This is the disposition, and these the behaviors of a Christian well
principled and bottomed; The effecting whereof, both the Author intended in
preaching these things, and I now intend in publishing them: together with
encouragement to all those, who stand stoutly, wisely, and constantly to their
own Principles, whatever the affections and conclusions of the world be toward
them.

But on the other side, numbers of men and women, missing of these Principles,
and falling upon other which are deceitful, do spend their lives in mere
vanities, and lose both God and their souls before they are aware. Some mean
to be rich howsoever, esteeming wealth to be the blessedness of man: according
to which ground, they stick not for injustice, bribery, oppression, cheating,
and other indirect arts of getting. Others attend their pleasures, and account
it happiness to live deliciously for a season: which therefore they will
enjoy, though with uncleanness, intemperance, unthriftinesse, prodigality,
other sins, and total forgetfulness of the Afflictions of Joseph. Others
Amos 6. 6.
admire the honors of the world, or credit with men of the world, or applause
of the people: which to obtain and hold, they care not though they undermine,
traduce, flatter, smooth, betray religion, any thing: Yet honor me before the
people. And others, taking up other 1. Sam. 15. 30.
ends, and grounding themselves upon Principles of their own, go wide of
Christ and heaven, as far as East and West.

Yea though they will seem sometimes to put on a vizard of religion. The
Hypocrite minds nothing but his own selfe-respects; to have his Minister
think well of him, to be accounted some body in the profession, to get credit
with some who may do him a good turn another day, to get friends, customers,
chapmen, and work out his own advantages the more freely and slily:
Accordingly he holds none but an hobling course in professing religion, halts
between two opinions, says and unsayes; in one company speaks well of good
men, and good things, in another company quite otherwise, pretends God, and
intends himself, in fine, makes nothing of his religion, and if the wind
serve right, he will take the next occasion to strike sail, and become a
Persecutour of religion and religious persons.

The like of many Apostates. What other cause can be given, why numbers of
Christians fall off from the profession or obedience of the Gospel, but that
they never learned well and thoroughly these Principles of Christian Practice,
to deny themselves, to take up their cross, to follow Christ, to look to the
welfare of their souls howsoever, to provide for the day of their accounts, to
run and strive lawfully, to depend on God by prayer for direction and blessing,
and to save themselves from this untoward generation, of Epicures and
worldlings? If these grounds had been well laid, they had never left off
building so shamefully, as now have done: nor had their house come tumbling
upon their heads, but that their foundation was laid in the sands.

Others there are, that abuse good Principles (as, concerning the infinite
mercy of God, and merit of Christ:) or settle upon false and insufficient
Principles, outward prosperity, deliverance out of trouble and danger, example
of the multitude, rulers, preachers, and the like; thereby bolstering up
themselves, either in gross prosaneness, or a refined Atheism, till their
souls be utterly lost, unless the mercy and grace of God do greatly prevent
them.

They are thrice happy, who are thus prevented. It is the Lord only, who gives
us both a Savior, and the knowledge of salvation, and wisdom to attend our
Principles aright: he does it for us, and must therefore have all the glory.
To his grace and mercy I commend you both (my much respected Friends:)
entreating your acceptance of this small present, and pardon for this large
Preface. The Lord often renew your years upon you, with all heavenly and
earthly blessings, and peace upon Sion. So prays,

Isleworth. Dec. 20. 1634. Your Woe: remembrancer with God, WILLIAM JEMMAT.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
The Institution of a Christian man in twelve heads of Doctrine.
1 THe doctrine of self-denial, out of Mat. 16. 24. Wherein is showed, who
are Christ's Disciples. page 6 What things selfe-denyall comprehends, page 15
The difficulty of this duty. 18 The necessity of denying ourselves. 21
Mischiefs of not beginning in this duty. 25 Helps to further us therein. 29
Motives to deny our selves. 35 Notes of one that denies himself. 39
2. The doctrine of takin up the Cross, out of the same verse. Where is
showed, What the Cross is. 46 Why called the Cross. 47 What it is to take it
up. 48 Why take it up daily. 52 That every Christian has his Cross. ibid That
we must both bear and take up the cross. 61 Means to be willing so to do. 70
3. The doctrine of following Christ, Ow of the same verse. Where is showed, In
what we must follow Christ. 75 Instances of Christ's piety and charity. 77 D^e
fr the brethren, as Christ did. 85 How Christ can and must be followed. 87
Motives to follow him. 9^ Danger of not following him. 93 Safety of following
him. 96
4. The doctrine of life temporal and eternal. Verse 25. Whosoever will save
his life, etc. Where is showed, How a life is saved and lost. 101 Who lose
their lives for Christ's sake. 104 Who may not fly in persecution, and who may.
107 Christians must take their lives in their hands for Christ. 115 Objections
answered. 121 Practices and Meditations preparing for Martyrdom. 126
5. The worlds worthlesnesse in respect of a soul. Verse 26. What shall it
profit a man, etc. Where is showed, What the world and winning of it is. 139
That we must preach well for matter and manner. 142 That in weighty matters
we must use special vehemency. 147 That we are naturally addicted to the
world. 149 Where is treated of covetousness. 151 There is danger by earthly
gain to lose the soul. 154 How this comes to pass. 155 Damnable to seek
the world out of order or measure. 161 How to avoid the danger of earthly
gain. 166 That many lose their souls for the world: and who they be. 169
Signs of Christ undervalued for the world. 171 Speeches of the world how to be
limited. 173 Lawful callings abused, and callings unlawful. 176 How wealth
casts men back in the way of salvation. 178 No clear gain, nor thriving in an
evil way. 180 Further thy salvation by wealth: motives: and how. 182 What
friends are to be made by unrighteous Mammon. 184 Riches unprofitable, how,
and in what respects. 190 That the soul is a most precious thing. 198 Evils
that hurt it, to be avoided. 202 A great work to save souls. 205 No help for
a soul once lost. 210 The estate of a lost soul, what. 211 What makes a lost
soul irrecoverable. 214 All unable to recover a lost soul, how and why. 217
What goes to the ransom of a soul. 219 Uses of that doctrine. 221
6. The last judgment. Verse 27. For the Son of man shall come, etc. Wherein
is showed, how Christ is called the son of man. 228 Christ content with mean
^^les. 235. so should we too. 237 Christ comes from heaven, whither, when. 241
The time unknown, for six reasons. 248 Opinions about it. 249 Meet Christ
coming to judgment: how. 256 Of Christ's glory in that day: of person: office.
258 Preparation and execution, glorious. 264 Diverse sorts of evidences. 266
Wait and wish for the appearance of this glory. 278 Prepare for it, and how.
280 Angels number, relation, office, coming with Christ. 287 The end of
Christ's coming. 314 Good works not meritorious as evil are: why. 321 Why
works are the rule of judgment. 322 Whether the Law or Gospel be the rule of
judging. 324 The last judgment glorious and righteous. 327 Live well and fare
well in judgment. 331 Be patient in all confusion and injustice. 334 Be
sincere in matter of religion. 335 Watch and judge thy self beforehand. 336
How to know what will become of us in the day of judgment. 338
7. The Kingdom of grace. verse 28^ Verily I say unto you, There be some
standing here, etc. Wherein is showed, Christ's coming in his Kingdom, what.
342. 343. Opinions. 346 Christ's Kingdom, and how it comes. 348 Kingdom of God
general and special. (...) How the Kingdom of Christ comes. 350 Of the
accomplishment hereof. 351 Christ's Kingdom enlarged in the Gospel. 352
Evidences of Christ's Kingdom enla^ged. ibid. Of the times when the Gospels
were written. 358 Preaching and obeying the word advances Christ's Kingdom. 360
Christ like to Kings, and superior to them. 361 Eminence of Christ above other
Kings. 362 Enemies of the word, enemies of Christ. 365 Rejoice in the thriving
of the Gospel. 368 Help Christ into his Throne. 379 How Christ's Kingdom is
erected and maintained within us. 372 Defend Christ's right and be loyal. 374
Motives to be loyal to Christ. 376
8. The Christian Race. 1 Cor. 9. 24. So run that you may obtain. Where ^s
showed, The similitude, and reason of it 350 That every Christian must run. 354
Our life in five respects is a race. 355 Reasons why we must run this race. 357
Even our whole life, and not at the end only. 359 Who conceit not aright of
Christian profession. 361 Motives to run as we ought. 362 Direct ons thereunto,
and preparation. 364 Hindrances to be removed. 365 Helps in running the
Christian race. 367 Conditions of running aright five. 369 The right mark we
must run at. 370 The right way in which we must run. 371 The right foot
wherewith we must run. 373 The right motion, humble, cheerful, constant. 374
The right end of running twofold. 379 The reward of running, no merit. 382 How
to run and obtain. 384 Look not back. 386 Respect the way, and not
by-matters. 387 Renew strength continually, and how. 390 Encouragements thus to
run. 393 Excellency and eternity of this goal. 39^
9 The divine Teacher and Scholar. Psalm. 119. 33. Teach me O Lord, the way,
etc. Where is she^ed, The Prophets holy prayer and vow. 399 What the Statutes
are, and why Statutes. 400 Why called the Statutes of God. 402 Their eminency
above other Statutes. 404 The metaphor of a way, and singularity. 406 God
teaches four things, above all teaching of man. 411 A good heart still
desires to be taught. 414 That all true knowledge is from God. 416 What this
knowledge has above natures reach 418 In the means repair unto God. 421
Ministers must pray for themselves and their people. 423 That sound knowledge
is ever humble, and why 424 Defect of knowledge, whence. 425 Knowledge of good
men and others, how it differs. 431 Good men are ever d^strous of more holy
knowledge. 435 What fearful effects ignorance has. 436 Benefits of knowledge
within and without us. 439 Motives to get heavenly knowledge. 44^ How unseemly
ignorance is. 444 Knowledge delightful to man's understanding 446 Excellent
properties of Gods way. 448 Reproof of them that desire not knowledge. 451
Excuses refuted. 455 Hindrances of saving knowledge. 461 Disposition to it,
wherein it stands. 464. means. 467 Of vows, what are lawful. 469 L^d of
sound knowledge is obedience. reas. 477 Notes of one careful to keep his way.
484
10. Epicurisme discribed and disgraced. Exodus 32. 6. The people sat down to
eat, etc. Wherein is showed, that Idolatry is ever attended with sloth and
luxury. 489 People secure in sin, are nearest to mischief. 496 Rules for
eating and drinking. 500 Meditations in eating and drinking. 504 Sports and
recreations are lawful, and how. 507 In sports is much sin. 509 C^oyee to be
made of sports, 510 use limited 512 Our selves how to be ordered in them. 513
What may not be lost in play. 517
11. Abuse of the creatures unlawful. An Appendix to the former. 1 Cor. 15.
32. Let us eat and drink, etc. Wherein is taxed, the abuse of the creatures.
522 Heathens and Epicures abuse them 4 ways. 525 Rules of right using natural
comforts. 529 Times seasonable for sports. 533 Right ends of our liberties. 537
12. The Physician of souls. Luke 5. 31. The whole need not the Physician,
etc. Wherein are sundry general notes. 541 Christ takes our causes on
himself. 543. and 544 None is whole, unless in conceit: and how (...)
arises. 545, 546, 547 The misery of them that are conceitedly whole 548
Discovery of diseases in the soul: four signe^ 549, 550, 551 Sin is a most
dangerous sickness: five resemblances. 552, 553, 554 Christ is a most
excellent Physician: in five respects. 561, 562, 563 Come to him for cure: and
how this may be. 565 Great comfort to afflicted souls. 571. to 576 The author,
matter, and virtue of this heavenly Confection. 577. to 579 The Physic
precious and powerful: in five respects. 580, 581 See our own misery, and
admire Christ's cure: five particulars. 582. to 588 Love we our Physician: and
^ow. 589, 590. 591 How the physic is applied: to whom: and when 592. to 600
Notes to know we are cured: four. 600. to 606 And four means to preserve
health in the soul. 606. to ult.

FINIS.
THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN PRACTICE.
MATTHEW. 16. 24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me,

25. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it: and whosoever will lose
his life for my sake, shall find it.

26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels, and then he shall reward every man according to his works.

28. Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste
of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom.


THe occasion of these Occasion of the words.
words was the offense that the Apostle Peter took, when our Lord Jesus Christ
had preached the doctrine of the Cross, and had foretold his own passion and
suffering shortly at Jerusalem. Hereupon Peter (as a Politician, turning
himself to carnal counsels) draws his Master aside, and wishes him to look
better to himself, and wisely to prevent these troubles, Ver. 22. Our Savior
now perceiving that he went about to dissuade him from that great work, for
which he came into the world, and on which the salvation of the whole world
depended, most sharply reproves him, as a most special agent of Satan, though
he were his Disciple a thousand times, Ver. 23. And yet, not forgetting his
wonted compassion, takes occasion thence to instruct him, and all the rest of
the Disciples; yea, and with them all Believers, that they also after his
example must be in a readiness to deny themselves, and take up his cross and
follow him.

The words contain in them Sum of them,
the institution of a Christian man, or of a Disciple of Christ; who is here,
1. Informed: 2. Confirmed in the first Principles of his holy profession.

The Information is in Ver. 24. Parts.


The Confirmation in all the rest to the end.

The former is an universal Canon for all that mean to give their names to
the profession of Jesus Christ, consisting of three branches, wherein they must
be soundly initiated:

1. Self-denial. Three duties.
2. Taking up the Cross. 3. Imitation of Christ.
If any man will be my Disciple, or, will follow me.] Which words concern us
all, not excepting or exempting any that intends soundness in Christianity:
and no calling, no sex, no age, nor condition of life can free any Christian
from the rules following.

Object. Christ spoke them only to his Disciples, as the words before. These
belong to all.


Answ. 1. Saint Mark says (cha. 8. 34.) Christ called the people 1.
or multitude, and said. He spoke it to all, as concerning all. 2. By a 2.
Disciple or Follower of Christ in our Text, is not meant only those twelve
Apostles, who are (...).
so called in a peculiar manner, because they were chosen to be trained up and
instructed in Christ's own family in the future service of the Church: Nor only
those faithful men and women, whom Christ honored to follow his own person
in the days of his flesh; but all faithful ones that shall learn, believe,
and practice holy doctrine, and follow his holy life to the end of the world:
for these himself has honored with this name, Luke 14. 26. If Nimirum in
liberate nostra nobis relinquens, utrum amplecti maluerimus. Jansen. in loc.
The Text makes not for free will. 1
any man come to me, and hate not all for me, he cannot be my Disciple. Act.
11. 26. the Christians and Disciples were all one.

If any will follow me.] The Papists gather, that it is in our free will to
follow, or not. But

1. Christ's scope is not here to show how we come to him, but who they be that
come; and not from the cause of their coming, but from the effects.

2. If we will learn from 2.
Christ the cause of our coming to him, he will not have us find it in our
selves, but without us. Joh. 6. 44. None comes to me, unless the Father draw
him: his free will draws him not, Nature draws him not, but the grace of the
Father: And Ver. 45. He that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto
me: Where this coming is not ascribed to the will or study of him that is
taught, but to the excellency of the Teacher.

But a more pertinent question is, how we may know that we Notes of a
Disciple of Christ.
are Disciples and Followers of Christ. And beside the signs in the Text, we
shall discern it by sundry marks: as

1. The Disciples were called by Christ's own voice, and depended 1.
on the mouth of Christ. Respect to the word, and dependence on it.
By the word of Christ must thou also be made a Disciple; thou must be called
by his voice in the Ministry. Do thou then cleave to the means of growth in
grace, and listen attentively to the word of Christ? so did the Disciples, and
so will thou. But if thou carest not for the preaching of the word, if thou
desire not to grow in knowledge, but contentest thy self in thy ignorance,
or with some confused knowledge: If the word be near thee, thou runnest from
it; if it be absent, thou runnest not after it: thou hereby show thy self
to be no Disciple.

2. The Disciples being called, 2. Mat. 4. 22. and 23. 8. Joh. 6 68. Respect to
Christ, and dependence on him alone.
left all for Christ, and acknowledged no Master but him, because he had the
words of eternal life. If thou also be a Disciple, thou renouncest all other
Masters, and all employments that will not stand with Christianity. If thou be
a Disciple, thou know the truth, and the truth has set thee free, Joh. 8.
31. Of a servant of sin, thou art a freeman in grace. The Disciples walked in a
course of mortification; they sought not the world nor themselves: they were no
swearers, gamesters, deceivers, usurers, haters of grace, liars, or slanderers;
and if thou be so, thou art no Disciple.

3. The Disciples were called to be near Attendants of Christ, 3. Attendance
and obedience to him.
to abide and continue with him, and perform all his commandments. John 8.
31. If ye abide in my word, ye are verily my Disciples: that is, if ye
continue both in the faith and obedience of my word. Art thou a near friend
unto Christ? so were they. Ye are Joh. 15. 14.
my friends (says Christ) if ye do whatsoever I command you. The best trial
of thy friendship to Christ is in difficult, costly, and dangerous
commandments: So Melius est habere paucos discipulos, quam mulios auditores.
Thriv. apoph. 105. Luke 6. 46.
the Lord tried Abraham's friendship. Otherwise, Why call thou him Lord, as
if thou were a Disciple, and do not the things he commands thee?

4. The Disciples were glad of Christ's presence; and when he 4. Mat. 9. 15.
John 16. 6. Joy in him, or mourn after him.
was absent, their hearts were full of sorrow. If thou likewise be a Disciple,
thy soul rejoices in the presence of Christ, in his ordinances, in the
directions and consolations of his Spirit: thou art alive when his sweet word
drops upon thy soul, and thou droupest when Christ has withdrawn Cant. 5. 6.
Inaudita est dilectio quae amicum diligit. and pr^sentiam ejus non amat.
Cassiod. in Psalm. 18.
himself from thee in any of these means of his presence. But can thou be a
Disciple (except a Judas) that find as much sweetness in the word of
Christ, as in the white of an egg? that professest thou have no comfort in the
word, but it is a perpetual dropping and molestation? that risest up against
Christ for his word (as Judas) because the word of Christ detecteth thy
covetousness, pride, deceit, treachery, other wickednesses?

5. The Disciples had commission and commandment to make 5. Make Disciples:
win others. (...). Mat. 2^. 19 Scimuo quod viri isti nec sibi vixere, nec
sibi sunt mortui, sed ei qui pro ipsis mortuus est, magis autem nobis omnibus
propter illum. Bern. sermon. Petr. and Paul.
other Disciples, and so did: They were diligent in their callings, and
exercised therein the love of God, and love of men; were sober, godly, humble,
walking in the steps of Christ their Lord and Master, spending themselves in
doing good to others, departing with dearest things, their names, their
liberty, and life for Christ and his Church. So the general calling of a
Christian is, to make Disciples, to bring men to Christ, by instruction,
admonition, reproof, comfort; herein expressing love to Christ and his
members: And to walk beseeming the Gospel; for the honor of Christ, making
him our pattern, and walking as he walked; of which afterward. 1 John 2. 6.
In a word, to be all that we are for Christ, that Christ may be magnified by
us, whether by doing Phil. 1. 20.
or suffering; whether by life or death.

6. A special badge of a Disciple 6. Love of the brethren, a special badge of
a true Christian.
is charity: John 13. 35. By this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if
ye love one another. Every man's disciples are known by some special badge or
cognizance: Moses disciples by circumcision, feasts, and sacrifices. The
Scribes and Pharisees disciples by fastings, watchings, phylacteries, long
prayers, and the like. But a true note, whereby a Disciple of Christ may be
known, is christian love; being an immediate fruit of christian faith: where
Gal. 5. 6.
that fire is, it will appear in this heat and light; for faith works H^b.
2. 4.
by love: and he that walks by faith, walks in love; and he 2 Cor. 5. 7.
that is joined to the Head by faith, is united to the members by Ephesians. 5. 2.
love.

But art thou a Disciple, and live Rejection of them that want it.
in uncharitableness, envy, malice, slandering, lying, or any the like sin?
Know,

1. A Disciple is borne of God, 1.
and bears the image of his Father, who is love, 1 John 4. 8. this then is a
birth from hell, and an issue of him, who is a manslayer John 8. 44.
from the beginning.

2. The Disciples had the presence, 2.
leading, and inhabitation of the Spirit of God, and consequently, the bond of
the Spirit, which is love, the fairest fruit of Ephesians. 4. 3. Gal. 5. 22.
the Spirit, by which Christians are knit together, and made of one spirit. But
is the uncharitable wretch led or inhabited by this Spirit, or by the spirit
that lusts Jam 4. 5.
after envy? Such may say to Christ, as the Jews, We are none of thy
Disciples, but Moses disciples; John 9. 28.
or rather, we are neither thy disciples nor Moses, but of Jannes and Jambres,
and Judas, 2 Timothy 3. 8.
who resisted both Moses and Christ.

3. A Disciple is a member of 3.
the Church, a chief subject in the Kingdom of Christ; but a malicious man is
none of Christ's Kingdom: for when a man is brought into the Kingdom of
Christ, the Lion and Lamb feed Isa. 11. 6. 7. 8.
together, the child and cockatrise: Now he puts off his fierce nature, his
lionish, aspish, waspish and poysonfull disposition; he is now of a wolf and
devourer made tame and tractable, as a Lamb of Christ's fold, and as a child
of God his Father: inunion both with head and members, and acknowledges all
the ties and bonds between himself and his fellow members: They are children
of one Father and Mother, God and the Church; brethren of the same elder
brother, Jesus Christ; of one household of Gal. 6. 10.
faith; sit at the same table, clothed with the same suits, heirs of the same
inheritance; and can John 4. 9.
these live as Jews and Samaritans?

4. The Disciples respected all Christ's commandments; but 4. Niltam commendat
Christianam animam, quam misericordia. Ambr. offic. l. 1. cap. 11. Joh. 13. 34.
that which above all Christ was so earnest in, they would not forget, his new
commandment of loving one another: Col. 3. 13. and 1 Pet. 4. 8. Above all
things put on love. What, above faith, confidence, prayer, and the like? No;
faith is the parent of love: but above all graces that bind man to man, of
which the Apostle there speaks. It is the sinews in the body, the cement in
the house, without which all were but cobling and confusion. He is no Disciple,
no living stone, who is not coupled with this cement, called the bond of
perfection. Col. 3. 14.


Well, get those graces in truth, and be not discouraged for their weakness.
(For how weak were the Disciples while Christ was with them?) Christ will yet
acknowledge thee a Disciple, if men do not, and own thee when thou dare
scarce own him.

[Let him deny himself.]
Here our Savior propounds The first duty and note of a Disciple.
the first note and trial of a Disciple, the renouncing or forsaking of
himself: Where

1. What is meant by himself. Four things in it.
2. The difficulty of this precept. 3. The necessity of obeying it. 4. The use.
For the first of these. By himself I. What is meant by ones self.
are meant,

1. Things outward: that is, concerning the outward man, yet so near him, as
they are after 1. Outward things.
a sort himself: Not only his riches, which a man is willing to hold as fast
as his life; nor only his friends, which are most dear, as a second self: but
even his name, his liberty, his life it self, all which must be willingly and
cheerfully given up to God, and denied rather than Christ and his truth; that a
man may say with Peter, Master, we have left all to follow thee, Mat. 19. 27.

2. Things inward, which can 2. What inward things must be denied.
hardly be distinguished from himself, and which yet come nearer the quick;
as namely, a man's whole corrupt nature: And here, taking it to pieces,

First, he must deny all the wisdom of the flesh, which is 1. Romans 8. 7.
enmity to God. And till this be done, there is no savouring of the things of
God, no relish in Gods word, wisdom, or ways.

2. He must deny his own 2.
corrupt will, which is contrary to Gods will, and only seeks how it may
please it self. And till this be denied, well thou may say, Thy will be
done, but it shall be by others, not by thy self.

3. He must deny all his own 3.
corrupt, carnal, and unmortified passions and affections; as carnal love,
fear, hatred, anger, and the like: for even all these branches must be
stocked up with the root.

4. He must deny all his own 4. Qui dep^ni^ v^terem hominem cum operibus suis,
abnegat s^ipsum, etc. Hieron. in Matthew.
wicked inclinations, the streams and incessant stirrings of natural
corruption, as apt to be kindled as any Gunpowder by the least spark: whether
more common to the nature of man, or more proper to a man's own person, as
hastiness, pronenesse to revenge, to hatred, injustice, or the like.

5. He must denial wicked 5.
habits and sins, the acting of lusts and vices; as all intemperance, rotten
speech, uncleanness, covetousness, wrath, envy, pride, idleness, and the
like; that a man live not now to himself, but Romans 14. 7.
wholly to Christ whom he professes to follow.

In a word, all selfe-respects, Non dixit, neget, sed abneget, ut hac
adje^^iun^^la plurimum addat, etc. Greg. Phil. 3. 7. 8. II. The difficulty of
this duty.
selfe-seeking, selfe-aymes must be renounced, and the Christian wholly vanish
into nothing, and all things in the world become dross and doung in comparison
of Christ.

Next, of the difficulty. Who sees not by this time what a difficult precept
our Savior has enjoined every one of his followers? even the cutting off of
hands, and plucking out of eyes, Mar. 9 43. 47.
the most necessary and tender parts, and casting them away. To discern which
difficulty a little more distinctly:

1. Consider the neernesse of things to be denied. Were it only Seen in 3.
things. 1.
in things without us, as to part with friends and riches, this were a
difficult commandment to flesh, as appears in the examples both of him that
must first Luke 9. 59.
bury his father, and bid his friends farewell, as also of the young man that
left Christ because of his possessions. But when it comes Mat. 19. 22
so close to us, as to lead us out of our own reason, wisdom and judgment,
what an hard province proves it? For, who thinks not his reason nearer him
than his religion? what worldly-wise man can yield to that of the Apostle, That
he must become a fool to be 1 Cor. 3. 18.
wise? To advise a man to despise lands, liberty, and life for his profession,
were to wish a man to hate his own flesh, which no man in his wits ever did.
To persuade to the keeping under of lusts, and to the forgoing of dearling
sins, is, to cut them short of meat and drink: these are sweet morsels,
which they hide under Job 20. 12.
their tongues, and will not let go.

2. Natural pride and self-love 2.
is such, that it is with us as with Solomon in the days of his folly, Eccles.
2. 10. Whatsoever mine eyes desired, I withheld it not. Nay, we wish so well
to our selves, as we could not offer the least wrong to our least and lowest
joint, nor endure it of others. We are so far from crossing our selves, that
we endure not any other should cross us, or deny us in our persons or corrupt
lusts. Haman is sick on his bed, because Mordecai denies him obeisance. If
John deny Herod his Herodias, he shall dye for it. If Jonas lose his gourd,
he will be angry to the death. If a man touch Lamech, he will revenge seventy
times seven times. Such impatiency and impotency is in our nature, if we be
crossed in our wills.

3. Distrust in God, and trust 3.
in the means, makes the precept yet more difficult. We see not easily how
we can do well without friends, wealth, liberty, favor, preferments. Wisdom
(we say) is good with an inheritance, Eccles. 7. we would be on the sunny
side, and on the gathering hand; and it is a sore thing to forsake all; which
makes the young man go sad away from Mat. 19. 22
Christ himself. God in his creatures we can better content our selves
withal, than either in himself or in his Son. Our unbeleeving hearts see the
gift better than the giver. We cannot live by promises; something we would
have in hand, and are loath to let all our hold go.

Ye see the necessity of self-denial. III. The necessity of doing it.
Our Lord was not ignorant how this precept is an hard saying, able to
discourage any from once thinking to follow him, or become a Disciple: And
therefore his great wisdom would not have laid this ground for a foundation,
if it had not bin so necessary, as without it the whole frame of profession
would prove ruinous: For,

1. The Context affirms a In six respects.
twofold necessity of this selfedeniall; 1. Si peril homo amando se, profecto
invenitur negando se. Aug. ser. 77. de diversis.
both in the words immediately going before (for without it a man cannot be a
Disciple of Christ;) and in the words immediately following: for whereas every
Christian must be acquainted with the cross, no man can take up his cross
patiently, who has not first denied himself; and therefore that is rightly set
after this.

2. The corruption of nature is 2. Non potes perfectam possidere libertatem,
nisi totaliter abneges temetispsum. De imitat. Christi, li. 3. cap. 32.
such before grace, as that a man in every thing is wholly tainted, and
contrary to the image of God. Now all that vicious disposition must be
renounced, before Gods image can be renewed, even as all old rubbish must be
carried away, before a new frame can be reared.

3. All true wisdom is lost by the fall, and an infinite lump 3.
of folly bound up in the heart of every Pro. 22. 15.
natural man. Now though true wisdom be offered again in the word, yet can
it never be embraced before the other be displaced, no more than light can be
manifest, before darkness be chased away.

4. The Gospel offers Christ 4. Mat. 9. 12. and 10. 6.
as a Physician only to the sick and diseased, and as a Savior to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. And therefore necessarily must a man deny all the
means he can make or devise to help himself, before he can come to see what
need he has of Christ. He must come first to discern his misery and lost
estate, before he can believe and rely on Christ for salvation.

5. The whole scope of the 5.
Word is that golden rule of all the Law and Prophets; namely, to teach us to
love God and Christ above all, and our neighbor for Mat. 22. 37. 39.
his sake as our selves. And therefore that corruption of nature, whereby every
man loves himself, and seeks himself and his own profits, rather than
Gods glory and his neighbors good, must be denied before we can take out any
lesson of the word.

6. No obedience can be acceptably 6. Vigila super teipsum, excita teipsum,
admone teipsum, and quicquid de aliis sit, non negligas teipsum. Tantum
proficies, quantum tibi ipsi vim intuleris. De imitat. Christi, l. 1. c. 25.
performed to God without self-denial: for many commandments are hard and
difficult, as that to Abraham of killing his son: many are dangerous that may
cost a man his life, as John's Ministry did: many are costly, and may cost a
man his whole estate. Now never can any of these be cheerfully and willingly
undertaken, till these strong holds of flesh in man be demolished. A man may
profess himself a servant of Christ: but little is the service he shall do
him, till this be done.

As wise master builders therefore IV. Use. Exhortation to selfedeniall.
are most careful in laying the lowest and first stone, so must we begin the
building of Christianity where our Lord enjoynes us; namely, in the denial of
our selves. Fail in this foundation, Mischiefs by not beginning herein.
Fecerunt civitates duas, amores duo: terrenam scilicet amorsui, usque ad
contemptum Dei^coelestem vero amor Dei usque ad contemptum sui. Aug. de Civ.
Dei. l. 14. 2. Ephesians. 2. 2.
and the whole frame of Christianity tottereth, and falls to the ground: For,

1. Can a servant please his Master, or a wife her husband, who denies not her
self, and subjects not her will to his? And can thou be wedded to Christ,
and not subject thy will to his?

2. Whence do men follow the course of the world, and will be taught no
better? (they must swear, and lie, and drink, and rail, and serve the times,
and persons, and pleasures:) but because they think it folly and preciseness
to deny themselves or their ordinary liberties to follow Christ: And,

3. Is it from any other cause 3.
that men thrust themselves into Gods chair of estate, to revenge their own
wrongs, and challenge, and take challenges into the field, to the perpetrating
of horrible murders; or else basely stabbe and wound; but because they think
it disgrace and cowardice to deny a man's self, and to put up the least wrongs?

4. Whence is it else, that many pretend to follow Christ, but 4.
upon condition they may not deny themselves? for they must be gainers by their
religion, which must be another Diana, to bring profit to the Crafts-Masters.
Have Act. 19. 24.
those learned self-denial, that measure their religion by their gettings,
but will be sure to be no losers by it? like the Swallows, that will take
their Summer with us, but not our Winter.

5. Whence is it, that some in 5.
case of necessity can cast no part of their superfluity into the Treasury,
when the widow can cast in all that ever she had? And Ananias and Sapphira that
had not denied themselves, could give three parts of their estate away to pious
uses; and how far are most behind them, who profess self-denial? Nay, it
is the sin of many great professors, that what need soever Christ in his
members has, they must remit nothing of their costly apparel, full diet, and
following of fashions; which show them lovers of 2 Timothy 3. 4.
pleasures more than of God. Crumbes now and then they can part withal, but
endure no de^riment, no abatement. These certainly have not yet denied
themselves.

6. Whence is all the denial 6.
of Christ at this day, but for want of self-denial? Why did Peter Qui
leviter ac desunctorie ad pietatis doctrinam accesserunt, -- exaruerunt. Naz.
orat. 3.
deny his Lord, but because he could not deny himself? Whence are so many
Apostates and Demasses in our age, that fall to Popery, to novelties, to false
or no worship, but for want of self-denial? They must please, and rise, and
serve the times and themselves, and the appetites of Patrons, and then farewell
Christ and his truth.

This was the cause, that many Disciples walked no more with him, John 6. 66.
for they could not deny their own wisdom to subscribe to his. And many among
the Rulers believed in him, but durst not confess him, because they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God, chapt. 12. 42. 43.

Quest. But the duty being so necessary, as without it can be no Christianity;
and so difficult, as scarce one of a thousand is willing to undertake it; what
are Quo^usquisque haec adimplevit? sed quae penes homines difficilia, penes
Deum facilia. Tert. de idol. c. 12. Helps to further this difficult duty. 1.
the helps and means, by which we may be forwarded herein? for the Lord has
not left us destitute of means, if we be not wanting to our selves.

Answ. True: And therefore,

1. We must not conceive it natural for a man to cross his corrupt nature;
for nature fortifies it self in all the holds: It must be therefore a superior
fire that must descend to make a man hate himself for the love of God and
Christ. Regeneration is a work of the Spirit, and strength to overcome our
selves is not from our selves. And therefore we must pray for the truth of
this grace of Regeneration; and never be at rest till we find it in our
selves in some degree of it, encouraging our selves in that promise that the
Spirit is given to those that ask him, and is powered Luke 11. 13. Isa. 44. 3.
on the thirsty grounds.

2. Consider what an advantage 2.
it will be to take our selves in hand before our lusts be grown strong in
us, and how they are far more easily denied in the first motion and rising of
them, than when they have seated themselves with delight in the affections and
members, and are grown from motions to acts, from acts to customs, from
customs to habits, and from habits to another nature, that is, after a sort
become the man himself, that he can as soon leave to be himself, as leave
these. And therefore we must subscribe to the wisdom of Jesus Christ, who
enjoynes it as the very first work of Christianity, fit to be first set upon.

3. As it must be the first, so also 3. Self-denial the first and continued
act of a Christian.
the continued act of a Christian, to stand in the denial of himself, seeing
the enemy continually uses our own natural inclinations against us to our
own hurt: he plowes with our own heifers, even those lusts in any kind which
he finds not thoroughly denied. We must therefore instantly watch them, and try
them, and finding them corrupt, presently cut them off, and deny them.

And because they are not denied, Pensem^s quomodo Paulus se abuegaverat, qui
dicebat, Vivo autem jam non ego. Extinctus quippe suerat sevus ille persecutor,
et vivere coeperat pius praedicator. Greg. in Evang. hom. 32.
till the contrary be practiced, our care must be that the room of our
hearts be taken up with good desires and motions, and the lustings of the
Spirit, which being contrary, will keep out, and keep under the lusts of the
flesh. And indeed this is the strongest denial of our selves, when we are
strongly resolved in our selves, rather to be sufferers than doers in any
wicked motion; and retain with us a steadfast purpose to please God in all
things, though it be with the displeasure of our selves, and all the world.

4. Whereas the high mountains of pride resist this self-denial, 4.
Preservatives against pride, which hinders self-denial.
we must labor for the grace of humility, which only can bring these
mountains into a plain. To which end consider thy own estate,

1. What it is by nature; and that is such, as thou have no cause 1.
to be proud of it: as, what cause has a condemned rebel to be proud in
going to execution?

2. That it can be no better by grace, till thou be humble: 2.
God gives grace only to them; and the raines of grace fall off the
mountains, and water only the valleys to fruitfulness.

3. What it ought to be by grace. Still humble and lowly. 3.
Grace is as the light in the soul, that discovers all our defects and spots,
and all the nasty corners in our hearts, to keep us low.

4. What thou art restored to 4.
in Christ, both in grace and glory, but all upon condition of self-denial:
for neither Christ nor the Christian have any other way to the crown, but by
the cross; and no reigning with Christ, but upon condition of suffering with
him.

So of the fourth means.

5. Whereas distrustfulnesse of heart wedgeth and rivetteth us 5. Also against
distrustfulnes, which hinders it.
into the world, so as a man cannot easily command his heart off the least
unlawful gain of it (and much less the whole) for Christ; Labor daily for
the strengthening of faith in the providence of God, and bring thy heart to
lean upon that, and not upon thy self, or any inferior means. For which
purpose,

First, consider what a base folly 1
it is, to seek after vain and earthly contents, and in the mean time neglect
and despise heavenly. What other is it, but to catch at shadows?

Secondly, set the promise ever 2.
before thee: that to them that seek the Kingdom of God first, every good
thing shall be Mat. 6. 33.
ministered in due season. And what an high indignity is it, to trust an honest
man on his word, but not God without a pawn?

Thirdly, observe his special 3.
providence to thy self and thine for time past, in all things, and thou
shall not find cause to distrust him for time to come. So Abraham raised that
Proverb, God will provide in the Mount, Genesis 22. 14
and in the Mount God will be seen. David can deny himself 1 Samuel 17. 37.
and his own strength, leaning on the assured experience of Gods strength in
the Lion and Bear.

Quest. But this duty being so difficult, we had need have good encouragements
to excite our dullness, and provoke our backwardness unto it. What spurs
therefore or motives have we to quicken us thereunto?

Answ. Look what way we will, we want not motives unto it.

1. Look at Christ; he denied Encouragements to this harsh work of
self-denial.
himself for us: he forsook all, father and mother, lands and liberty, and
life it self, yea heaven and happiness for us. We cannot deny so much for
him; 1.
and all ours is but a thankful return to him.

2. Look to the world, which 2. Nil me juvabunt fines mundi, nec regna hujus
seculi: melius est ^ihi emori propter Jesum Christum, quam imperare
finibusterrae. Ignat. ad Romans Psalm. 120. 5. 6.
has us in such bands, and is so hardly denied: It will leave us, and deny us;
the fashion of the world passes away: it denies us any continuing city here,
denies us a resting place, and all that we should deny it. It is as Egypt to
the Israel of God, full of burdens and oppressions: as Mesech to David; and it
should be their woe, that they are forced to dwell in Mesech. But this is the
folly of men: Every one complains of the badnesse of it, but none are willing
to leave it, neither in affection nor action.

3. Look on the right hand: 3.
we want not clouds of examples of the Saints, who have denied themselves for
Christ. Moses denied Heb. 11. 25. 26.
the honors and profits of the Court, desplsed the treasures of Egypt, refused
to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and chused to suffer with Gods
people. Abraham denied himself in Genesis 22. 16
his own bowels, in his only son Isaac. Others left all to follow Mat. 19. 27.
Christ, as the Disciples. Others have followed him out of Jerusalem, Heb. 13.
12. 13. Rev. 12. 11
even to the cross. Others sold all to buy the pearl. Others loved not their
lives unto death, for Ignis, crux, -- and diaboti tormenta in me veniant,
tantummodo ut Jesum nanciscar ^dem ibid.
the testimony of Christ. Neither fire, nor sword, nor any torment could hinder
the Martyrs from Christ; they would fetch him out of the fire, and exchange all
their peace and outward contentments with most exquisite torments.

4. Look on the left hand: we have hypocrites forsaking much 4.
for Gods favor: we have Baals Priests lancing and tormenting themselves, to
uphold their Idolatry: And Micah 6. 6. Where with (say the hypocrites) shall we
come before the Lord? they will bring thousands of rams, and ten thousand
rivers of oil: they will part with the firstborn of their bodies, for the
sin of their souls.

Besides these, we have the Papists charging us, that we will forsake nothing
for our profession, while they give all to the Church, and betake themselves to
voluntary poverty, and beat down their bodies with fastings, whippings, and
watchings: We are enemies to fasting, we feed and fat our lusts, and our
religion is an enemy to all charity and good works. Wherein although they be
liars and deceivers, as well in that they do themselves, as that they say of
us; yet indeed they have too much ground of our reproach, in the filthy, loose,
carnal, and covetous life of a number of professed Christians. But shall
hypocrites and Idolaters get before us in self-denial? etc.

5. Look to the end of our 5. Si^ olerum pl^lae tra^sponuntur, ut proficiaeu:
Unde enin videntur^ii perdidsse quod cra^t, inde incipiunt apparere quod non
erant. Greg. ubi supr.
self-denial: there meets us Gods promise with a full horn and hand, and
will not let us be losers by the bargain. All the loss shall be made up with
an infinite return and advantage. For, Whosoever shall forsake house,
brethren, sisters, father or mother, wife or children, or lands for my sake and
the Gospels, he shall receive an hundred fold for the present, houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands with persecution;
and in the world to come eternal life: Here is usury enough, above ten in the
hundred, yea an hundred for ten, yea for one, Mar. 10. 30.

Quest. But what are the signs or marks of self-denial?

Ans. One is in regard of God: Notes of one that denies himself.
it will cast a man wholly out of himself upon God, as David, Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in heaven 1.
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. It will
look directly at God in all things. In doing things it will do all by Gods
rule; it will do all for his glory: the love of God 2 Cor. 5. 14.
constrains it to duty. In duties of piety or charity it seeks not the own
things, not private profit, nor is carried by the aims that flow from
self-love; but aims at the Kingdom it self, and the promoting of Gods glory
in his own salvation.

The second is in respect of 2.
Christ: for whom he esteems all things loss and doung, Phil. 3. 8. These
inferior comforts are but as the starlight in respect of the brightness of
the Sun, which is in his eye: for Christ he can want as well as abound, be
empty as Phil. 4. 11. 12.
well as full, yea be nothing, that Christ may be all in all.

The third is in respect of the word of God; self-denial bewrayes 3. Four
things that self-denial does in respect of the Word. Regards whatever God
teaches. Act. 10. 33.
it self sundry ways:

1. It goes with an open heart to hear, learn, and obey whatsoever God shall
please to teach: He cannot be a Disciple, that brings not self-denial. Can
he that sticks to his own reason, and denies not his own wisdom, ever
believe that life must be fetched out of death, that one man can be healed by
another man's stripes and wounds, that heaven must be fetched out of hell, and
a glorious resurrection out of dust and ashes? He will never be a Disciple,
that will receive the word no further than he sees reason to do it. But a true
Disciple is described, Isa. 32. 3. The eyes of the seeing shall not be shut,
and the ears of them that hear shall hearken: And David desires but to be
taught, and promises to obey, Psalm. 119. 33.

2. It is willing to be acquainted Loves it all, even reproves.
with every part of Gods will, that he may frame his own will unto it, as
knowing that every truth of God concerns every one of Gods people, and is
profitable for them to know, 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. and Romans 15. 4. And hence
self-denial loves reproves, and likes that Ministry best, which most
searches the conscience, and in which is the most power of God, judging and
rebuking his own sin: there if he be wounded, he is sure to be cured. But
far is he from the denial of his sin or himself, that hates and storms
against him that dislikes and censures his sin. Ahab had sold himself to
wickedness: and therefore hates Micaiah, because he never prophesied good unto
him.

3. Having heard the word, it Quarrels not, but submits.
subscribes to it, and dares not cavil or dispute against it, be it never so
contrary to nature, or cross to our desires. Self-denial allows every
thought to be brought into the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. It checks the
stubbornness of heart, and says as Romans 9. 20. O man, who art thou that
disputest against God! who art thou that risest against the truth of God? See
Job 6. 24.

4. Self-denial in love to the Suffers, rather than the truth should suffer.
truth of the word resolves to suffer any thing, rather than to renounce any
part of that it is persuaded to be the truth of God: so did the Martyrs. And
without this readiness to suffer disgrace and loss for the truth, if we be
called, we can neither be Martyrs nor Disciples; we can have no acquaintance
with Christ here, nor be saved hereafter, Luke 14. 26.

So of the third note.

The fourth is in respect of himself: He that has denied 4. Resignation to
God for prosperity,
himself, will desire no way of prosperity but Gods own, nor rely upon his
own means, strength, policy, diligence, nor sacrifice to his own net in
successes; but ascribe all his prosperity unto God: it is he that gives him
power to get substance, it is he that gives the fruit of the Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
womb, the dew of heaven, the fat of earth, that spreads his table, fills his
cup, etc. Inadversity Of adversity.
he will be willingly what God will have him to be, sick or poor, pained or
disgraced; he will not carve for himself, but suffer his father to choose his
rod, and not limit him for the manner or measure of correction; and all this
without murmuring or impatience: and dares avoid no evil by any evil means.

The fifth note is in respect of others: 5. He is useful to others, though
enemies.
He that has denied himself, lives not to himself, but procures the good of
others, and advances to his power every man's wealth and good; as being now a
public good, though a private man. He can do good to his enemies, and pray for
them that curse him, and wrong him. He looks not on men, as they are affected
to himself, but as he ought to be affected to them. And he that cannot deny
and displease himself, can never please his neighbor for good and
edification; which is the Apostles argument, Romans 15. 2. Let us not please our
selves, but our neighbor for edification: for Christ pleased not himself, etc.

The sixth and last note of self-denial 6.
is the life of faith, beyond and without all means of help. Abraham, denying
himself, distrusted He can live by faith, whatever means be, or be not.
not when means failed. Faith leanes not upon means, but upon God; and is not
tied to means, but to God, and will say, Our God is in heaven, and does
whatsoever he will, be there means or no, Psalm. 115. 3. The Prince could not
deny his reason, 2 Kin. 7. 19. If God should make windows in heaven, could
this come to pass? but it cost him his life. And good Zachary could not deny
himself, but doubted of Gods word; and God denied him his speech for forty
weeks, Luke 1. 30.

As nothing gives more glory to God than faith, so nothing takes so much from
man. Nothing makes him so little in himself as faith, which acknowledges God
so great.

By these signs we may examine what measure of self-denial we have
attained, and thereby know what fitness we have to be Disciples.

[Take up his cross.]
This is the second branch of the Precept, to take up the cross, The second
duty and note of a Disciple. Luke 9. 23. Three things in it.
and as Saint Luke says, daily. Where, for the meaning, consider;

1. What is this cross. 2. Why it is called the cross. 3. What to take it up.
For the first of these. By the cross is not meant any affliction I. What the
cross i^.
which belongs to the common calamities of nature, to which all men of all
sects and professions are subject; nor any thing suffered by evil doers: But
properly the cross of a Christian is that affliction and suffering, which is
inflicted upon any for the profession of Christ and his truth, and for
well-doing: Called the suffering of a Christian, 1 Pet. 4. 16. and Paul calls it
the sufferings of Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5. and bearing of his reproach, Heb. 13.
13. that is,

1. From him: his fan, to fifth and purge us. 2. For him: endured for his
cause and glory. 3. His in his mystical body, not natural. 4. Not in respect
of merit, but of sympathy.
But why is it called the cross? II. Why it is called the cross. 1.


1. Because of the union between Christ and the Christian; so it is a part of
Christ's own cross: for, as all the members suffered with Christ on the cross,
as their head and surety; so he suffers with them as his members, and after a
sort hangs still on their cross. The head and members of this body are
inseparable.

2. That we should never think of the troubles for Christ, but cast our eyes
also upon the cross of Christ, where we shall see him sanctifying,
sweetening, and conquering all our sorrows, and behold him a companion,
partner, and yoke fellow, bearing for us the heavy and ponderous end, and the
greatest part off us.

3. That in all our sufferings for Christ we should support 3.
our faith and patience in beholding what was the end of Christ's cross, and so
expect the same happy end and issue of our crosses for Christ; that as he
passed from the cross to the Crown, so will he in the end admit us into the
fellowship of his crown and glory, whom he has vouchsafed as Simons and
companions in the bearing of his own cross, which is an unspeakable help and
support to our perseverance.

Next, what is it to take up the III.
cross?

It is not to devise a voluntary What it is to take it up.
affliction for a man's self: as Baals Priests lanced themselves, and Negatively.
Popish Priests and Proselytes at set times afflict and torture their bodies by
whipping cheer, to merit thereby.

Neither is it to run into affliction, or pull the cross upon our shoulders,
or thrust our selves into danger, no not for Christ, as Peter thrust himself
into Caiaphas hall.

For first, Christ did not carry his cross, till it was laid upon Reasons that
we may not pull the cross on our selves.
him. Secondly, our rule is, to use all good means for the preservation of our
bodies, health, wealth, strength, and comfort. Christ himself did fly
persecution, 1.
till the time was come; and 2.
commanded his Disciples if they were persecuted in one city, to fly into
another. Thirdly, every bearing of affliction must be an 3.
obedience of faith; and therefore must be grounded upon a commandment of
God. No soldier must of his own head raise war against his own peace, nor
set fire upon his own house; this is not the part of a good soldier, but of a
mutinous and seditious fellow: So no soldier of Christ must be superfluous in
suffering, but see he be pressed into the battle by the great General and
Commander. Fourthly, we may 4.
not tempt God by running before him, but follow him going before us. If without
sin, and with good conscience we may escape danger, and do not, we run upon
it, and it becomes our own cross, and not Christ's.

It is enough to suffer wrong; we must not offer wrong to our own persons. We
are not bound to seek the cross, nor make it, but to bear and take it up: Nor
to fill the cup for our selves, but to drink it when God reaches it. Our
afflictions must not be a cup of our own brewing, or a potion of our own
providing, but the Father must give it us: John 18. 11. Shall not I drink of
the cup, which my Father has given?

To take up the cross therefore Affirmatively. Description of taking up the
cross. Four motives.
is, When a cross meets us in our way, which we cannot without sin and breach
of conscience escape, we must now take knowledge of Gods will, Gods hand, Gods
time, and Gods voice calling us to suffer: And as Christ, when his cross was
laid upon him, took it upon him, and bare it willingly, meekly and cheerfully;
so must we by enduring the cross declare our obedience to God, our love to
Jesus Christ, and our zeal to his truth. This is to take up the cross. Now
God laying on the cross, we must not pull away the shoulder, nor hide our
selves from the cross under the covert of sinful shifts, nor avoid it by any
unlawful means, but take it up, and buckle to the burden.

And this (says Luke) must be Why it must be taken up daily.
done daily: that is, 1. Every Christian must be in a daily expectation of the
cross: 2. He must not prescribe unto God how long or 1.
how much to exercise him; no, 2.
though it were all the days of his life. 3. That we should renew our
strength daily to the daily 3.
conflict; seeing it is the trial of soundness, to abide with Christ Luke 22.
28.
in tentation, and the fruit of it shall be to abide with him in his glory.

Two points may here be noted.

1. No Christian but has his Doctr. 1. Every Christian has his cross.
cross; it being the very badge and mark of a Disciple: and, Christ and his
cross are inseparable.

For first, the word is passed, All that will live godly in Jesus Christ,
Reason 1.
must suffer persecution; and if every one, none certainly is excepted, 2 Timothy
3. 12. Act. 14. 22. Heb. 12. 6. Rev. 3. 19. And, what befalls the whole, the
parts cannot avoid: Isa. 54. 11. he says of the whole Church, O thou that art
tossed with tempests, etc.

Secondly, there must be a conformity 2. Dei filius sustinuit ignominiam
crucis: and tu beatos putas, qui soelicita^^ ^tius seculi and deliciis
per(...)untur? Hieron.
between Christ and the Christian, as between the head and the member. But it
behoved Christ first to suffer, and then to enter into his glory: and our
tenure is the same, the Disciple is not above his Master; if they call him
Beelzebub, what shall we be called? if they did so to the green tree, they
will never spare the dry; if all his innocence and wisdom could not fence
him, no more will ours fence us: if they persecuted me, they will persecute
you also.

Thirdly, if we consider the causes of the cross, this truth 3. Two causes of
the cross never wanting.
will be better cleared. One, the rage of Satan against Christ and his truth,
who incessantly tempts, buffetteth, and terrefieth the godly. Whom he cannot
hinder of salvation, he will of comfort, so much as he can. If there can be
hope, that he will cease to be malicious, so may there be of the ceasing of
our vexations. The other, the wicked of the world, 2.
carried by the spirit that rules in the world, will see the godly shall want
no exercise: For no Christian, as a Christian, can please the wicked world. No
communion can be expected between light and darkness: Nay, there cannot but
be separation, fight, and persecution. Ye shall be hated of all men for my
Names sake, Mat. 10. 22. And, Prove. 29. 27. The just is an abomination to the
wicked. Hence are they proclaimed enemies, as traitors, heretics, and the
offscouring of the world; even as Christ on the cross was accounted the most
^lagitious fellon of all other, and far worse than Barrabas: Yea, he was
thought so unmeet to live in Jerusalem, that he was thought unworthy to dye in
Jerusalem, but must be carried without the gate. Hence also is all that
cart-load of reproaches and invectives, yea bonds and banishment, stripes and
contempts, fire and sword, and all the most exquisite torments, which rage is
witty to devise against the innocent lambs and sheep of Christ.

Fourthly, the cross is necessary, both in regard of the godly, 4.
and of the wicked.

1. To the godly, afflictions Sicu^ cibus adhaeret vast in quo coquitur, nisi
amoveatur, ac perditsaporem debitum, debitumque colorem: sic cor hominis
adhaeret isti mundo, nisi amoveatur per tribulationes. De contempl. ver. pat..
3.
are often as necessary as meat and drink. For prosperity is as a dead sea, and
ease slays the foolish, Pro. 1. 32. Standing waters contract mud, and breed
vermin. A still body fills with bad humors. Fallow and unstirred grounds are
fruitful in weeds. And therefore God in great wisdom by trials shakes them
out of security, and makes them more watchful of themselves, more fit to do
good and to comfort others. Scowring makes metals brighter, and more useful.

2. In regard of the wicked the cross is necessary, that it may be as a fan
and plain distinction Mat. 3. 12. Triticum percussum de palia sua exi^it ^oras,
etc. Chrysostom. ibid.
between the godly and them. The working Ox is continually bound; but those
that are reserved for the slaughter have scope in fat pastures: So this
difference the Lord appointed, when he made the way narrow, and the gate
strait that leads to life, and few to find it.

Another reason why the Lord has yoked the Christian to the 5.
cross, is, because he will thence fetch a strong argument to confound Satan,
who will be ready to allege against the Christian as against Job, that he
serves not Job. 1. 9.
God for naught. But he will have it appear, that his servants love Christ and
Religion for it self, not for ease, wealth, or any outward respect. And,
greater or more sincere love cannot be testified, than by suffering for him.

Of all this it follows, that the Use 1. The cross no sign of Gods hatred.
cross is no sign God hates a man, but rather is a sign of his love, and a
proof of our legitimation: for, if you be without correction, whereof all
(sons) are partakers, ye are bastards, and not sons, Hebr. 12. 8. Neither
our selves nor others may give false witness of us for our sufferings: but
still say as Job in the midst of his abasement, God forbid that ever I should
take away mine innocence from my self: until I dye, I will keep my
righteousness, Job 27. 5. And when, we have Satan assailing us, and his
instruments aggravating Gods hand against us, our own hand had not need be on
our selves too: but now we must stand to our selves, and gather conclusions for
our selves; and see love in stripes, and a fatherly affection lurking even in
sharp correction.

Again, let no man think he Use 2. Think not to get into heaven without
crosses.
can get to heaven so easily, but he shall well know how he comes there. All
the way is thick strawed with crosses, and there is no shunning of them. For,
seek to shift them by evil means, or laying down duty, thou have slipped
out of the way to heaven, and Christ is not before thee, who himself got not
the crown, but by the cross. How vain is it then to expect a paradise of
delight, in the time of our prison or pilgrimage? etc.

3. If the cross be the badge Use 3. Still expect the cross, when it will
come.
of every Disciple, let us be wise to expect the cross aforehand. The Church
is compared to a camp: look not to be in a camp without war and blows, and
the ordinary hazzards of it. To a ship, and Noah's Arc: thou can not be in a
ship, nor in the Arc without a world of waters, waves, winds, and dangers. To
the Lords corn standing in the field: think not then to escape the sickle,
floor, flaile, millstone, oven, and such like. To the Lords Vineyard: let never
a cluster look to escape the press. To Christ's fold: and not one of the flock
but must look for shearing and shambles. To the Lords building: and every
living stone laid in this house must be hewn and squared; the axe or hammer
must fit them. Never is the Paschall Lamb eaten, but with ^owre herbs; and,
Christ and his cross are never separated.

4. Is our suffering a part of Use 4. Comfort under the cross, threefold.
Christ's cross? here then is exceeding comfort to the Saints in their
suffering: three ways,

1. In that we have such a partner, 1.
Heb. 12. 2. Rev. 1. 9. It will be a singular encouragement, when we conceive
our selves but as Simons, helping Christ to bear his cross. If Christ were on
earth, and we saw him fainting under a burden, he would think himself happy
that might lend him an hand to ease him. We are indeed like Simon, who
willingly bear not, but must be compelled to bear his cross: For Mat. 27. 32
violence must be offered to nature, and the flesh will be resisting the
spirit. Peter, when he was an old Disciple, must be girded and led whither he
would not, John 21. 18.

2. In that we have Christ 2.
himself at the other end of the cross, helping and supporting us. He is of
power to carry the heavy end, and bear off the weight from us. He has
promised his presence, and cannot be absent; but as our Head, condoleth and
compassionateth our grief.

3. In that we have all the Saints our companions, even the 3.
whole Church, either going before us, or with us, or coming after us in this
way. How can we sink, having so many shoulders under our burden? or how can we
miscarry in a way beaten by the feet of all the Prophets, Apostles, and
faithful Pastors and Believers in the world? Discourage not thy self: say
not, never any suffered such hard things as I do; thy sufferings are no other,
than such as befall the rest of the 1 Pet. 5. 9.
brethren. So of the former point.

2. Christians must not only Doctr. 2. Every Christian must take up his cross.
bear the cross, but take up the cross: For it is not the taking, or
bearing, but the taking up of the cross that is here a note of a Disciple. The
worst and wickedest have often as many miseries as others, but cannot take them
up, and christianly carry them. And indeed the nature of man is unwilling, and
prone to impatience, grudging, and complaints of suffering the least trouble,
and cannot easily take up any: And in taking up a cross is more difficulty,
than all the strength that is in nature can conquer.

Quest. Why? what is required in taking up the cross?

Answ. Five things.

1. A continual expectation Five things required thereunto. 1.
and a standing unfearfully in the station wherein God has set us, with a
strong resolution not to be discouraged therefore, though crosses come never so
thick. Expected evils smart less. Job waited for changes, and evils expected
Job 14. 14. and 3. 25.
came upon him; and how stoutly were they borne?

2. A contentedness to abide under a great burden, which is 2.
(...), the word for patience: as a man stands under the burden he has taken
up. Hereto unmortified flesh is very impatient; but where faith is, there is
not haste-making, Isa. 28. 16.

3. Love of GOD still, notwithstanding 3.
the cross: as an ingenuous child loves his father, even when he corrects
him; and this keeps him from murmuring and discontent, and frames him to stoop
under his fathers smiting hand contentedly. That is true love, which I show to
him that deals hardly with me.

4. Humility and silence; not 4.
disputing the matter with God, much less charging him foolishly; Job 1. 22.
but as David, Psalm. 39. 9. I held my tongue, and said nothing because thou, O
Lord, did it.

5. Joy and rejoicing, not in 5.
the smart of the cross, but in waiting the sweet fruit of it: Act^ 5. 41. the
Disciples rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer ^or the Name of
Christ. So in Luke 6. 23. and Jam. 1. 2.

A difficult thing to corrupt nature: Yet the Scripture presses it upon us
with strong reasons: as,

1. No cross is laid upon us, Reason 1.
but by the will and appointment of God: nothing falls out, but by his special
providence; not a Mat. 10. 29. 30.
Sparrow can fall to the ground, not an hair of the head, and much less the
head it self.

As our Lord Christ himself had not the cross laid on him, but by the
determinate counsel of God, Act. 2. 23. Herod, Pilate, the Gentiles, and the
people of Israel did nothing against him, but what the hand of God and his
determinate counsel appointed to Act. 4. 27.
be done: So is it in the members, no cross is laid on them but by Gods
determination. And as Christ told Pilate, Thou could Joh. 19. 11.
have no power over me, if it were not given thee of the Father; so may the
members say to their persecutors. And therefore those* that are to suffer
according to the will of God, must submit to his 1 Pet. 4. 19.
will, and commit themselves in well-doing to his revealed will: for, shall not
both the head and member drink of the cup which the Father has given?

2. We must therefore take up 2.
the cross, because this is the time and place of taking it up: John 16. 33.
In the world ye shall have tribulation. God has ordained this world to be a
dripping and watery seed time; and he must be content to sow in tears, Psa.
126. 51
that would reap in joy: and God can wipe away no tears hereafter, but such
as are shed here. The world to Christians is Gods furnace and fining pot, to
purify his gold, whereof he will frame his golden vessels: and while we are
earthly vessels, he will by crosses scowre us from the rust and filth of sin,
that sticks so fast to our natures.

3. We must willingly take 3. This duty makes us conformable to Christ:
them up, to show our selves both conformable to Christ, and serviceable.

Christ willingly took up his cross for us, and endured wounds, scarres and
marks in his body Heb. 12. 2.
for us: And so we must for him willingly bear his marks and scarres in our
body, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in our flesh, Col. 1.
24. and this made the Apostle rejoice in his sufferings, and glory in his
persecution for Christ, Gal. 6. 17. I bear in my body the marks of the Lord
Jesus. And indeed it is the glory of a -- narrat (...) vulnera miles.
Christian soldier to show the marks and scarres of his fortitude and valor
in a good cause, in his Princes quarrel, and for the honor of his Country.
See Luke 24. 26. and 2 Timothy 2. 11.

Again, to show our service And serviceable. Phil. 2. 7. 8.
and love to him. He became a servant, and was obedient to the death, and took
up his cross to endure a meritorious suffering, the price of our redemption.
We cannot so suffer for him, but must (...). Ignat. ad Ephesians.
in way of thankfulness endure the service of suffering, and not love our lives
to the death for him: Acts 20. 24. My life is not dear to me, so that I may
fulfill my course with joy. And wherein can a man more clearly express
himself a servant of Christ, than by suffering for righteousness sake, and by
maintaining his Lords honor and just quarrel to the death? 2 Timothy 2. 3.
Suffer affliction as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.

4. We may cheerfully take up 4. No fear of being overburdened by the cross.
the cross, because we know it shall not overburden us: for it is Christ's
cross, and he puts under his shoulder, and bears the weight-from us, and
supplies strength to us, to carry the light end of it: for he did suffer, to
succor Heb. 2. 17. 2.
them that suffer. Beside, we know that no afflictions can separate us from the
love of God in Christ, Romans 8. ult. When Christ was on the cross, our sins
separated between God and his sense, and made him cry out, My God, Mat. 27. 46.
my God, why have thou for saken me? But his promise has tied his aid and
presence to us in six troubles, and in seven, in passing through fire and
water, etc. Again, 3.
we know the sting is taken out of our cross, by Christ taking it on him: and
therefore we may cheerfully take it up, as Moses took the Serpent by the
tail, and it was turned into a rod in his hand, and threatens only a loving
correction.

5. We must willingly take up the cross, because of the present 5.
blessed use, and future issue of it.

For the present: It is of use for Present use and future issue of the cross,
good. 1.
the trial of our faith, much more precious than gold: 1 Pet. 1. 7. for the
exercise of our patience, Jam. 1. 2. and manifestation of all graces. Perfumes
smell sweetest, when beaten in a mortar. Stars shine brightest in the darkest
night; so the graces of the Saints disappeare often in the noonday and
sunshine of prosperity, and are most shining in the dark night of affliction.

For the future issue: These 2. (...). Ignat. ad Polycar.
temporary and short afflictions cause an excellent and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. This was Jobs argument, not to refuse the Lords
chastening: for, Blessed is the man whom God corrects, Job 5. 17. This was
Moses his argument, to choose the cross and afflictions: Heb. 11. 25. for, He
had respect to the recompense of reward. What if the way be rough and asperous,
and as a foul lane? yet it leads to heaven, and brings into a glorious
mansion. Care not then so much Noli auendere qua iturus fis, sed quo venturus.
Aug. in Psalm. 36.
what way thou go, as whither it leads. A fairer way were more pleasant, but
perhaps not so safe. Elias is not afraid (nor hurt) to be carried in a fiery
chariot to his rest and glory. And glad may we be, if by the doung-gate, or any
posterne gate we may get within the heavenly Jerusalem.

Thus seeing both the necessity, Use. Be ready to take up the cross daily.
difficulty, and utility of this precept of Christ, and seeing it may be and
must be attained of every Disciple, let us frame to the obedience of it, and
get near us such helps as may hold us in a fitness and preparedness to take
up our cross daily.

Quest. What are they?

Answ 1. Before crosses come, make account of them, and store Means 1.
thy self with patience, even for the sharpest, and for one after another, not
prescribing the time or measure; but account him a slight servant, that gives
up his work, and makes holy day at his pleasure. This wisdom we may learn
from the wise Pilot, who in a calm looks for a storm; so must we in our peace
for a storm of adversity: And the wise soldier will keep sentinel in time of
truce and peace.

2. When they do come and 2. Animae quior esto, and ad majorem sustinentiam
accingere. -- De imitat. Chr. l. 3. c. 57
smart, we must not be senseless of* sorrow, nor yet overwhelmed, but labor
to overcome the sense of flesh by the power of the spirit: For which end
religion looks not on the cross, as it is in it own nature, a fruit of sin,
or as a scourge in the hand of an offended father; but as it is overruled by
Gods providence, and altered by Christ. Religion looks not so much on the
cross, as beyond it, and on the happy fruits and issue of it: As a woman in
sorrow of travel gets over it in hope of a birth: Or as a stout soldier, who
fixes his thoughts on the hope of victory and glory; and forgets, and feels
not for the present the grief of his wounds: so should the Christian soldier.

And indeed, if the husbandman endures so much loss and misery, in hope of an
harvest, whereof he may fail by many accidents; with what patience and
resolution should we endure pains and sorrows, and digest all difficulties
for Christ and his truth, and for such riches and durable substance, as are not
subject to loss or end?

3. Get sound judgment, to esteem aright of the cross. Moses 3.
therefore chose to suffer with Gods people, because he esteemed Heb. 11. 26 So
Ignatius. (...) Epist. ad Ephesians.
the rebukes of Christ greater riches, than the treasures of Egypt. The
Apostles more gloried in chains for the Gospel, than if they had been chains
of gold. What an honorable thing to have Christ a companion in our suffering?
or that the Lord should honor himself by us? that he should advance his own
wisdom, power, and goodness in the constancy of his servants? that he should
spread and seal the truth of the Gospel by their blood? that their blood
should be the seed and watering of the Church? and that by suffering they
should conquer as their Head did, and help to batter down the Kingdom of the
Devil? Finally, what a comfortable thing is it, to bear Christ's cross? the
wisdom of God will let us see to what it is that God now calls; namely, to
such sufferings as have hope, patience, and light in them, that we may never
suffer those that are hopeless and desperate.

4. Be much and often in the use 4.
of the Word and Prayer.

First, hear and read the Scriptures Word helps us to bear the cross, how.
diligently; for whatsoever is there written, is, that we may have patience
and hope, Romans 15. 4. These are the Wels of consolation, that inform of all
things, the author, Isa. 12. 3.
matter, end, and use of the cross, and of the comfortable manner of bearing
it. These are as the strong Tower of David, and minister much strength and
reviving to the weak and languishing spirit of man: as David confesses, Had it
not been for thy Word, I had perished in my trouble. Psa. 119. 92


Secondly, be frequent in Prayer, both before the cross and under And prayer.
it: for it is a gift of God, that we are able to suffer as well as believe,
Phil. 1. 29. and chap. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me: And the way to get this strength from Christ is fervent
prayer: Coloss. 1. 11. the Apostle prays, that they might be strengthened with
all might according to his glorious power, unto all patience and longsuffering
with joyfulnesse.

[And follow me.]
This is the third duty of every one that means to be Christ's The third duty
and note of a disciple.
Disciple; namely, the holy imitation of Christ: where are to be considered,

1. The matter wherein we must follow him. Three things in it.
2. The manner of following him. 3. The reasons why.
In two things we must follow

Christ: His holy doctrine. His holy example.

1. His doctrine was as the I. Follow Christ in his holy doctrine:
sun-shining from heaven, by direction where of he leads us in paths of
righteousness. It is the Star that leads wise men after Christ. It is the
pillar of the cloud and fire, to guide the Israel of God by day and night in
all their journies. If this pillar move not, we must not move. Christ must be
before us in every thing; in necessary things by precept, in indifferent by
rule, special or general.

2. Follow him in his holy life: And life. 1 John 2. 6.
walking as he walked, and making his life an example and copy to imitate, so
far as he propounded himself a rule of imitation: because some kinds of
actions of Christ were not imitable; as,

First, those that he did as God; namely, his miraculous works; In what we may
not, or cannot follow him.
these are not exemplary: for, 1. they are impossible to any creature, but God
alone: 2. by these he was separated as the Son of 1.
God from all the sons of men; for he effected them all by his own power,
as no Saints did: 3. we have no commandment to follow him in these.

Secondly, some works he did 2.
as Mediator between God and us: as suffering for the sins of the Elect,
satisfying Gods justice, justifying the sinner in the sight of God. And these
are too high works for men or Angels. And if Papists will needs merit
salvation, or satisfy Gods justice, they must needs be Mediators, meriting
persons, even gods as well as men.

But the things wherein we must follow Christ, are such as whereof himself
said, I have given Joh. 13. 15.
you example, that as I have done, ye may do also: as,

1. In expression of his piety to God. 2. Of his charity to men.
His piety shined forth as the Five expressions of his piety to be followed.
brightness of the Sun many ways; we will instance in five.

1. In that he never sought his own praise and glory, but the 1.
glory and praise of God that sent him, John 7. 18. and 17. 4. Father, I have
glorified thee in earth. So every Christian must do all things, even the
least, for the glory of God, 1 Cor. 16. 31. not hunting after praise of men,
nor enduring that the glory of GOD should be turned into shame by sinful men.

2. In that he contemned his 2.
own will for his Fathers, to drink even the dregs of the bitter cup of
death: Not my will, but thy will be done, Mat. 26. 39. He would lose his life,
before he would lose his obedience. In no temptation would he start aside from
his Fathers will. Oh how happily might we pass our days, if we would give up
our wills to Gods, according to our daily prayer, that there might be but one
will between God and us, Thy will be done!

3. In daily and frequent prayer to his Father: early in the 3.
morning, late at night, long time together, sometime whole nights, Mark 1.
35. and Luke 5. 16. He kept himself apart in the wilderness, and prayed.
Nothing he undertook without prayer: at the calling of his Disciples, at the
entrance into his passion, and upon the cross, Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit, etc. Here should every Christian tread in Moses ad bella non
vadit, sed orat, et tum vincit Israel, etc. Hier. in Levit. 1 Timothy 4. 4. 5.
his steps, upon every occasion sending up prayers, before any business of the
calling, general or special, and sanctifying every thing by the Word and
Prayer. Christ could not pollute any thing, and yet did thus: A good motive to
thee for performing this duty.

4. In fervent zeal to his Fathers house, which even consumed 4. John 2. 17.
him. He was daily in the Temple, reading, praying, preaching, conferring*
confirming, reforming. If he withdrew from his Parents who had lost him, there
you might find him. Herein should Christians imitate his piety, in a burning
zeal to Gods glory. How zealous was Phinehas for God! How was Paul's spirit
troubled within him! Acts 17. 16. (...), the word signifies he was almost
besides himself, to see the Idolatry of the Athenians.

Alas, where is our zeal? we are generally key-cold, as Gallio Act. 18. 14.
15. Unumquemque Christianum zelus dom us Dei come. dat, v. c. vides fratrem
cunere ad theatrum: prohibe, moan, contristare, si zelus domus Dei comeditte*
etc. Aug in Joh. trac. 10
was, in Gods causes. Christ his zeal was inflamed for the reformation of his
Fathers house; but much of our zeal is against zeal and reformation. And such
was his zeal, that whatsoever he saw, it affected him deeply, either with
grief, if evil; or joy, if well done; or pity and compassion in the misery of
others. Wherever he was, he was welldoing: in the City and public places he
was teaching and instructing; in solitary and desolate places he was praying,
meditating, preparing himself, or enduring temptation: in porches and
highways he was curing, healing, helping: He went about doing good, Acts 10.
38. Our zeal also to Gods glory should move us to watch, and take all
occasions of doing good, of promoting Gods glory, furthering man's good, and
fitting our own reckoning.

5. In his faith and confidence: His whole life was an obedience 5.
of faith; his death likewise an obedience of faith. In that dreadful
desertion of his Father, that we had deserved, he cried, My God, my God: he
could trust in his Father, killing him. Herein a rare pattern of imitation, in
all deeps by faith to give the Lord the honor of salvation, and lean upon his
love and promise. Thus of the piety of our Lord.

His charity and love of man shined likewise many ways. Four expressions of
his chatity.


1. In his humility, meekness, patience, and gentleness beyond all example.
For first, being in the form of God, and equal to his 1.
Father, yet he came to serve, and not to be served. So lowly, that he
disdained not to wash his Disciples feet, even Judasses, John 13. and he will
have every one look on this glass: If I have washed your feet, you must wash
one another feet, that is, stoup to the lowest services one of another: and,
Learn of me: for I am lowly and meek, Mat. 11. 29. and Phil. 2. 5. Let the
same mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. But alas! we strive to go
one before another in pride, and taking honor, because the mind of Christ is
not in us. Secondly, so patient was he, that when he could have revenged his
enemies, who came to apprehend him, he struck them all to the John 18. 6.
ground with a word, but let them rise again. He hurt none of them, but cured
Malchus his ear whom Peter had hurt. He delivered himself into their hands.
He blessed them that cursed him, and prayed on the cross for his tormentors.
All to teach Christians, to moderate their anger, to suffer wrong, to offer
none, to return good for evil, blessing for cursing, as being heirs of
blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 18.

2. In his beneficence and goodness 2.
to every one: He healed all diseases, dispossessed Devils, raised the dead,
gave to his enemies food to eat, health to their bodies, salvation to their
souls. So must every Christian do good to all, especially to the household of
faith, Gal. 6. 10. yea, do good to enemies and ill deserving, thus either
winning them, or heaping coals on their heads.

3. In that he was an admirable 3.
pattern of civil righteousness, in word and deed. Never was guile found in
his lips or hands; no nor ever in the thoughts or desires of his heart did he
detain any man's right, but gave every man his due, and taught others so to do:
To his Parents obedience: to the Magistrate subjection: to Caesar he paid
tribute for himself and his. He never impaired the estate or good name of any
man. Thus must Christians give to every one Romans 13. 7.
his own, in word and deed, honor to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute
pertains; and dispensing to every one all offices of justice and love:
Laboring to live, though not without sin, yet without just blame; out of the
testimony of a good conscience able to challenge the Adversary, which of you
can accuse me, though I can easily accuse my self? but whose Ox or Ass have
1 Samuel 12. 3
I taken, that I may recompense him?

4. In that he never transgressed 4.
the rule of love, but left a transcendent pattern of it, in laying down his
life for his enemies. Never was there such a copy. And this for our imitation,
who must walk in love as he loved us, Ephesians. 5. 2. and 1 John 3. 16. If he
laid down his life for us, we ought also one for another.

Quest. Does Christ's example bind us to dye for our brethren?

Answ. Yes: not only that Scripture proves it, but the example Paulus
procharitate Christi nol^it habere Cl^istum. Hieron.
of Moses, Exodus 32. 32. and Paul, Romans 9. 3. and chapt. 16. 4. Priscilla and
Aquila laid down their necks for Paul's life.

The reason is this: The member of the natural body will save a fellow-member
with the loss of it self; as the hand will save the head, though it be
stricken off for it. So in the mystical body, the Church.

The rules these: 1. Christians must aim at such sincerity in love, as to be
willing to give their lives, 1. for God, 2. for his image, and stand in a
readiness to undergo any danger for GOD and his image sake: for, love seeks
not her own. 2. We must intend the salvation of our brethren 1 Cor. 13. 5
before our own lives; for their souls are better than our lives: so did
Christ, and so did the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 15. I would most gladly be
bestowed for your souls. 3. Not rashly, and (...).
without calling; for, Christ died not for us, till he was called to it. Which
when we have, we must part with our lives, even for their bodies, much more for
their souls.

Thus of the matter, wherein we must follow Christ.

Next of the manner of following II.
him.

Object. How can we follow Christ, seeing he is in heaven, and we on earth?

Answ. Not having his bodily How Christ can and must be followed.
presence on earth, we cannot make any pilgrimage to follow him with the feet
of our body: but,

1. We must follow him in 1. By faith, a threefold act of it.
faith; move after him with the feet of faith: which to do, know that faith
has a threefold work in this business.

First, it causes us to know and acknowledge our Captain, and 1.
the way wherein he is gone before us: for it tells the Christian, that he
being now set into Christ, and become a member of him; If he now live, he
must live unto him: If he dye, he must dye unto him; he is not his own, but at
his Lords command wholly, and must follow him close in the means of his
presence, especially in searching the Scriptures, which testify of him, John
5. 39. as also in listening to the inward teaching and guidance of the Spirit;
and taking the benefit of his own experience by the change and fiuits in
himself, since he had Christ before him.

Secondly, faith will hold us in our way, and keep our leader in 2.
sight. It will not be led by the opinions of men, or customs of the world,
but by the commandment and will of the Captain. It will not look a squint to
approve it self to Christ and the world too; but it knits the heart undivided
to Christ alone, as an only perfect Savior and Pattern. Yea, because he now
lives, and moves, and has being in Christ, he can no more be without him,
than a member without the head, and, as a member follows him through fire and
water, perils and torments, most earnestly and cheerfully.

Thirdly, faith causes a man, 3.
whenever he is slipped out of his way, to return back by a new act of
repentance: as when Christ looked back upon Peter, and excited his faith, he
wept bitterly: and, says the Church, Cant. 3. 3. Saw ye not him whom my soul
loves? And thus faith is crowned with perseverance. This of the first way to
follow Christ.

2. We must follow him in love 2. By love. 2 Cor. 5. 14. Gal. 5. 6.
and ardent affection, by which faith always works. No other thing must
constrain us, but love: as a wife out of love follows her dear husband. And
this will be stronger than death: nothing can separate us, neither height, nor
depth, nor sword, nor death, nor a sea of the waters of affliction can drown
it. Yea, zeal and fervency of spirit is required to exclude hypocrisy and
lukewarmnes: for dissemblers and halters can never follow Christ in the rugged
ways wherein he goes before us.

3. We must follow him sincerely; 3. In sincerity. What it does in this thing.
for love of himself, not for self-love: for self-denial must go before
the imitation of Christ. This will make us follow him into Jerusalem, and out
of 1.
Jerusalem, unto the Consistory, unto the Cross; as well when they cry,
Crucify him, as when they cry, Hosanna. And not as many, who follow the times,
and not Christ.

It will make us follow him for right ends: not for loaves or 2.
perishing bread, as the Jews: not for curiosity, as Herod, to see a miracle:
nor as Peter, to gaze and get news in the high Priests hall; but as the
Disciples, John 6. 68. Master, thou have the words of eternal life, and
whither shall we go?

It will make us follow him wholly, not lamely, as on one leg, 3.
as such who profess his doctrine, but deny his life, live carnally,
covetously, uncharitably; all this religion is naught and vain, and opens the
mouth of Adversaries, to say from the loose lives of Professors, that our
religion is an enemy to good works.

Where did Christ teach thee, that professest to follow him, to swear, to lie,
to deceive, to profane the Sabbath, to raise slander, to revenge, to spend thy
time in gaming, idleness, or the like? where learnest thou this of Christ?

4. We must follow him constantly, 4. With constancy.
without wavering or desisting, not for a brunt or a start, not as the young
man that came hastily, but departed heavily: He loves no lookers back. Know
that Christ is best at last: and, though thou may be sometimes weary, yet
Christ will refresh thee, and lead thee to rest.

This is the manner of following him.

Now let us see the reasons or III. Motives thus to follow Christ.
motives thereunto.

1. One is the equity of the precept: We are sheep, he is the great Shepherd
of the flock, and 1.
all the sheep must follow this Shepherd, John 10. 27. The hundred forty and
four thousand follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, Rev. 14. 6. that is, the
multitude of the faithful follow Christ their Captain, and obey him in all
things. Besides, we are Christiani nomen ille frustra sortitur, qui Christum
minime imitatur. Quid enim tibi prodest vocari quod non es, and nomen usurpare
alienum? etc. Aug de vita Christiana.
Christians, our very name persuades us how equal it is to follow him, else
deny our name if we deny this duty. Again, the equity appears, because here
is nothing required or requested of us, but our Master has done it before us,
and commended it to us by his own example: Our Joshua says to us his
soldiers, What you see me do, that do you; and shall a common soldier
recoile or start back from that he sees his Captain do before him? If we see
our General deny himself, take up his cross, obey his Father, love his
brethren, is it not equal that we do the like? shall Christians live like
Jews, Heathens, Worldlings?

2. Great is the danger of not 2. Danger of not following Christ as a guide. 1.
following Christ our guide:

First, if we look at our selves. We would feign be leaders and devisers,
which Christ knew well enough: and, as we easily stray of our selves, so we are
easily misled, either by our own lusts, or by other perilous guides:
Sometimes one; as the people, who in simplicity followed Absalom, not knowing
whereabout he went, 2 Samuel 1^. 11. thus sometime we follow some wicked
counselor, as a drove follow the Butcher in stead of the Shepherd. And
sometimes many: how easily follow we a multitude unto evil? and therefore have
great need of this precept of Christ, both for prevention and direction.

Secondly, if we look at the 2. Justice of God against such.
justice of God, who gives over men to follow dangerous guides, when they
refuse Christ by his Word and Spirit to lead them: See it in a number of
instances.

How many are given up, as the Heathens were, to their own hearts lusts, Romans 1.
26. that it were better they were given up to the Devil to buffer, or any
tyrant to torment, than delivered to fall by their own hand; and all because
they will not have Christ to lead them, nor will follow him! Nay, seeing the
Devil rules in lusts, to be given up unto lusts, is, to be left into the
hands of the Devil, the Prince of the air, to be ruled at his will: And how
just is it, that a sheep that will not follow the Shepherd, should follow the
Butcher?

How many others who will not follow Christ in the Word, are given up to follow
the world, and the course of the world? Some follow their covetousness, as
Jer. 8. 10. every one from the greatest to the least: tormenting themselves and
the world in it; give no rest to it or themselves, allow neither GOD nor
themselves any rest on the Sabbath, etc. Others walk after the course of the
world, Ephesians. 2. 2. and fashion themselves unto it, contrary to Romans 12. 2. as
appears in many, who have sold themselves over to voluptuousnes, delicacy,
pride in apparel, tiring out all the tires and fashions of all countries.
Others spend their time in idleness, or gaming, or sports, and other calling
have they none. But all the world knows, Christ's life was humble, painful,
sober, heavenly, holy, fruitful, and clean contrary to these who receive
only a name of Christ, but follow the world, a sworn enemy to Christ.

Numbers are given up to follow evil company, and evil counsel, because they
despise Christ's counsel. He that refuses the counsel of wisdom, it is
just that folly should lead him: See Prove. 1. 30. 31. Some follow idle fellows
(Prove. 12. 11.) because they are destitute of understanding. Some, drunken
company, to whom the woe is directed, Isa. 5. 11. Some, whorish company, as the
Prodigal, who rejecting good counsel, spent himself, and came home by
weeping-crosse.

Thus dangerously are men given over to perilous guides, who will not have
Christ to guide them. And this is the second motive.

3. Argue from the safety of 3. Great safety in following Christ. 1.
following Christ our guide: for,

First, he propounds us no crooked pattern nor false rule to follow; but
himself a perfect and express idea and pattern of all grace and virtue, and
an unfailing pattern, unening, inflexible.

Object. But must we not imitate the Saints?

Answ. Yes, so far as they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. an Apostle himself
must be followed no further.

Secondly, he leads us not into 2.
crooked or by-pathes, but into the paths of righteousness, Psalm. 23. 3.
pointing us out our way by his holy doctrine, guiding us in it by the example
of his holy life, comforting us in our weariness, supplying us in this way
with bread of life, opening to us in this way the fountain of living waters;
revives us with new strength, guides us out of bypath, and so carries us in
the strict, but strait way to the happy end of our journey.

Thirdly, he leads us not in 3.
dark and desolate ways, but himself, being the light of the world, (John
12. 35.) while we follow him, we cannot walk in darkness, and having light to
discover the dangers in the way, we walk safely. How safe was Israel under the
pillar in the wilderness? so safe are we under the conduct of this pillar. How
safe were they from enemies under the guidance of Joshua, leading them to
Canaan? but a greater than Joshua is here: Josh. 1. 5. A man shall not be able
to withstand thee all thy days: nor man, nor Devil shall make us fall short of
the heavenly Canaan. Follow Christ, thou followest the Angel, as Lot out of
Sodom. Follow this Joshua, and thou followest him to Canaan, to thy country,
to be ever where he is, who is both the guide and the end of the way.

Lastly, consider, if Christ had 4.
only given us a precept, we were bound to obey; but adding Si praecipientem
sequi non potes, sequere antecedentem. Sublata est hoc modo omnis excusatio,
etc. Lact. l. 4. c. 24.
his example, we shall be answerable for neglect of his holy example, as for
his holy doctrine. We never want good example, in the midst of many bad
examples, of Rulers, Preachers, and private men: Christ has said, Follow me.
And, thou have not done thy duty, to see him go before thee in holy example,
but in following him; nor to admire a good example as many do, but imitate none.

Verse 25. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it: and whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake, shall find it.
OUr Lord having informed his Confirmation of the former doctrine by three
arguments.
Disciples in these difficult principles, does now confirm them, and adds
strong arguments to enforce them: three,

The first in the words, drawn 1.
from the danger of failing in the duties. The failing in them brings the
certain loss of ones life; which is amplified by the contrary: But if any
will rather lose his life than his obedience, he shall certainly gain and save
it.

The second reason is drawn from the unprofitablenesse of winning 2.
the world with the loss of the soul, which loss can never be repaired or
made up, Ver. 26.

The third is drawn from the consideration of the last judgment, 3.
in which they shall find the accomplishment of this whole doctrine: for the
Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, etc. Ver. 27.

This first is very forcible and Danger of failing in those duties.
pressing: for it is a matter of life and death; as Moses to his people, so I
propound life and death this day unto you, choose life, do good, deny your
selves, take up your cross, and follow me.

Whosoever shall save his life] the Exposition.
word (...) properly signifies the soul, which by a Metonymie is put for the
life or the person himself, because the soul is the cause of life: and, Anima
cujusque est quisque the soul of a man is properly himself: the saving of the
soul is likewise the saving of ones self; charity to the soul is the chiefest.

To save the life] is taken sometime Save life, in a good sense and bad.
in good sense, as to preserve it from famine by food, from sickness by physic,
from danger by flight; as Jacob from Esau, David from Saul, Christ from the
people that would have thrown him down the hill: but this is not here meant.
Sometime in the evil sense: that is, to save and preserve the life by evil
means; as Saul by sorcery, David by dissembling, Peter by a lie: so is it taken
here, He that will save his life, namely, by denying Christ, by renouncing the
truth, abjuring the pure religion, or falling to the world, or false worship:
For Christ does not condemn the saving of life, but the manner and unlawful
means of it.

He shall lose it.] Atheists would How a life is both lost and saved.
find a contradiction in the speech of Christ, that a man at the same time
should find and lose the same life; and natural reason cannot reconcile it. It
is a riddle to flesh and blood, that the same life should be both saved and
lost: For the resolving whereof we must know,

1. That there is a twofold tribunal, 1.
Forum coeli and soli, the court of the world, and the court of heaven: and as
he that saves himself in the common Law, may be cast in the Chancery; so he
that saves himself here in the Consistories of men, may elsewhere lose
himself, namely, in the court of heaven.

2. There be two sorts of Judges: 2.


1. Humane and delegate. 2. Divine and supreme.
A man may by indirect means save himself from the sentence of the former, but
not of the latter. Joab may escape David, but shall not escape Solomon. And, as
him who escapes the sword of Hazael (1 Kings 19. 17.) shall Jehu slay; so he
that by denying Christ and his truth shall save himself from a Bear, shall
meet with a Lion, and be devoured.

3. There is a twofold danger, 3.
temporal and eternal. A man by evil means may save himself from the former,
but by no means from the latter. If the silly fish leap out of the pan, it falls
into the burning coals. A man loses that which above all he would save. And
this loss is amplified; 1* by the dearnesse of the thing lost, his most
precious soul and life: 2. by the duration, it is lost eternally: 3. by the
certainty, the sentence is passed, and cannot be repealed.

Object. Peter saved his life by denying and abjuring his Lord, and yet lost it
not.

Answ. All the threats of Scripture must be understood with exception of
repentance; as all promises See Cyprian de lapsis.
with exception of the cross. Peter upon his repentance saved his lost life;
and so doubtless many in this land were forced under Antichrist to abjure the
truth, who as they fell with Peter, did also rise again with him.

And whosoever shall lose his life for my sake.] Not he that loses his life as
a malefactor; as Saul, Judas, others: nor those that for vainglory, or
discontent, or hope of bettering their estate bereave themselves of life: But
for my sake, that is, 1. For the profession Who lose their lives for Christ's
sake.
of the Gospel, as did innumerable Christians in the Primitive Church, and many
in Queen Mary's 1.
days, who in love to Christ were prodigal of their lives; if they had had a
thousand lives, they should all have gone. 2. For 2.
discharge of duty, answerable to that profession; as David, John Baptist, the
Prophets, Apostles, Stephen, and others, who suffered for righteousness sake,
Mat. 5. 10.

He shall save it:] that is, he shall have it returned to him wi^h advantage;
of a miserable and temporary life it shall be changed into an everlasting and
blessed life: he has suffered with Christ, and he must reign with him.

Object. But then martyrdom meriteth eternal life.

Answ. No: for first, the sufferings of this life are not worthy Martyrdom not
meritorious.
the glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. there being no proportion
between the body and 1.
soul, between life temporal and life eternal. Secondly, the promise is
made, not to the suffering, but the sufferer, being a member of Christ; and
performed, not for any merit (for it is but our duty and a thankful return of
our lives to him, who gave his for us) but for the faithfulness of the
promise, apprehended by the faith of Believers.

Object. But shall none save Life saved, though not lost, how.
his life, but he that loses it?

Answ. Yes: many of the Patriarchs and faithful in all ages lived and died
peaceably in a good old age. But two rules must be resolved upon:

1. If occasion be offered, and God call for the life in the witness 1.
of faith and well-doing, it may not be saved: and now if it be saved, it is
lost.

2. If occasion be not given, yet there must be an expectation, 2.
a resolution, a readiness of mind to it, whenever it may be given. For we
read among the Ancient of mental Martyrs, or votary Martyrs, without fire or
blood, in whom the readiness of mind to lose the life for God and his truth,
is accepted of GOD as the losing of the life: for, God accepts the will for the
deed, and accounts of Abraham as if he had sacrificed his son, and says of
him; he spared not his son, though he was spared: And of David, that he had
built him an house, when he had it but in his heart to build one: for this
built him an house.

Object. But it seems, if a man to save his life fly in persecution, he
loses his life by so saving it.

Answ. Distinguish of persons. Some are bound not to fly, and these by saving
their lives do lose them. Others are free, and Who may not fly in
persecution. 1.
may safely fly. To say something of each of these.

For the former: 1. Some are bound inwardly, by an inward call and voice of the
Spirit; as Paul was bound in spirit to go up to Jerusalem, even to suffer,
Acts 20. 22. and was endued with such a spirit of courage and fortitude, that
his life was not dear unto him; but he was ready to endure all extremity; for
Christ. Such a spirit GOD gave to Luther, when he went to Worms to dispute,
that though he saw nothing but death and danger before him, yet so many Devils
as there were tiles on the houses could not turn him off. And to many of the
Martyrs in Queen Mary's days God gave in silly bodies noble and stout spirits,
to contemn all threats and torments. These may not fly in persecution.

2. Some are externally bound to stand, by virtue either of the 2.
general calling of a Christian, as when by a man's flight the whole Church and
truth is endangered, which must be dearer than a man's life: or of the special
calling, as when by the work of it GOD may be more glorified, and the Church
edified, I must keep me in the way, notwithstanding the peril ensuing. For
example: If the persecution be general and common to the whole Church, the
Minister may not fly; for the weak are in great danger, and most need the
support of the strong: and now the duty of the calling must be dearer than his
life. Whereas if the persecution were personal, and directed against the
Pastor only, he were in his own liberty to withdraw himself, only for a time.

3. Some are tied and bound not 3.
to fly, by reason of their present estate, especially in two cases:

First, when God has cut off all law full means and ways of flying, and a
man cannot escape but by unlawful means; as an officious lie, hearing of
Mass, equivocations, pealing and discovering the brethren, or the like. Here a
man must abide the will of God, who has called him to stand out, and do no
evil to save his life.

Secondly, when a man is in hand or hold under the custody of the Magistrate,
though unjustly prosecuted, he may not break prison, nor use violence; but obey
the Magistrate in unjust sufferings, always counting it thank-worthy to endure
grief for GOD and Christ wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2. 19.

Quest. But what if the prisondoore be left open, as sometime it may be, or
has been?

Ans. If God open a door, this is not a breaking of prison. The Apostles (Acts
5. 19.) used no violence to get out; but when the Angel opened the door, they
went away and shifted for themselves: and thus not themselves only, but the
Church was preserved in them.

Now all these that are thus brought by God to the wrestlingplace, must strive
for the best game, without shrinking or starting away.

But there are a second sort, that And who may.
are more free, and have liberty to avoid persecution by flight, in these three
cases:

1. If any have not attained 1.
strength sufficient to bear the extremity for Christ: our Savior Luke 14. 28.
would have these costs to be forecast, as in the Parable of the Builder, and
of the Captain mustering his forces. Only in not finding strength bewail thy
weakness, and use means of further strength.

2. If the danger be certain and 2.
present, not suspected or surmised: for a man may not (as Jonas) by casting
fears cast himself out of his calling; but if he see certain peril to
himself, and no great hope of doing good by his stay, he may fly.

3. If avoiding private respects (as loosing himself from duty, 3.
or out of excessive fear shifting for himself) he aim directly at the
furthering of Gods glory, and Christ's Kingdom: for it is a rule, in which
wisdom and conscience must overruled. If it may make more for Gods glory to
fly, fly; if to stay, stay: thus seeking Gods Kingdom in the first place.

Quest. But how prove you, that such may fly?

Ans. By the commandment and practice of Christ himself, Mat. 10. 23. If they
persecute you in one city, fly into another: and so himself did. He could by
miracle have saved himself; but for us he would rather humble himself by
flying, Matthew. 12. 15. And, he was now as strong in spirit, and as ready to
dye, as he was afterward: but Gods time was not yet come.

So did the Apostles. Paul being persecuted at Damascus, was let down by a
basket, and sent to Tarsus, Acts 9.

The commandment (Rev. 18. 4.) fly out of her my people, is of force
hereunto. He would rather have commanded to stand out the persecutions of
Antichrist, if it had been unlawful to fly.

After Christ we read of Athanasius Euse^. l. 10. c. 18. Trip. hist. l. 5. c.
3.
that great light of the world, how being infinitely hated and pursued by the
Arrians, he was forced to hide himself for six years in a deep pit, where he
saw no sun; which he would not have endured, but to have preserved the Church
in himself, waiting the time which God afterward gave him at Alexandria many
years to be the only hammer of Arrians.

The same of many faithful men in Queen Mary's days flying beyond sea, who
were happily revoked to the great glory of God, and use of the Church, in the
most happy days of Queen Elizabeth.

Ob. But this is to deny Christ, and not c(...)sse him before men.

Answ. (...): to fly friends and country is an inferior confession and
suffering for Christ, though in dying is a greater perfection and degree in
suffering.

Ob. But we must not fear them that can kill the body: therefore not fly.

Ans. That is, not fear them more than God; not fear so as to apostate or deny
faith and good conscience, which is not the fear of them that fly: for, would
they deny Christ or his faith, they need not fly at all.

Object. But we must preach and counsel the greatest perfection.

Answ. Yes: but in the several ranks of believers God has not set all his
children in the same degree of grace; some are babes, some young, some old men.
It is not greatest perfection for a child, to offer to run before he can go;
but boldness, which costeth him many knockes and falls. Neither for those of a
lower stature in Christ, to cast themselves into danger, before, or further
than need shall require: for, when times come that GOD sees fit for any by
death to glorify himself, and edify his Church, his providence will find
means without a man's own presumption to call him thereto.

Now the point issuing out of the words thus expounded, is this:

Whosoever undertaketh the profession Doctr. Maintain thy holy profession to
the death.
of Christ, must take his life in his hand if need be, and give it for the Name
of Christ: Revel. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto death. Luke 14. 26. If any man
come to me, and hate not all, yea even his own life, he cannot be my Disciple:
by hatred he means not that affection simply considered, but in comparison,
namely, if the love of God and our selves, the love of Christ and our friends
cannot stand together: all natural affection must give place. Hebr. 12. 4. Ye
have not yet resisted unto blood: as if he had said, Ye have resisted sin
unto reproach, unto loss of substance, unto bonds, and other evils; but yet it
remains to resist unto blood, as Christ did. Revelat. 12. 11. they that
overcame by the blood of the Testimony, and the blood of the Lamb, loved not
their lives to the death, that is, doubted not to hazard them for the truth
and faith: so as no torment could drive them from it.

Hebr. 11. 35. We have the cloud of witnesses before us in this duty: they
were racked and slain, and would not be delivered, but refused the offer of
life and liberty upon condition of renouncing the Gospel. The Ecclesiastical
History mentions one Phileas, a Noble man and Martyr, who going to execution,
seemed as one deaf at the persuasions, and blind at the tears of his
friends, moving him to spare himself: As the waters use to break themselves
on a rock, so was he altogether inflexible. And when one Philoromus defending
him, said, How Quomodo potest terrenis lachrymis flecti* cujus oculi coelestem
gloriam contuentur?
can he be moved with tears on earth, whose eyes behold the glory of heaven?
he also was taken in, and both presently beheaded.

Amongst our own Martyrs, when at the stake many of them had letters of pardon
offered, they would not look at them, nor would be delivered on their
conditions. Others absolutely refused them. One said she came not thither to
deny her Lord. Not one of them accepted them, neither would buy deliverance so
dear.

For first, if we look at Christ, he is to be loved best Reason 1.
of all, and all things must be accounted dross and doung in comparison of
him, Phil. 3. 7. 8. My welbeloved is the chief of ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10.
And withal, he is such a Lord, as has absolute command and power of (...).
Ignat. ad Polycarp.
our life and death: for we are not our own, but his; and if he call and
command us to seal our profession with our blood, we must be ready to
magnify Christ in our bodies, by life or death, Philip. 1. 20. not fearing
those that can kill the body. Again, if we look on his merit and desert, he
loved not his life to death for us, but readily offered it up on our behalf,
Luke 12. 50. How then should we hold our selves bound in way of thankfulness,
if we had a thousand lives, to give them up for him? shall the Just for the
unjust, and not the unjust for the Just?

Secondly, if we look to the 2.
truth and Gospel: it is far more worthy than all we can give in exchange for
it; it cost Christ dear: he thought it worthy of his life, and bought it with
his precious blood, which was the blood of God, Act. 20. 28. and should we
think much to buy it with our last blood? Remember the precept, Pro. 23. 23.
Buy the truth and sell it not, no not at any rate. God has magnified his truth
above all things, and so must we: Shall not Christ shrink from the truth to
save his life, and shall we, being called to witness, leave it in the plain
field?

Thirdly, look on our selves: 3.
1. We are soldiers under Christ's colors: A soldier in the field sels his
life for a base pay, and is ready for his King and Country to endure (...).
Ignat. ad Ephesians.
blows) gashes, and death it self: How much more ought the Christian soldier
for the love of his Captain, and honor of his profession, contemn fears and
perils, and think his life well sold in so honorable a quarrel and cause as
Christ's is?

2. This is indeed rightly to love our selves, when we can rightly hate our
selves. We must learn to love our selves by not loving our selves, who indeed
hate our selves by loving our selves too well: And this is, if we believe our
Lord, to save and preserve our life by thus casting it away. A man that will
save his seed, and not cast it away into the grrund, loses it by such saving;
but if he sow it, he renews it, and multiplies it sometime an hundred fold:
So to lose thy self for Christ, is to save thy self, and to reap an hundred
fold: for it is but sown to spring out unto the eternal harvest. Ever
remember, that the right love of a man's self is in and for Christ.

Ob. You speak of nothing but hindrance and loss, and as if a Christian may
not have riches, friends, life, and comforts of it.

Ans. 1. Yes, he may have them, and must save them; but not in Christ's cause,
when he is called from them. 2. Divorce not the parts of the text: as there is
loss in the text, so there is a greater gain by it; as the harvest makes him a
gainer, who in seed-time seemed a loser.

Ob. But that is a long day: we would have something in hand.

Answ. So thou have in hand, an hundred not for ten, but for one, in this life,
with persecution, Mar. 10. 30. for thy father forsaken, thou have God to thy
father; for thy mother, Gods Church; for thy goods, Gods rich graces; for thy
friends lost, the favor of God, of his Angels, and all Saints; for thy trouble
without, peace of conscience within; for thy lands, the deeds and assurances of
an heavenly inheritance; and for thy life temporal, life eternal. Would
thou have more in hand?

Ob. Oh but this is a very hard thing to row thus against the stream, and do
as no body does.

Ans. Indeed few enter into this narrow way: but it is good going to heaven,
although without company. And yet thou want no good company, but have the
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Christ himself before thee, who also
suffers and smarteth in all the sorrows of the Saints.

Object. But is it not hard to be counted and die for an heretic?

Ans. Not of heretics: and Christ was counted no less for thee.

Ob. But I have wife, children, and friends depending on me.

Ans. The case indeed is heavy, as Christ implied, saying, Woe be to them that
give suck in those days: but, 1. thou art a saver, if thou savest nothing but
Christ: thou love well enough, if in case of confession thou love nothing
but Christ: 2. cast thy care on the Lord, who is wont to save his against all
appearance: And, speak not one word for them that depend on thee, and two for
thy self.

Ob. But it may be I have a flock which will be scattered.

Ans. But thy blood shed for the truth which thou have preached, preaches with
much more fruit and furtherance of the Gospel, than all thy life and labors:
as in Abel, Stephen, and the Martyrs, whose blood yet speaks.

Let all of us therefore, who are Use. Believe this doctrine, and obey it.
pressed under this banner of Christ's holy profession, resolve to do our Master
saithfull service, even to the death, and strive to believe the words of our
Lord, that to lose the life in this cause, is, to win it in everlasting glory.

Object. But the days (thanks be to God) are peaceable, and there is no
great need nor use of this doctrine.

Answ. Yet, 1. a wise Pilot will in peace provide for a storm. 2. We know not
how soon we may have use of it; one powderblow from underground may shake all
our foundations. Little did the Christians in King Edwards days think of such
a sudden change as Queen Mary brought in. 3. Never were Gods people nearer
danger, than when they thought themselves furthest off, and cried, Peace,
peace. 4. No Christian is well furnished, but he that in peace has attained a
ready disposition to lay down his life at any warning for the Name of Christ.

Object. But who would not give his life for Christ? all say they are ready.

Answ. Yet first if times should change, would they indeed, who now in days of
protection are ashamed of the Gospel of Christ? would they stick to Christ,
crowned with thorns, who when he wears a golden Crown, think it good
policy not to be seen with him?

Secondly, is it to bring men's lives in their hands, to Christ and his
profession, to shrink now for fear at the name of a Professor, and be ready
to faint to hear a damsel say, Surely thou art one of them?

Thirdly, would they suffer for the profession, that now scoff and scorn at
Professors, under reproachful titles, that now are persecutors themselves, and
go as far in persecuting as they can, and the laws will suffer? No, no: those
that now rob them of their good names, while the Gospel is publicly
professed and protected, would easily bereave them of their lives, if times
would afford them laws and liberty.

So as the great part of the world is not resolved of this truth, that to lose
the life for Christ is to save it; and those that now deny him in the peace of
the Gospel, are far from dying with him in the trial.

Now because this is a building, which requires great forecast, and is above
natural strength, we had need furnish our selves with all the helps to set it
forward, and fit our selves well to the obedience of so difficult a
commandment.

Quest. What are they?

Ans. 1. Begin with God: presume I. Practices to prepare for martyrdom.
not of thine own strength, as Peter. It is a work of sound conversion, and
of mighty power by that Spirit of fortitude, by which of weak we become
strong. And therefore we must pray earnestly, that he would please to
stablish us unto this trial, and strengthen us with all patience,
long-suffering, and joyfulnesse, Col. 1. 10. For none have more cowardly lost
the field, than such as have most boasted of their valor and strength at home.
Pray also for that eye salve, which may let thee behold the glory of Christ,
and thine eternal felicity hid with him: this will make thee forget thy self
(as the Disciples did at Christ's Transfiguration) and long after him; and
indeed a little taste of his glory will make us valiant to take the Kingdom by
force, as himself did for the glory that was before him.

2. Then take thy self in hand, 2.
and strive daily in thine own mortification and denial of thy self; beware
of self-love, love not Ideo tam pauci illuminati and liberi intus efflciuntur,
quiaseipsos ex toto abnegarenesciunt. De imitat. Christi, l. 4. c. 8.
the world, nor the things in it: account not of riches and wealth above their
worth. If thy life be too dear to thee, or the world swell in thine eye, or
if thou mindest earthly things, or set too fast a hand on any thing, were
thou never so wise, learned, civil, nay, did thou follow Christ at heels,
and were able to work miracles, and cast out Devils; yet at length thou
would play false, and prove an Apostate; as Judas and Demas, who forsook the
truth to embrace the present world. 2 Timothy 4. 10.


3. Get sound judgment in matters of Faith, firmly and distinctly 3.
to believe the truth of Religion: for this must be the ground of undaunted
profession, 2 Cor. 4. 13. I believed; and therefore I spoke. He has begun
well, who has begun in truth, and laid a sure ground. It was soundness of
Faith, that carried (...)ent Believers through such extremities. They endured
racking, and burning, and hewing asunder, and all by faith. The just in Heb.
11. 38.
trouble must live by faith, Hab. 2. 4. And every house not founded upon a
rock, when floods beat and Mat. 7. 27.
storms blow, must fall, and the fall shall be very great.

4. Get sound affection, and grow 4.
up in the love of God and Jesus Christ, and then all torments shall be sweet
for his sake; as Jacob for Rachel. 1 Cor. 13. 7. love suffers all things.
Cant. 8. 6. love is strong as death: the coals thereof are fiery coals, and a
vehement flame; much water cannot quench it, nor floods drown it. Nay, where
this love is fervent, it kindles a flame of zeal, by which if God cannot
otherwise be glorified, or rather than God should lose his glory, the Saints
would endure even the torments of hell: Moses would rather be razed out of the
Book of life, and Paul separated from Christ, rather than God not glorified.

5. Christian resignation notably conduces hereunto. Learn to 5.
commit thy soul unto God in welldoing, as into the hands of a faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Thus did Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have
believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed
to him, till that day. A child that has any precious thing given him, the
best way to keep it, is, to put it into his fathers hands to keep. Thy soul is
the most precious thing thou have, let thy Father keep it, and it shall be safe
whatever befall the body and outward man.

6. Christian confirmation, or corroboration unto all long-suffering 6.
and patience with joy, Col. 1. 11. We must daily out-grow some weakness, and
be adding to our strength, and laying up something to animate and encourage
our selves in enduring with Christ, that by no means in trial* we be won to
deny Christ and his Name.

Now for our daily strengthening II. Meditations availing thereunto. 1.
it will be useful to meditate daily on some of these things.

1. On Gods eternal decree, who has appointed an hour for the power of
darkness to work; before which time not an hair can fall from the head: Till
it be come, Christ shall withdraw himself from danger; but when it is come, he
is not afraid to meet his enemies, to tell them he is the man whom they
seek, and deliver himself into their hands. The enemy can do nothing that God
is not aware of, nothing beyond his just and wise permission, nothing but what
shall glorify himself, edify the Church, and turn to the best, even to us
particularly.

2. Meditate on the Word of 2.
God, predicting and foretelling of persecutions for the Name of Christ, Ye
shall be hated of all men for my sake: all that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution; and, the time comes, in which they that kill you,
will think they do GOD good service. Which are good admonitions, to keep us in
some preparednes, to drink of the same cup with Christ our Lord. Commanding: to
hold fast what we have, and let none take our crown, Rev. 2. 25. as if he
had said, Hold fast with both hands that faith and grace which is the pledge of
a crown. Promising, and fencing the heart with assurance of his presence,
mitigation, deliverance, and honorable recompense, which are all strong and
sure foundations grounded in his own truth and faithfulness.

1. He has promised his presence Promis^s to them that suffer for God. 1.
in six troubles, and in seven, in fire and water; and, that for their
strength and consolation the Spirit of grace and glory shall rest upon them, 1
Pet. 4. 14. And then he does more for his Saints when he stands by them,
strengthening their faith, to suffer the pangs of death, than when he opened
the prisondoors and iron gates to let Peter and Paul goefree. Nay, the same
blessed Apostles were as dear to God, and God as near to them, when they were
behcaded by Nero, as when the one by an Angel was led out, and the other had
the foundations of the prison shaken, and the gates cast open.

2. He has promised mitigation: and it is much more, that Christians 2.
can with joy clap their hands and sing Psalms in the flames, and profess as
some of the Martyrs, that the fire was to them as a bed of Down, or sweet
Roses, than to be led out of prison by an Angel.

3. He has promised an happy 3.
deliverance: for the fire shall not hurt the gold, but fine it: the flaile
shall not hurt the wheat, but cleanse it: the black soap seems to foil and
foul the cloth, but indeed makes it whiter and cleaner. There is no danger
when Gods Battledore come on his children; it serves but to whiten them, and
parts them from their foulness. All the enemies cannot hinder thy glory, no
more than they could Christ's: they may sever soul and body asunder, but
neither of them from Christ. They may take our souls from our bodies, or our
hearts out of our bosom; but cannot take us out of the hand or bosom of our
heavenly Father.

4. He has promised a most 4. (...). Igna. ad Polycar.
ample recompense to him that overcomes. I will give him power over the
Nations, he shall be a pillar in the house of God, and shall go no more forth:
and Christ will Rev. 2. 26. and 3. 12.
confess him before his Father in heaven, Mat. 10. 32. Oh now look often upon
this happy end, if thou shall give thy life in Christ's quarrel. Great shall be
thy reward in heaven, when a miserable life shall be exchanged with eternal
blessedness. This of the second meditation.

3. Consider, that thou have Christ thy companion in suffering; 3.
yea, thou have him an example also, who for the joy set before Heb. 12. 2.
him, endured the cross: Nay, he endured thy cross, and all thy suffering is
but an honest duty of thankfulness, and a grateful part to stick to him in
trouble, whom we have followed in prosperity. Polycarp the Martyr at his death
said thus, I have served Christ 86. years, and he never hurt me, why should
I speak evil of him?

Yea, it is but duty to maintain his cause to death, who by death maintained
our cause, and now pleads it in the sight of God. Neither is it an unglorious
service, but a precious gift, and an honorable advancement, 1 Pet. 4. 14. The
Martyr that sat down with Christ at a bitter breakfast, expected a better
dinner, and found it. Oh think with thy self, what had become of me if
Christ had kept his life so fast from me, as my corruption would hold my life
from him! If I would keep it from him to day, he may snatch it from me to
morrow. If I will not give it now to glorify God, he may take it unto
punishment. If I give it freely once, it is not to lose it, but to receive it
for ever. I see when God called Abraham to sacrifice his Isaac, Abraham by
offering him preserved him: The way to preserve my Isaac, my joy, my life, is,
to offer it to Christ: for, then it shall not perish, but live and be
increased; and for my Isaac and joy, a Ram shall be sacrified, that is, only my
corrupt affections and concupiscence, but my joy shall none take away.

Verse 26. For what shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
IN this Verse our Savior enlarges the former doctrine by a 2. Argument:
unprofitablenesse of winning all with the souls loss.
second reason, drawn from the unprofitablenesse of winning the world with the
loss of the soul; and seems to prevent an objection, which might rise up in
the minds of his hearers, thus: But we see that this is not to provide for the
Prolepsis.
safety and comfort of life, for those that care not for following thee, live
at hearts ease, in plenty and fullness, they are on the rising hand, and are
the only gainers in the world, only we are losers, and have left all, and
betaken our selves to an afflicted and despicable condition for following of
thee; why might not we look to be gainers too? To which our Savior directs
his answer; They are indeed gainers in the world, but if they were gainers of
the world, there is a greater loss near them, than all that gain, even the
loss of the soul, which as it is the most incomparable loss, so is it the most
irrecoverable loss of all, but a just punishment of that man, who by losing
Christ will save his own stake. For the meaning of the words.

What shall it profit a man?] That is, What shall it any way better a
Exposition.
man's estate? The English is somewhat too short for the Greek, the word profit
being amongst us (...).
commonly used for the increase of riches; but the Greek comprehends also the
gain of honors, preferments, pleasures, or any other thing, whereby the
estate is bettered, either indeed or in appearance.

To win the whole world.] This is spoken by way of supposition: for no man ever
won the whole world. Alexander won much of it. Ahasuerus was Lord over 127.
Provinces. But never any could win the whole: yet suppose a man should win
the whole world, this would fwell to a great bulk, if we consider both what is
included in the word world, and what in the word gain the world.

1. By the world is meant, not World, what it is here.
only the frame of heaven and earth, and the creatures, but all that a natural
man's heart can desire in the world, or can wish for his full contentment, such
as honors, pleasures, and all the delights of the sons of men: In which sense
Paul says (Gal 6. 14.) I am crucified to the world, and the world to me, that
is, I have weaned my self from the desire of all such worldly contents, as
natural men make their only portion; yea, I am ever dead to such desires. This
then is the meaning: Suppose one man could gain all the world, and honors, and
pleasures that all men on earth jointly or severally have, yet what is it to
the souls loss?

2. In the gaining of the world is Gain of the world, what.
included, 1. A right and title. 2. Possession and hold. 3. Fruition and
content. ^4. A certainty of holding the whole. For all these go to a clear
gain: yet were all this, nothing to the loss of the soul.

And lose his soul.] That is, and lose himself: for so S. Luke expresses it,
chapter 9. 25. If he destroy or lose himself. And so by an ordinary Hebraism the
soul is put for the whole person: Seventy souls went Genesis 46. 27
down into Egypt, that is, seventy persons. And the soul cannot be Bucer.
lost, but the whole person must perish. And the soul cannot be but lost, when
he is offended, who can cast both soul and body into hell. Luke 12. 5.


Or what recompense shall a man give in exchange for his soul?] That is, no
exchange can countervaile the loss, nothing in the world can redeem the
soul: as if he had said, Devise what you can, all the world cannot, nor can a
thousand worlds redeem a lost soul: And therefore, as the loss is the
greatest, so it is most irrecoverable, and impossible to be made up again.

Now something is observable: Notes from the manner of propounding this truth.
1. Out of the manner of propounding: 2. Out of the matter propounded.

The manner of propounding is by a continued interrogation: which not only
carries in it more strength than an ordinary negation, but stirs up the
hearer to ponder and well weigh the matter, as if he were to give his judgment
and answer: As if the Lord had said in larger speech, Tell me out of your own
judgments and best understanding, let your own consciences be Judges whether
the whole world were a reasonable gain for the loss of the soul, or whether
the whole world could recover such a loss, or no. Wherein note,

1. That the Ministers and Preachers 1. Note. Preach well for matter and manner.
of the Word, after the example of Christ, must not only be careful of the
matter, what they teach, but also of the manner of teaching, so to instruct, as
to sharpen and set an edge on the word, so as men may be brought to commune
with themselves, and enter into their own hearts, to whet upon themselves
things delivered, to embrace that which is good, and hate the contrary.

Jer. 6. 27. the Prophet must try their ways: the Lord set and sent him, that
he might know and try their ways. To try metal, is, to bring it to the
touch; so Gods Minister must bring men to the touch, and so touch upon their
sins and dross, as the guilty person may feel himself touched, and tried
with the reproof.

Thus did Nathan in the Name of the Lord with David his King, Thou art the man,
2 Samuel 12. 7.

Thus the Lord himself (Deuteronomy. 10. 12.) after he had made rehearsal of manifold
benefits conferred on his people, asks themselves the question, And now
Israel, what does the Lord require of thee? as if he had said, Think with thy
self, and say, if he deserve not the love, fear, trust, and obedience of thy
heart and life.

Isa. 5. 4. after the Lord had showed, how he had chosen, planted, hedged, and
dressed his Vineyard, he summons them to give answer to this question, What
could I do more to my Vineyard? As* if he had said, Say within your selves,
and be Judges your selves, whether your wild grapes proceed not from your
selves, and from your own naughty disposition, and not from my want of manuring.

One reason hereof is taken from Reason 1.
the love of the Minister: Our love must direct particular doctrine to him,
whom we would profit and help toward heaven: Colos. 1. 28. Paul's affection
caused him to admonish not all men, but every man, and to teach every man, and
to present every man perfect in Christ.

The other from the fruit and pro fit of the Ministry, wherein God 2.
gives the learned tongue, that by Isa. 50. 4.
special application the doctrine may be brought home to every man's heart,
and the heart may be taught in wisdom. It is the life and excellency of
preaching, to be an able Minister of the Spirit; by the shril trumpet of the
Word to awaken the drowsy consciences, and set men's sins in order before them.
And otherwise, let a man teach generally, without application, long he shall
teach, and his people remain untaught: the bellows shall be burnt in the
fire, but the dross remain still. A garment fitted for all bodies, is fit for
no body; and so is it with doctrine: Or as a loaf of bread set among the
children, but none can they get cut and given them.

Which teaches people how to esteem of such Preachers as labor Use 1.
in application, and hold the glass of the Law before men's faces to see their
spots: namely, not as the world does, troublers of Israel, or spy-faults, or
invective Preachers; nor as our Libertines hold them, Legal Preachers. No: but
Ministers of Gods rich mercy, whose wonderful favor it is, to send us a Nathan
that will say, Thou art the man, This have thou done. Were not the Disciples of
Christ Preachers of mercy, and the best Evangelicall Preachers? yet what sharp
points had their doctrine to prick and pierce the hearts of men, to make them
cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Act. 2. 37.

Be also contrary to the practice Use 2.
of the world, who most distaste that word which comes nearest to the
conscience, and nearest the bad customs and fashions of times and persons:
Whereas indeed a good heart honors the Word for nothing more, than discovering
the thoughts, secret speeches, and practices: in nothing more can it be like to
God; an Idiot, an Infidel now can acknowledge it to be the Lords, 1 Cor. 14.
24. 25. God is in you of (...) truth. What difference between Gods word and
man's, if it should not reach the conscience? Where were the Spirit in it, if it
should not discern the spirits, and divide Heb. 4. 12.
between the marrow and the bone?

Lastly, it discovers the practice Use 3.
of wicked men, who shrink more at the curse, than at their sin; and when they
cannot blame or deny what is said, then to fly upon the Preachers purpose and
affection: So ranking themselves among those wicked ones, who rebuke the
Priest, Hos. 4. 4. Such a one will not appear an Atheist, therefore will
approve the doctrine: but he remains an hypocrite and enemy, therefore reviles
the person, and in effect rejects the doctrine. This of the first note.

2. In the manner note another 2. Note. In weighty matters use special
vehemence.
point of wisdom, namely, in matters of much importance, as is the losing of
the soul; or else of great danger, as is the winning of the world, to use more
than ordinary vehemence. The wisdom of God speaks not of tything Mint and
Cummin, as of the weighty points of the Law. Neither has every Verse in the
Bible a verily, or a behold in the beginning, or a Selah in the end. But in
matters of greater intention or excitation some star is held over them, that he
who reads, may consider.

Our Lord expressing such vehemence here, shows it the greatest matter in the
world, the gaining of heaven, and saving of the soul: And that the greatest
danger in the world is, the gaining of the world by the losing of the soul.
Can a man grapple thorns together, and not fear pricking? Can a man walk on
snares safely? and such is the gain of the world, Mat. 13. 22. and 1 Timothy 6. 10.

And therefore, as the end of the whole Ministry is to draw men Use.
from earth to heaven; so if in any argument, we the Ministers could be more
earnest and persuasive, we had need lay weight upon this (as in this our
Precedent) in haling men from the gain of the world, to the gain of
themselves, from the care of the body to the care of their souls, and from the
eager pursuit of all false profits, to the purchase of the best and surest
commodity, which shall eternally enrich them to life everlasting.

3. Our Savior in the manner 3. Note. We are naturally addicted to the world.
teaches, how naturally we are all of us inclined to the world, to seek it
with all greediness, and so have need of many and strong back-byasses: In that
this care is implied here to be, 1. the first care of a natural man, because
it is of a sensible profit and benefit: 2. the most vehement care, in that a
natural man sets his soul light for it: 3. the most insatiable, in that a man
would gain (if it were possible) the whole world: for, he that sets his heart
on silver, cannot be satisfied, Eccles. 5. 9. And this unmortified desire for
the unsatiablenesse of it is compared to the Hors-leach, which is never full
till he burst. Neither indeed can the round world (if a man had it all) fill
the corners of a covetous man's heart.

Ob. Oh but many natural men have despised the world: Some Philosophers have
cast away riches; Cr^^es.
and this, some orders of Papists profess: and therefore every man is not
naturally carried after the world.

Answ. I answer: 1. It was not hard for many to despise riches, when they saw
they could not attain them. 2. Some by common grace, above nature, are
repressed and restrained: for many such common gifts are bestowed on wicked
men, for the common good of mankind, and upholding of humane society; and
otherwise every man would be a wolf and devourer. 3. The vow of voluntary
poverty in hope of merit is blasphemous, a fruit of pride, a gross hypocrisy,
and nothing less than poverty indeed. Well said one, The purse is easier left
than the will; and if you will, Facilius saccus relinquitur, quam volumas: si
vultis, and retinendo* relinquitis. Use 1.
you may hold it, and yet leave it.

Every covetous man then is a natural man: where covetousness reigns and
commands, there nature swayes; and they are not only under this, but all their
sins* A covetous man, and a godly man, are incompatible; no more than a man can
be in heaven and earth at one time. Find thou thy heart bowed downward, and
fixed on earth with full desires? never deceive thy self with profession of
religion or godliness: for, religion entertained as well as professed, 1.
would show thee better Religion, what it does to expel covetousnes.
things: 2. affect thee with them as with thine own: 3. order unquiet and
unsatiable desires. True contentment with food and raiment, 1 Timothy 6 6.
if God give no more, is the daughter of godliness. 4. It would make thee and
all thy wealth servants of grace, employed for God, and thought best saved when
well laid out. Consider, and deceive not thy self.

Again, even professors of Religion, and those that in part are 2. Earthlines
in the godly, very scandalous.
gotten out of the world, must espy flesh and nature still at work, and
returning upon them in this behalf. It is a common, and too just an imputation
on many, who make their profession hear ill, and their Religion doubted of,
that they bind up their hands from doing good, and from furthering their own
reckoning, yet all this while profess a far degree in mortification; when,
for any thing a man can see, there is little difference between them and
worldlings: you may observe them in their trading and calling, as intent, as
untrusty, as griping, as ordinary in the mysteries and crafts of their trade,
as the ordinary worldling: Move Nonsolum avarus est, qui rapit aliena; sed and
ille avarus est qui cupide servat sua. Aug.
them to pious or charitable duties, you find many of them as barren, as
grudging, as penurious; you would think you had a flint in hand to fetch out
water. Pence are pulled from them as their joints; and silver out of their
purses, as blood out of their veins. Here is a faint profession of godliness;
but the life, the power, the spirits are oppressed. May we not say now, their
riches and cares are thorns to them? Oh that we were wise to discern how these
thorns supplant and unroot the Word, and while they root themselves, undermine
the counsels and exhortations of it! how they draw away this moisture, that
should preserve the growth and greenness of Christians, and keep the
comfortable heat and shine of the Sun of grace from us, as thorns do! Oh see
and bewail the curse of our sin, that our earthly hearts should bring forth
thorns and thistles to the choking of the seed of grace! and then be ever
cropping or unrooting them.

This of the manner of propounding these truths.

The matter affords sundry instructions.

1. The more a man is addicted Doctr. 1. Danger by earthly gain, to lose the
soul.
to gain the world, the greater is the danger of losing his soul. They that
will be rich, fall into many temptations and snares, 1 Timothy 6. 9. and surely,
he that walks on snares, and on many snares, walks not the safest. Ecclus.
5. 12. Solomon observed an evil sickness under the Sun, riches reserved to
the hurt of the owner. Pro. 1. 17. In vain is the net laid before the bird:
for, she is so greedy of the bait, that she forgets the danger, and loses her
life: So is every one that is greedy of gain, which takes away the life of the
owners thereof (as in our New Translation.) Yea so strong a snare the Devil
thought this, that he assaulted Christ himself with it, and kept it for his
last and most violent on-sett, if all other should fail him: All these will I
give thee, Matthew. 4. 9. and when this would not work, he departed hopeless.
And what else does our Lord affirm, in saying, How hard is it for a rich man
to be saved?

For first, the gain of the world Reason 1.
commonly estrangeth the heart from God, from heaven, from thoughts and desires
of it. The love of the world is an Idolatry Col. 3. 5. Jam. 4. 4. (...) Psa.
73. 27.
and spiritual Adultery, whereby the heart goes a whoring from God: and as
the adulterer gives the strength of his body to a stranger; so the worldling
gives the strength and confidence of his soul to a strange god, the god of the
world, and says to the wedge, Thou art my confidence, Job 31. 21. As the
Idolater sacrifices to his Peccatum avariti^, mentem quum infecerit, ita
gravem reddit, ^t ad appetenda sublimia at^olli non possit. Greg. moral. l. 14.
Idol; so the worldling is the Priest that sacrifices to the world and
Mammon. And as the Idolater serves his Idol, and worships it; so the lover of
gain bestows his love, affection, service, honor, and time upon the world, to
get or increase it, and thinks all the time set apart to Gods service
exceeding tedious and burdensome. And is not the Idolater in danger of
perdition? or else an Adulterer?

Secondly, desire to be rich and 2.
gain the world stuffeth the soul with a thousand damnable lusts, every one
able to sink it to hell. This one sin brings in a band and army of
wickednesses; swells the heart with pride, deads it with security, begets a
licentiousness and boldness in sinning, fills the hands with wickedness and
robbery, the mouth with oaths, curses, lies, against God and conscience, the
house with bribes and riches of iniquity, the belly with bread of deceit,
usury, and oppression. In one word, it is a fruitful root of all evil. 1 Timothy
6. 10. and a covetous person is a most Sed quae reverentia l^gum? Quis metus
aut pudor est unquam properantis avari? Juven. sat. 14.
vicious person; no sin will he forbear, that may bring him in gain: he is a
fit anvile for the Devil to forge and hammer out any mischievous device upon;
as in the examples of Ahab, Balaam, Judas, Demas, all carried in the violent
stream of this sin to heinous acts against their consciences. And does not so
cursed a root endanger the soul?

Thirdly, desire of gain threatens 3.
danger and singular detriment to the soul; because it brings it almost to an
impossibility of repentance and solvation: Matthew. 19. 20. It is easier for a
Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to be saved:
the reason is, because it commonly frustrates the means of repentance and
salvation. Our Savior notes it in those two Parables, Mat. 13. that all the
seed cast among thorns of worldly cares is choked: the thorns hinder the
sunbeams from shining on the blade and stalk, and unroot it within. And,
what was it else, that kept men from the supper of the great King, but buying
of oxen, marrying of wives, and other worldly occasions? What pulled good
Martha from the feet of Christ, and from hearing his gracious words, but
distractions about many things, which Luke 10. 41. 42.
made her forget the one thing necessary?

Does not our experience show us, that of all other men, worldlings, who are in
their thousands and ten thousands, are most dull and incapable persons in
spiritual things? Call them to works of justice, piety, mercy, neighborhood,
to uphold the worship of God, to exercise bounty and beneficence, we speak to
deaf men, and shall as soon persw ade the pillars they sit by. If they come to
Church, and hear, and get a little understanding, and be convinced, and
pricked a little, the cares of the world choke all presently, and their
covetousness suffers them not to profit by any preaching; as the Prophets,
Ezekiel. 33. 31. Of all men the bitterest enemies, and scorners of their teachers,
are covetous men. If Christ himself should come and teach them, they would
scorn him. These things heard the Pharisees, and mocked him: for they were
covetous, Luke 16. 14. they pretended other things against Christ; but it was
their covetousness that kept alive their malice.

Fourthly, as it keeps ou^ grace in all the means of it, so it eats out and
casts it out of the heart; as the lean Kine ate up the fat, and were lean
and ill-favored still. How many Apostates and Revolters confirm this truth,
who in their lower estate could read, pray, keep the Sabbaths, and their
private watches with God, could instruct their families, and use diligence in
good ways and means; but now resemble the Moon, which never suffers
eclipse but at her full, and that is by the earths interposition between the
Sun and her self? Better had it been, that these had never seen penny of
their wealth, than to have exchanged such things for it. And is not the soul
now in danger?

Quest. Is it not then lawful to labor for riches, for our selves and ours to
live well and honestly in the world?

Answ. God has enjoined man to labor, and consequently, permits him the
reward of it for the sustaining and upholding of himself and his family.
Again, there is an honest care for the family, which is part of a man's calling
enjoined by the Apostle, if any man provide not for his family, he is worse
than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. But the thing condemned is the seeking of the

world 1. Out of order. Whence this danger comes.
2. Out of measure.

1. The former, when we seek it in the first place, as that which 1.
we can worst want; when the unbeleeving heart says in it self secretly, I
must attain this and that profit, and pitch of estate, I must compass such
and such a project, and then I will become religious and devout: contrary to
our Saviors counsel, Matthew 6. 33. First seek the Kingdom of God.

2. Out of measure: both seeking 2.
more than is sufficient, and with more care and affection than is warrantable:
when for the matter, nothing is sufficient for their desire, but they are as
the grave and Horse-leach, and say ever, Pro. 30. 15.
Give* give, Eccl. 5. 9. he that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with
it. And for the manner, their care is immoderate, cutting, distracting the
heart, engrossing the thoughts and desires from better things, extinguishing
faith, consuming the time, deadning prayers, cutting off testimonies of love,
resolving to part with nothing for Christ, and to suffer* less for him if it
were possible; and in a word, not knowing any moderation.

Object. But then we are in good case, and none of us so bad.

Ans. It is hard to find a man not entangled for wealth, or by wealth; and the
less the danger is seen, the more it is.

All which may lead us into our selves, to take notice of our Use 1.
pronenesse and propensity to this sin, which no man willingly confesses, and
those that are deepest in it, and swarm with all sorts of evils flowing from
it, do least discern it in themselves. For why? 1. The Apostle (1 Thessalonians. 2.
5.) calls it colored covetousness: it Covetousnes a sin hardly noted and
confessed: why
maskes and hides it self by many subtle evasions. 2. It is an inward sin,
lurking in the spirit of a man. 3. The dust of earthlinesse puts 1.
out the eye of the mind, or at 2.
least darkneth the understanding, 3.
that it does not easily discern it. Yet,

Must we be convinced of it in our selves, and of our danger by Marks of it.
it: for first, while we have more care for earth than heaven: secondly, 1.
while we more joy and 2.
trust the means than Gods promises or providence: thirdly, 3.
while we can compass our gain by fraud of speech or deed: fourthly, while we
are remiss in 4.
means of salvation for love of 5.
the world: fifthly, while we are distracted and discontented with the things
we have. All the world may see our conversation is not without covetousness:
and Heb. 13. 5.
where is he that can say his heart is clean? Let us therefore bewail our
selves, who thrust our selves into such dangers by so base a vice as should be
found in none but Heathens and Infidels. Mat. 6. 32.


Also it may moderate our delights in these outward things: Use 2. Overjoy not
these dangerous comforts.
We think our selves happy and beloved of God, when we prosper in the world.
We rejoice in our wealth and in-comes, and bear up our head aloft, because we
have gotten more than many others. But may not many see in their wealth, how
they have endangered and hazzarded their souls? How many do highly conceit of
themselves, and are well conceited of by others, because they are rich? but if
either themselves or others should see how far off salvation they are by
means of their riches, they would soon change their note and mind: And why may
they not see this? Is not the Word a dead letter to them, or choked in them?
Is not Christ kept out, and his Spirit beaten out by the god of the world? Are
not religious duties laid aside? and they so much the more forgetful of God,
as he is more bountiful toward them? Is there not as much crop of the seed
sown in a thicket, or a thorn hedge, as of fruits of grace from them?

Likewise it may moderate our Use 3.
sorrows in afflictions, in losses, and in the bitter sufferings here below:
seeing thereby the Lord weaneth us from the world, and from the love of those
things which are so dangerous to our selves. Well we may as children cry, when
the father takes away a knife from them: but it is our safety to want what may
hurt us so much.

Lastly, let it moderate our desires, to use the world weinedly, Use 4. How to
avoid the danger of earthly gain.
even as the Mariner the sea, he cannot leave the sea, only he must avoid the
rocks and dangers.

Quest. How?

Answ. By four rules.

1. Labor to descry those 1.
rocks: note the fearful attendants of this sin, how easily it swalloweth
unlawful things, what mischiefs usher it, and are perpetrated for money; the
poor shall be sold for shoes, their faces ground, justice perverted, little
and false measures, great and unjust prices: Balaam will curse, Gehazi will
bribe, Demetrius will cry down Paul for his Images, Judas for a little money
will sell his Master, and Christians will deny their profession for a vile
price: here is Mammon of Luke 169.
iniquity, the next odious name to the Devil himself.

2. Consider the distance of 2.
that we desire, and that we hazard for it: in the vanity of this life, and
the eternity of that we expect; in the baseness of earth which we covet, made
to tread under our feet, and the precious soul of man, which is from heaven,
and has no earth in it: Nay, God has made the body of man upright, and his
face lifted up from the earth, that he might conceive how high his soul
should be elevated from it. And why should he take that into his heart, which
the Lord has cast under his feet?

3. Labor to esteem of the 3.
world, as Israel of Manna, and that wealth is but for the day; and if this
days gathering or labor will serve this days food, so shall to morrowes
labor supply for to morrowes meat: Esteem it a moveable, but God is the
portion: Esteem it a means, but man lives not by bread only, Mat. 4. 4. God
is our life, and the maintainer of it: Why then do thou not cast over thy
care to him, and confine it to the day? He gave thee thy body, will he not
give raiment also? He gave his Son for thy soul; will he then deny food
for the body? He made the mouth; and will he not give meat? Do thou trust
him for the salvation of thy soul, and not for the provision of thy body? for
heaven, and not for earth?

4. Pray to find the extreme 4.
need of Christ and his righteousness, and that all other things are but
conditionally necessary. Pray that GOD would incline thine heart to his
testimonies, that it may be so much the more drawn from covetous cares which
are opposed to all Gods commandments, Psalm. 119. 36. Pray for wisdom to
conceive thy self a stranger and pilgrim here, so to intend principally thy
departure Psalm. 39. 12.
hence: for ere long, gather as fast and as dangerously as thou can, the
poorest man's Omer shall be as full as thine.

So of the former point of instruction.

2. Many Christians do not only Doct. 2. Many lose their souls for the world.
endanger, but even lose their souls for the world: so our Saviviour implies:
Numbers of men, to win the world, do lose their souls. And though a man
would think, that no man were or could be so mad, as to part with his soul on
such base terms; yet millions of men exchange heaven for earth, and barter
away their souls (not for the whole world, but) for an handful of earth. As
for example: 1. Instances and proofs thereof.


1. He that loses Christ, loses his soul. But for the winning of the world
many lose and forgo Christ. The young man left Christ, because he had great
possessions, Mat. 19. 22. Many of the Jews heard Christ, knew him, and
believed in him, but durst not confess him, for that they feared to be losers
in the world, Joh. 12. 42, 43. And thus do all they, who being convinced in
themselves, and having some good affections joined to illumination, yet give
the day to the world, and the night to Christ. Great and rich men dare not be
seen in the profession; when poor fishermen come by day, they dare not come
by night.

2. He loses Christ for the world, that gives priority to the 2.
world above Christ: as the Gade^ens preferred their hogs before the presence
of Christ: and as Esau preferred the broth before the blessing. He only has
won Christ, that esteems all* things as dross and dung in com parison of
Christ, Phil. 3. 7, 8. The wise Merchant that found the pearl, lost all to buy
it. The Disciples left all for Christ. But easily may we see, how millions of
men undervalue Christ in comparison of the world: for,

First, what is the chief labor, Signs of Christ undervalued fo th wrorld.
study, time, costs and pains of men employed upon? is it not for the food
that perishes, and profits of the world? in the mean time the labor for 1.
that durable food, and the Manna that came down from heaven, is either none
or formal, slight, seldom.

Secondly, how are the affections of men generally bent? is 2.
Christ their chife joy, or treasure? has. She gained their thoughts? delight
they in his love, more than in life? Or see we not the multitude prefer the
world before their chief joy, set their hearts upon it, dote upon it, their
thoughts run first and last, and all day long after it, with unwearied
delight and comfort? when in the mean time they banish thoughts of Christ, of
their treasure, portion, and country in heaven. How do most men fear the
loss of the world, more than the loss of Gods favor, their souls, and
salvation? How do they more grieve and sorrow in a trifling loss of the
world, than when by sin Gods favor and the grace of Christ is forfeited?

Thirdly, how do the speeches 3.
of men bewray them to be worldlings? and if the speech be according to the
abundance of the Mat. 12. 34.
heart, Christ has small room there. Esa. 32. 6. the niggard speaks of
niggardliness: and 1 John 4. 5. They speak of the world, and the world
hears them. But how long should a man watch in vain for a ^avorie word
concerning Christ, or the salvation of their souls? or speak to them the
language of Canaan, it is Hebrew? or thrust in a savory speech, of God, his
word, or grace, how strange and unwelcome is it? their pens tell us, that
their hearts indite no good Psalm. 45. 1.
matter. Is not this to undervalue Christ in comparison of the world? or is
this to be a pilgrim, or to possess, or rather to be wholly possessed of the
word?

Object. There is no man, whose ordinary theme is not more of the world, than
of GOD or Christ: and will you therefore Speeches of the world, how to be
limited.
conclude, that there is no man but loves the world better than Christ?

Answ. 1. We are all more carnal than spiritual, and therefore 1.
our thoughts and speeches, will be wandering: but we must not please our
selves herein, but mortify and subdue carnal words as well as desires, and
groan under this corruption: for, is it not a woeful and wonderful error,
that earth and perishing things should more affect and possess us, than the
great things given us of God in Christ?

Secondly, I grant we have callings, and earthly affairs, 2.
which tie us ordinarily to speak and think of such things: but the special
calling of a Christian must be ever subordinate to the general, and in all
earthly business a man must carry an heavenly mind. God gives no leave to be
earthly-minded, even while a man is earthly-employed.

Thirdly, the speaking and thinking more of a thing upon 3.
necessity does not ever argue more love unto it, but the speaking and
thinking of things out of the valuation of judgment: for instance, A workman
thinks more of his tools, and an husbandman speaks more of his husbandry,
than of his wife or children, because these are the object of his labor; but
it follows not, he loves them better, because he does not in his judgment
esteem these better. Now let a Christian preserve in his judgment a better
estimate of Christ, and heavenly things, and his speeches in things earthly
will still prefer that, and run upon it.

So of the two former proofs.

Thirdly, he loses his soul for 3.
the world, that for wealth or by wealth hinders his own salvation: as numbers
do by unlawful getting the world, falling down before the devil for it:
wealth is even the devils wages for some sin committed, being either gotten
or kept by evil means, or against good conscience, viz. either in the use of
an unlawful calling, or by the abuse of a lawful.

Of the former sort are such as live by dicing houses, filthy Unlawful
callings make wealth dangerous, when gotten.
houses, and the like places of hellish resort, which may be rightly called the
devils houses of office. And those that live by unthriftie gains, by usury,
magic, making the instruments of pride and sin, or a calling to which they
are not fitted, as insufficient Ministers, who run but are not sent, because
they are not gifted: God need not send a message by the hand of a fool.

Of the latter sort are, first, those Or the abuse of lawful.
that enrich themselves for doing a duty which they do not, as gross
Non-residents, that feed 1.
themselves, but not the flock: or for doing that they ought not to do, as
Lawyers, who take reward for pervertings equity and right, or perhaps are
fee-ed on both sides, by one to speak, by the other to hold their peace, or as
good.

Secondly, tradesmen that use false weights, measures, words, (...). Is. Pel^s.
lib. 3. epist. 24.
wares sophistical and insufficient: as many who rise by cousenage, and the
craft of their trades, by lying or swearing: or by tricks in bargaining abuse
the simplicity or necessity of men: especially by promise breaking, and
slipperinesse in contracts; and by breaking up their estate to defraud men, and
cheat their Creditors: an horrible theft, and an arrow shot lately from hell
to the overthrow of many: they will be sure of a rich booty, that shall make
them Gentlemen-theeves ever after, when their poor fellows, who never did
half so much hurt, go to the gallows.

Thirdly, in the same sort and rank are Painters, that make idolatrous or
filthy inflaming pictures, as so many wanton and alluring harlots: Stationers
that sell filthy and lascivious pamphlets, the devils trumpets to spread his
poison and uncleanness: All these will one day prove heavy gains, when the
eye is open to see the soul lost for getting such an handful of the world.
Here is a great deal of the Mammon of iniquity, as profitable as Judas his
thirty silverpieces.

We come now to the lastproof.

Fourthly, he loses his soul for the world, that by the world 4. Wealth
casts men back in the way of salvation, how.
casts himself back in the way and means of salvation: as,

First, when his wealth blocks up the way of salvation, becoming thorns to
choke the 1.
word, or as water to quench zeal, or as weights oppressing the motions of the
Word and Spirit: when riches distract the owners, not suffering them to keep
watches with God in reading, prayer, meditation, and the like godly exercises:
when they are incentives to pride, and backbyasses to repentance, etc.

Secondly, when they are perverted 2.
to hold men, and uphold them in a course of sin and damnable lusts, as riot,
gaming, drinking, whoring, pride, idleness, or the like: or when men waste
them in contentions and quarrels needlessly, as some penurious snake that cannot
find a groat in many years to uphold the ministry, or any good motion, yet
can find pounds and pieces good store, to spend against his Minister or
neighbors, to compass his rotten and crooked will. But it is good to consider
the doom of such wicked servants, that have thus wasted their Masters goods:
bind them hand and foot, cast them into hell, there shall be weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Now conclude from hence, that there is no hope of thriving Use 1. No clear
gain nor thriving in an evil way. Lucrum fraud partum, damnumest, non
lucrum. Laert. l. 1. c. 1.
by iniquity, or indirect means of getting wealth; because Gods curse goes
with it, and the plague ever accompanies it: as if a man should eat good
cheer, but in a plaguie house; or wear silk and satin, but it is all
infected apparel; or as a felon by robbery gets a bag of money, but has for it
lost his life, and is pursued with huy and cry to be apprehended for judgment:
Hab. 2. 6. thou increasest that which is not thine. But suppose it were thine
by good means, it is but as thick clay wherewith thou loadest thy self, as a
pack-horse that has no other benefit of his load, than the heavy burden of
it. What were a man richer for an estate never so great, if he were sure it
should all be suddenly consumed by fire? yet such is the wealth of wicked
worldlings, who are well-pleased without any other portion: the curse of God as
a spark of fire kindles in that estate, and moulders, and consumes it, that
oftentimes not the third or second heir rejoices De male quae sitis vix
gaudet tertius haeres.
in it.

And it will be wisdom to consider, whether fraud and guile have not brought
such a guest as poverty, into many houses. Look upon shifters, gamesters,
couseners, and deceitful persons, who by all their tricks and shifts profit
themselves little or nothing in their estate, and cannot shift off contempt,
reproach, and beggerie: and many unjust persons who have risen and ruffled by
deceitful courses, have as suddenly sunk and withered; and no reason could be
imagined, but the falsehood of their foundation, and a secret and insensible
curse of God, fretting the very timber of their houses; sometimes (...)ale
parta, male dilibun^ur.
in their own days, sometimes in their heirs after them, wasting and
consuming as wickedly and speedily as ever their father, got it; whereof our
age affoordeth many fearful examples.

Now if God have spared the arrest of those goods forfeited by falsehood,
speedily labor to prevent it by repentance, by mercy, by restitution, by
reformation. Never trust to rise by that, which so many others fall by. Think
not to turn that to a clear gain, which is to all others a loss: yea, and
the greatest loss to thy self, in earthly things and heavenly, in body and
soul, nay, of body and soul, which is the greatest of all losses, and most
irrecoverable.

Again, our care must be, to be Use 2. Further thy salvation by the world.
so far from losing our souls for the world, as that by the world we further
the salvation of them.

First, for that God gives not Motives.
these things as snares and hindrances, 1
but as staves in our hands to help us in our way, and as a prosperous wind
to him that is sailing to heaven.

Secondly, he has commanded 2
us to Honor the Lord with our riches, Pro. 3. 9. to use them as our Masters
talents, to our Masters advantage: to use them as our servants: and a slave is
intolerable, when he takes on him to rule the house, especially when as a
rival he wooeth his Mistress to gain her love from his Master: so riches are
good servants, while servants; but if they allure the soul, and withdraw the
heart from the husband, they must be turned away.

Thirdly, what a lamentable thing is it, to pervert the good 3
gifts of God to our own perdition? as for a glutton to kill himself with
that which should preserve his life.

Quest. But how may I by riches promote mine own salvation?

Answ. First, make friends of Means. 1. Five sorts of friends to be made
them, to help thy self into everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. First, make
God thy friend by maintaining his worship, and the 1.
persons and places belonging unto it: buy the means of grace, and settle the
Ministry: buy the truth and sell it not. Once the people brought too much to
the Tabernacle: but the fault is now on the contrary side: see Exodus 36. 5. and
Pro. 17. 16. Secondly, make Christ thy friend, by relieving his poor 2.
members, whom we have always with us, not only to exercise their humility
and patience, but also the mercy and liberality of the rich: and Christ
acknowledges, what is done to them is done to himself: and who would not
relieve Christ, if he stood in need? Thirdly, make the poor 3.
thy friends, that they may receive thee, by their prayers, and testimony of
thy charity. The loins and bellies of the poor blessed Job: Obadiah fed the
Prophets of God: Dorcas made garments for the poor: Cornelius his alms came
up before God, and obtained a remembrance. Fourthly, make all men thy 4.
friends; To do good and distribute, forget not: for with such sacrifices God
is well-pleased, Heb. 13. 16. Do good unto all, especially the household of
faith, Gal. 6. 10. How fit is it, that the necessities of men in want should
be relieved by such as are laden with super fluities, to this very end, to do
good to others?* for the gathering of wealth should be like the gathering of
Manna (Exodus 16. 17.) whereof some gathered more, and some less, but so as he
that gathered more, had no overplus, and he that gathered less, had no want.
Fifthly, make thy self 5. Terrena omnia, qu^ servando amittimus, largiendo
servamus. Greg. 2 Cor. 9. 6.
thine own friend, by laying up a good foundation in good works, by an
hopeful and liberal seedtime: for he that sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly: and by works of mercy further both thy reckoning, and reward of
mercy: All which blessing and reward they wilfully deprive themselves of, who
neither for their Masters honor, nor the good of their fellow servants, no nor
for heaven and salvation it self, will part with any thing; but in stead of
blessing lay up judgment merciless for themselves, showing no mercy.

So of the first means.

Secondly, use riches to serve God with more cheerfulness, 2.
and with a good heart in the midst of abundance. A rich man Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
may have more freedom to enjoy the word, more time for meditation, prayer,
reading, and godly conference; which time and spare hours the poor want, who
are bound to their daily labor; and must not be spent by the rich in riot, in
lusts, in gaming and idleness, but in doubling their measure of grace, and
labor in the means of grace, reading, hearing, praying, meditating so much
the more, as God has freed them from the incessant labor, care and travel of
others. For, if thou have so many spare hours, thou must give account whether
thou art richer in grace, according to the proportion of those hours, than
those that have no such release from their labor. But in stead hereof, how
have the things of the world thrust in upon many, to take up their thoughts, to
unsetle good resolutions, to resist good motions and duties, to justle out the
course of fruitful conversing with God! Oh what hurt have their souls
sustained in all these particulars!

Thirdly, draw out of these 3.
outward things a spiritual use: for else the beasts use them as fruitfully as
we. For example: when I see my self or others so intent to treasure in earth,
I must turn mine eyes upward, and say to my self, Alas, what am I doing! I
profess my self chosen, and called out of the world, that I am a citizen of
heaven, that I am risen with Christ, etc. and must I drown my thoughts in
earth, and not seek things above? I profess the pure religion, which keeps
it self unspotted of the world: and being called out of the world, I must in
the world look for affliction which ever attends the choosing of the better
part: I must not now live after the course of the world, as in times past: I am
crucified to the world, and the word to me: I cannot serve two Masters,
commanding so contrary things, nor share my heart between God and the world,
nor have one foot in heaven, and another in earth; sinful pleasures will never
suit with spiritual joys and delights. Again, do I cast mine eyes upon my
own or other men's full cups, and large revenues? and is my earthly heart
working it own contentment in the abundance of outward blessings? now must I
check it, and bend it backward, and say to it, Alas, what will it avail me
to leave barnes full, houses full, chests full of treasure, and carry my soul
empty away in respect of true grace? And thus, one way or other, a good heart
may still help it self by temporalls.

4. Labor to hold and use them 4.
always: First, in Christ, by whom our right is restored unto them: Secondly,
with Christ, accounting himself the chief treasure, and his grace and service
the one thing necessary: Thirdly, for Christ, employing them to his glory, and
the benefit of our selves and others his members.

A notable means by riches to further the salvation of our souls.

Lastly, consider seriously the reason of our Savior, saying, Use 3. Riches
thus unprofitable, how.
there is no profit in that wealth for which a man loses his soul, or by way
of question, What shall it profit a man to win the whole world and lose his
own soul?

First, they are not able to make his person better: they make many 1.
a man worse, but can make no man better: or better they can make him, that is,
of better place among men, who measure goodness by goods, but not the person
better before God: for, did they better a man's person, why have the worst most
store of them? how is it that my Lord Esau goes strutting with four hundred
men at his heels, and poor Jacob comes creeping and crouching unto him? why
does Pharaoh sit on the throne, and his Just is his law, and Moses and Aaron
humble suitors unto him? why does Nabal abound in superfluity, and David
become his petitioner for some relief? why are false prophets set up at
Jezabels table, and Elias the mean time in commons with ravens? Or if they
were so profitable to better a man's person, why did not Christ furnish his
Disciples with them? why did he forbid them to possess gold or silver? why
must Judas have the bag, while Peter says, Gold and silver have I none?

2. Though they can thus far better a man's outward estate in 2.
temporalls, tha^ he has what to eat and drink, and put on more than others,
which not only poor men enjoy in some good measure, but the very brute beasts
themselves also: Yet what can they profit a man's inward estate? can a jewel
buy faith, or repentance, or pardon of sin? can clothes of gold get a suit
from God, or the spirit of God, or the hearing of prayer? nay, do not riches
rather hinder all these?

Thirdly, though they seem 3.
to profit a man for a time, yet when he has most need of them, they fail
him; and prove most unprofitable, and either fly away as very vagrants, or, if
he hold them in his hand, and lean on them, they become very ^eeds, which
break and pierce the hand that holds them. See some instances.

First, in time of danger, and 1.
Gods visitation: when they have Instances of times and cases wherein wealth
will do us no good.
caused us to forsake GOD our help, they prove helpless: 1. Sam. 12. 21. they
are called vain things which cannot profit us, nor deliver us, because they be
vanities: Pro. 11. 4. Riches avayle not in the 1.
day of wrath, that is, they cannot stop or hide from Gods judgment, they
cannot wall out the plague, nor the sword, nor the famine. The full purse never
kept a man from the robber, nor the full chest from the thief.

Indeed in time of peace and frozen security, they may as ice bear us up a
while: but when the fire of Gods wrath comes, they melt under us, and leave us
in the suds: Compared therefore to the brooks of Arabia, that for one time of
the year are covered with ice, and the other part dried up with heat, when the
passenger has most need of them; Job 6. 16.

Zeph. 1. 18. Silver and gold cannot deliver in the day of the Lords wrath:
nay, they are so far then from being helps, as they are heavy burdens to
the owners, as Ezekiel. 7. 19. The rich man shall cast his silver away, and his
gold shall be far off: nay, the greater his wealth is, the greater plague,
the greater grief, and spoil awaites him: as a tree that has thick and
large boughs, every man desires to lop him. And how many have we known
overthrown by the finenesse of their garments, who if they had had a shorter
train, had in likelihood stood out many years longer!

Remember that Riches have wings: under which let the Master hide himself a
while (as Esa. 28. 15.) making falsehood his refuge, and hiding himself under
vanity: yet with these wings will they fly away, like a runnagate servant when
his Master has most need of him.

Secondly, in time of sickness they are unprofitable. The honorable 2. Nugas
Scy^ha ornamenta missa a Michaele Palaeologo aspernatus, rogavit nunquid
calamitates, morb^s aut mortem depellere possint? Pachy. mer. hist. l. 5.
Garter cannot cure the gowt, nor the Chair of Estate ease the collicke, nor a
Crown remove the headache. Can a man by all his wealth buy a good nights
sleep? can it help him to a good stomach? or free him of one shaking or
burning fit of an ague? Nay, as worms breed in the softest woods, and cankers
in the most sappie trees; so softness, idleness, fullness, intemperance, and
effeminate delicacie in the rich, procure peculiar and most incurable diseases.

Thirdly, in the day of death 3.
they cannot profit: Job. 27. 8. What hope has the hypocrite, when he has
heaped up riches, and God takes away his soul! for as they cannot help to life
or birth (in which case some would give thousands or millions for an heir) so
they cannot help in life to put off death. Do not Princes fall Psa. 82. 6. 7.
like others, and these gods dye like men? Could all the rich man's wealth hold
his soul one night? no, the fool found his life stood not in abundance. It is
righteousness, Luke 12. 15. 20.
not riches, that delivers the soul from death, Prove. 10. 2. Nay, at death
they bring much bitterness: for it is as great a pang of death to part with
wealth, as to part with life: so as a rich man without better hopes dies a
double death here: And one misery abides with him, that while he leaves his
wealth, he carries his sins with him, occasioned in the getting, keeping,
and disposing of them; these lie down in the dust with him.

Fourthly, after death they profit 4.
not: they cannot keep the soul from hell, nor ease that torment one moment:
they cannot keep corruption from the body: open the grave, and see if thou
can discern a difference between the rich and poor: tell me if the worms
spare either of both: but if the living be wronged by cost about embalming,
entombing, or the like, it is but a corpse still, no sweeter to God, if not
sweetened by the embalming and burial of Christ.

Fifthly, at the day of judgment 5.
the whole world cannot profit a man, being then set on a light fire; then
shall gold and silver, and precious stones, and common stones be all one: the
Judge will not be corrupted, nor can causes be gilded, nor sentence pronounced
according to our wealth in goods Verae divitiae, non opes sunt, sed virtutes
quas secum conscientia portat, ut in perpetuum dives fiat. B^rn.
or lands, but according to our graces, and riches in good works: This will be
then the only profitable wealth; not gold in our chests, but faith and piety
in our consciences, shall avayle us: and, not that we had abundance, but that
we were abundant in faithful dispensing, shall be our acceptance. Pro. 21.
21. He that follows righteousness and mercy, shall find righteousness,
life, and glory.

And now after all this say, What profit is it to win the whole world, and
lose his own soul?

Or what recompense shall a man give for his soul?

Two meditations arise out of these words.

1. The soul of a man is a most Doct. 1. Man's soul a most precious thing
precious and invaluable thing: seeing all the world gained is not comparable
to the loss of one soul: Pro. 6. 26. it is called the precious soul, or life
of man. See it farther, 4. ways:

1. Consider the soul in it self: Declared 4. ways.
it is a particle of divine breath: 1.
not created as bodily things, consisting of matter and form, but inspired of
God. For the soul is neither traduced from the souls of Parents, and much
less generated of any corporal seed or matter, but the Lord that spread the
heavens, and founded the earth, formed the spirit of man within him, Zech. 12.
1. neither was it created without deliberation of the whole Trinity. Genesis 1.
26. Let us make man in our own image, or likeness: as being the exquisite
Masterpiece above all other.

2. Behold it in the faculties of it, and wonder that God should 2. Anima dum
vivifi^at corpus, anima est: dum vult, animus est: dum s^it, men's: dum recolit,
memoria: dum rectum ^udicat, ratio: dum spiral, spirit us est: dum aliquid
sen^i^, sensus est. Isid. E^ym. 11.
put in such a piece of clay so divine a soul: And that, not only in regard
of supernatural qualities, of holiness and righteousness, in the entire
nature of it; but also in respect of natural qualities and operations,
resembling God in his understanding and wisdom, it has a faculty to
understand and know Him whom it ought chiefly to love, and is almost infinite
(at least, insatiable) in seeking knowledge; a faculty to will, even that
which God wills, nor rests it in any thing of this life, nor is contented
with any thing below, but wills principally things beyond the sight,
blessedness and happiness, and respects good estimation after death; and so
argues it own immortality, as God is immortal: a faculty of conscience,
that stands in awe to sin though none look on, or cites the person (...).
Menan.
before Gods tribunal, as Belshazzar and Felix who trembled. It has likewise
all his operations above sense, to love GOD, fear God, believe in God, embrace
Religion, meditate on heavenly things: with an aptness to proceed in the
knowledge of God, which other inferior creatures 3. Creatio corporis and
membrorum est propter any mam. Arist. l. 2. de animalibus.
cannot do.

3. Behold it in the end of it: it was not made for the body, but the body for
the soul, and, not only to be the tabernacle of the soul to dwell in, but
the instrument of the soul to work by: for the soul tied to the body cannot
put forth his faculties without organs and senses of the body, to express love
and duty unto God. But, the primarie and proper end of the divine soul is, to
live to God in this life, and with God in the life to come.

Fourthly, behold it as redecmed 4.
by Christ, and created again to Gods image. What a price did God and Jesus
Christ set upon it? what more precious than the blood of him that was God? The
ransom of the soul must be a bove all corruptible things, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Also
as it is sanctified by the Spirit: what can be comparable to his unmatchable
graces? no pearls are to be compared to wisdom, to precious faith, to the
fear of God which is a rich treasure. And if the hangings be so precious,
what may we think of the room?

Then be so much the more Use 1. Be the more careful, that nothing hurt it.
wary to shun any thing that may hurt the soul. We esteem our natural
lives precious: and therefore are careful to avoid whatsoever is prejudicial
to the body. But the divine nature of the soul, and the excellency of it
above the body, calls for more care and watchfulnes about it: as,

1. Abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul: Instances. 1.
(1 Pet. 2. 11.) beware of inward uncleanness and impuritie, the projects of
the flesh, pleasures of the flesh, or pleasing of the flesh, which savoureth
not the things of God, but fights against the spirit: Romans 8. 7. and lusts
against it, Gal. 5. 17. Once already Animam non mors, sed mala vita perdit.
it has robbed us of Gods image and our own happiness: and cannot but serve
us so again, if we listen unto it.

2. Beware of earthly lusts, worldly desires, and seeking after 2.
these transitories which drown the soul in perdition, (...).
1 Timothy 6. 9. How careful will a man be of falling into a whirlepit, where if
good help come not in time, he is sure to be drowned? it is the word there
used: noting a certain danger of drowning in a well or pit: and such a danger
as covetous rich men seldom or never get out of.

3. Beware of false doctrine, errors, and heresies against the 3.
truth received, which are the poison and plague of the soul. A man would not
for a world drink a draught of poison: and a careful Christian will not
willingly drinke-in any poisoned or infected doctrine, which is infinitely more
deadly to the soul, than the other to the body.

4. Beware of all sin, but especially of sins against conscience, 4.
which are called wasting sins; Peccata vestantia.
and of David, prevailing sins, Psalm. 19. 13. Presumptuous sins make great
gashes in the soul: no sword can so gash and cleave the body. Who would not
avoid a mortal wound from a keen and mortal weapon? Every sin is a mortal
wound, but these far more desperate and incurable.

Again, is the soul so precious? Use 2. Murder of souls an horrible sin.
then the murder of the soul is the most horrible sin that can be: to
destroy the body of a man, is to destroy Gods image: yet a greater sin to
destroy his soul. Ah fearful sin of non-residencie, which destroys so
many souls* for if vision fail, people must perish, Prove. Cadit a^inus, and
inveniet qui ipsum sublevet: cadit anima, and non est qui manum app^nat. Bern.
in Cant.
29. 18. The careless neglect of so many souls as are under our charge, is a
fearful, and unregarded sin. Nature teaches to prevent death and mischief
from the bodies of all that are within our gates, even beasts themselves: and
shall we do no more for our brethren and bowels, than for our beasts? Never a
soul thou stand charged withal, but if it miscarry by thy default, thy
life shall go for his life: see 1 King. 20. 39. and Ezekiel. 3. 18.

On the other side, is the soul Use 3. To save souls, a work of highest
nature and worth.
so precious? then the saving of a soul is one of the best and highest works
of mercy, and shall receive the best reward: to shine as the stars in the
firmament of heaven, Dan. 12. 3. How should this stir up the Ministers to
diligence in preaching, so to feed and save souls? The gaining of one soul
is above the gain of the world. Therefore as the Lords nourses be ever laying
out your breasts, and afford the Lords children his own provision, in Anima
eliam pess(...)a, melior optimo corpore. Aug.
the word and sacraments: labor to bring them to faith, by which they receive
the food: and pray for the spirit, by whose heat it is digested and turned into
the nourishment of the soul.

How should it excite Parents and Masters to tender the precious souls of
their children and servants, to win them to God by instruction, counsel,
prayer, example, every way helping them out of sin? The chief love and care
should be set on that, which is most precious. But great is the sin of most
men, who no more regard the souls of their children and servants, than if they
had no souls at all.

How should it stir up able men to set up and hold up the Ministry every
where, according to their power, which is the highest work of mercy tending
to save souls? Ordinarily rich men at their death give (if any thing) to
hospitalls, or works of charity to the poor. And these works of mercy to
the bodies of men, being fruits of faith, are worthy evidences of the power of
the Gospel, and shall not want their reward, Mat. 10. 42. But if any man would
run at the best prize, and do a Si magn^e mercedis est a morte eripere
carnem, quanquam mori^ura^. qu (...)i est meati a morte animim liberare, in
coelesti patria sine fine victuram? Greg. mor. 26.
work of truest mercy, do it to men's souls, provide for their instruction,
get them food for their souls, and the clothing of Christ's righteousness:
this is the better part, (Luke 10. 42.) to show mercy to the more precious
part: the saving of one soul is a more happy work than the provision of a
thousand bodies: that must be done, and this not neglected.

More: how careful should every Use 4. Be specially careful to save thy soul.
one be for his own soul, which is here prized at so dear a rate? all other
things of price we are charie of: for our bodies we are excessively careful,
both to free them from annoyance, and supply them with abundance of good
things: how much more would we do so for our souls, if we prized them above
our bodies? but general is the folly of that fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.
20. who provided for every thing but his poor soul.

Consider: even in this life the Si animam negligamus, nic corpus salvare
poterimus. Non enim anima pro corpore, sed corpus pro anima factum est, etc.
Chrysostom. de repar. lapsi.
welfare of thy body depends on the good estate of thy soul: and if the soul
be well provided for, and saved, the body is sure to be saved too. Remember
the promise, Exodus 23. 25. If thou cleavest to the Lord, he shall bless thy
bread and thy water, and take all sickness from the midst of thee. And the
keeping of the words of wisdom is life to those that find them, and health to
their flesh, Prove. 4. 22. Hence the godly in death were ever and only careful
of their souls: as Steven (Act. 7. 59.) Commended his soul into the hands of
God: and Christ, himself, his spirit into the hands of his Father, (Luke 23.
46.) not mentioning their bodies: they knew one cure employed the other.

Lastly, note the madness of Use 5. Madness to lose the soul for the world.
men undervaluing their souls, and exchanging them for an handful of earth,
when indeed the world cannot profit them after this loss. Once Adam and all
his sons exchanged an innocent estate for a sinful abd miserable: and so it
is still. And with the prodigal son, we forgo willingly our fathers favor
for harlots and harlotrie, our fathers house for a strange country, our fathers
bread for husks. What an extreme folly this is, appears thus: lay a man the
wealth of a Kingdom, a Crown, and all the world in his hand for his life, he
will not forgo it at any hand, but will readily say, what will all this do
me good when I am dead? he is wise to esteem his life at an higher rate than
the whole world, because all the world cannot recompense or make up his loss.
But offer him a morsel of unjust gain, or a slight unlawful and stolen
pleasure for his soul, he makes a present exchange: Ah seely man, whose soul
is so small a moate in thine eye, which a thousand worlds of men and Angels
could not redeem! God set it at the highest rate: and the devil would give a
whole world for one soul: but thou countest it not worth any thing. Hell shall
be filled with souls at a cheaper rate, than one soul can get to heaven by.

So of the first meditation.

The second is this: For a lost Doct. 2. No help for a soul once lost.
soul there is no remedy nor recompense: all the world cannot redeem a lost
soul: for a soul not yet quite lost, may be a recompense by the blood of
Christ; but for a soul lost is no remedy nor ransom, no not in Christ
himself.

To conceive this, consider,

1 What is the estate of a lost 3. things to understand it.
soul. 2 What it is, that being once lost makes it irrecoverable. 3 The
worthlesnes and impotencie of all earthly things to help it.
For the first of these: see what goes to the loss of a soul. I. The estate
of a lost soul, what.


1. There is the loss of Gods favor, fellowship, and presence; whose favor
and presence is better than life: for with him is the 1. Psalm. 63. 3.
Well of life. And not that only, but the soul is thrust under Gods most
heavy displeasure, and his hot wrath, which is a consuming fire.

2. The loss of Jesus Christ, and all the benefits of his redemption: and 2.
so the soul is cut off from remission of sin, to which only Psalm. 32. 1. 2.
belongs blessedness; from imputation of righteousness, which only entitleth to
life; from the dignity of adoption, to which only belongs the inheritance;
from the benefit of Christ's intercession, that he will not so much as pray for
such. Now the soul lying without Christ, lies under the whole rigor of the
Moral Law, under the curse and sentence of condemnation and malediction, for
provoking so high justice; and under the power of Satan, as a Jailer, holding
the sinner unto execution in everlasting chains.

3. The lost soul has lost the blessed presence of the Spirit of 3.
God, which is the soul of the soul; and as the Sun to the world, so is he
to the Elect for light and comfort. There is a loss of the Spirit in all his
saving offices: his illumination, further than to make them unexcusable: his
consolation and joy, having left them to eternal horror and heaviness: and
his assistance of leading them into all truth, or raising requests in them.
Thus wanting the spirit, they want all degrees of mortification, from first to
last, in life and death. They are laid under the whole power of their vain
conversation, and under all the corruption of the present evil world, that they
may eternally lie under as much power as guilt of sin.

4. There is the loss of heaven and happiness, and that eternally: 4.
and not that only, but the sense of horrible torment, expressed in Scripture
by unquenchable fire: Mat. 3. 12.
which notes them infinitely miserable, in the eternity and durance of most
exquisite torments: for their worm dies not, and their fire goes not out,
Esa. 66. 24. and they have no rest, but the smoke of their fire ascends
continually, Rev. 14. 15. so as they Rev. 9. 6. Ipsumesse, iis poena.
shall seek death, but shall not find it: their very being is a punishment.

Next, what is it, that makes II. What makes a lost soul irrecoverable.
the soul, once lost, irrecoverable?

1. An invincible wicked and hard heart, settled upon sin, and sending out all
cursed practices of 1.
lying, swearing, despighting grace in the means and bringers, cruelty,
injustice, vain confidence, and all manner of sin. They that do such things,
are shut out of the kingdom of God, and of Christ, 1. Cor. 69. Gal. 5. 21. For
such be wray themselves given up of God to a reprobate mind, calling Romans 1.
28. Esa 5. 20.
good evil, and darkness light; whose consciences are seared against 1. Tim.
4. 2.
all goads and prickings of the word: no counsel or admonition touches them,
nor troubles them: all the threats and menaces of the law are to them as
iron-weapons to Behemoth, esteemed as straw. Here is a man in a lost estate.
Judas is a lost son of perdition: how know you him? all the counsels and
admonitions of Christ are lost upon him, nothing works upon him for
reformation: and obstinate Pharaoh will be broken all to pieces, before the
powerful ministry of Moses and Aaron can bend him.

If we meet with such knottie pieces, on whom in vain we break many wedges;
who, if Moses and Aaron were immediately sent with as many miracles as
messages, or if Christ himself in person should persuade with them, yet still
would remain obstinate, alas, what remedy? who can save a lost man? a man
that will not be saved? A man that chooses death, must dye: he will not live.

2. This also makes the lost 2.
soul irrecoverable, for that it has trod under foot the blood of Christ; so
as there is no more price or sacrifice for his sin, Heb. 10. 29. And they do
this (says Ambrose) who sin voluntarily, without fear, not regarding the
blood that was shed for them, nor fearing Christ the Judge who sometimes shed
his blood for their redemption. This is to crucify Christ again daily to
themselves, and to put him to death daily, Heb. 6. 6.
who having dyed once can dye no more. Slight this blood of Christ, and sin
against it, what can save thee?

3. The Spirit of grace in the 3.
Ministry has been despighted, his motions and knockes all rejected,
himself grieved and banished. And now that he is driven out with despite, he
never Heb. 10. 29
comes more, let that soul sink or swim: the Spirit of life is gone.

4. The day of mercy has been despised, the season of grace has 4.
been slipped, the door of grace is now shut, a world of tears and sorrow
cannot now quench the fire of wrath kindled against the sins, and souls: now
the blessing is too late sought with tears: tears of horror and despair (a
full sea of them) cannot wash the guilt of one sin: repentance is now
unseasonable. Time was when Christ called Jerusalem with tears, and would have
gathered her as the hen gathers her chickens, but she would not, the things of
Mat. 23. 37.
her peace were then hid from her eyes, and afterward all her sorrow was too
late.

Next, see the worthlesnesse III. All unable to recover a lost soul, how and
why.
and impotencie of all earthly things to recover a lost soul.

First, in their ranks. Whatsoever is in the world, is reduced to one of these
three heads (1. John 2. 16.) Lust of the flesh, voluptuousness, 1.
pleasures; wherein if there be any excellency, the brute beasts led with
sensuality enjoy it above men; for they enjoy their appetite without all
restraint and check, of reason or religion. Lust of the eye, desire of wealth,
riches, abundance, whereof worst men are greatest gainers, and those that have
no true treasure, abound in these: beside, the Scripture calls them shadows,
lies, thick clay, uncertain and deceivable riches. And pride of life, (...).
Epict. c. 1. and 2.
honor, ambition, preferment, estimation of men; which are so much the more
worthless, because they depend upon other men's breath and opinion: beside, the
whole world is witness to the levity and inconstancy of them. And can these
things, so vain in themselves, recover so infinite a loss?

Secondly, see them in their 2. Anima ^re^iosior est corpore, and omni
possessione, and omnibus aliis bonis. Arist. pol. 7.
properties. As they are vain in themselves, so are they not ours, but some
from parents as inheritances, some from Princes as honors, some from people as
praise, name, reputation, and all in other men's power so long as they will
confer or retain them. But our souls are properly ours: as also our sins:
and no man can redeem the soul of his brother, Psalm. 49. 7. Again, they are
changeable and temporary. For wealth, a man may out live a world of it, and
dye a beggar. Men's favors are no inheritance. Beauty will not stand before one
fit of sickness: nor strength the shake of one ague. One snuff of a candle
may suddenly overmaster the greatest estate: and the greatest pleasures are but
for a season. Heb. 11. 25.
Whereas the soul and faculties of it are immortal, and capable of eternal
weal or woe.

Thirdly, that which must ransom 3. What goes to the ransom of a soul: in 3.
things.
the soul, must appease the infinite wrath of God; which all finite creatures
are not able to do: Pro. 11. 4. they avayle not in the day of wrath. Only the
blood of Christ is a plenarie expiation. Again, that which must ransom a
soul, must buy back the sentence, and procure a righteousness answerable to
the law: but the whole world cannot do that: only Christ frees from the
sentence of condemnation, and his blood only obtaines for us better conditions
by virtue of a new covenant, than the law affords us. Lastly, that which
ransomes a soul, must help us out of corruption, pull us out of the power of
Satan, keep the soul from hell, and invest us into life and immortality: But
a world of worlds cannot do the least of all these: and therefore can be no
proportional recompense for a lost soul.

Fourthly, all the world cannot 4.
offer a recompense to God, of any thing which is not his own: whereas our
ransom must be of a thing undue, an offering above that the law requires, a
free will offering: so that no sinner can offer a ransom of sin. And by all
this it appears, that the whole world cannot afford a recompense for one lost
soul.

Which serves to condemn the extreme blasphemy of the Use 1. Confutation of
Papists.
Romish Church, teaching that masses, pardons, indulgences, satisfactions,
humane merits and pilgrimages, and a thousand such toys can become a
recompense for a lost soul: whereas no man nor Angel can become a recompense
for a lost soul, it is too great a price to pay, the person must be no less
than GOD and man: 1 Pet. 1. 18. Ye are not redeemed with corruptible things.

2. Let such rich men, as to 2. How to be affected to the world so worthless.
whom our Lord directs this speech, consider of their woeful estate; while
they abound with wealth, and trustin nothing so much as that. A broken reed:
and for all their wealth, being wicked, they must to hell; their riches cannot
ransom the^, yea they rather plunge them into the pit than help them out; as a
wedg of gold helps more to drown a man that is cast into the sea, tha^ to save
or deliver him. Which should be of use to all, the more willingly to want them,
the more weinedly to hold them, to grow into an holy contempt of them, and to
raise our desires to better and more durable riches.

3. It may humble us, for that it 3. Be humbled for so great loss, or hazard.
imports the extreme misery into which we have plunged our selves by sin: we
have lost our souls, and cast them into so ruinous a condition, as the whole
world is not sufficient to ransom them. The greatness and desperateness of the
cure amplifies the greatness and desperatenes of the disease. What earthly
danger is it, which the world cannot buy out? but gold and silver cannot
purchase a Church: no not one soul. It must be an infinite ruin and breach,
the repair whereof must be of such infinite value and sufficiency.

4. It calls us to behold the excellency of Christ, and fix our 4. Admire
Christ the redeemer of souls.
eyes upon the wonderful virtue of his precious blood, which did redeem our
lost souls, when all corruptible things in the world could not. How should it
excite us to love him, and admire his goodness? and raise the price of grace,
which is beyond all treasures? yea and teach us to esteem the rebukes of
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt? Paul would be Heb. 11. 26.
Phil. 39. 10.
set down a nothing in himself, that he might find the virtue of Christ his
death and resurrection: the worth and value whereof is beyond the worth of many
worlds; even so far as infinite is beyond finite, which holds no comparison.

Lastly, it may raise in us the true valuation and respect of our 5. Be the
more careful to save souls, thine own and others.
own souls. Is the soul at such a rate, as being lost a whole world cannot
redeem it? what an extreme madness then is it, for men so to live as if they
had no souls? or if they have, they are but as salt to keep their bodies
sweet: void of all care, either to keep or save them: never an horse or hog
about their houses, but their lives are more regarded than their precious
souls. Certainly there is nothing of price, no pearls, no grace, nothing
worthy of care, where men are so careless.

Let us be exhorted to look better to our souls, than to lose them for any
baits which the devil or the world lays in our way. Prize them above all the
world, as Christ does. Be serious in the saving of thy soul, above the winning
of the world. Use the ordinary means diligently. Get the Spirit of faith, love,
prayer, etc. which are utterly contemned by the most, and too much neglected by
the best. And with thine own soul pity and prize the souls of others,
especially such as are committed to thee, as a Pastor, as a Parent, as a
Master: lose them not for want of instruction: esteem the souls of thy wife
and children, precious things: bring them to the means of salvation: teach
them, pray for them, help them out of danger of perdition: if by thy default
one soul be lost, all the world cannot make up the loss, either to thee or to
that person.

Verse 27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels, and then shall he give to every man according to his deeds.
OUr Savior having enforced 3. Argu(...)nt: from (...) last judgment.
his doctrine of self-denial by two strong arguments already, the inevitable
danger of failing herein, and the unprofitablenesse of that unhappie match of
winning the world with the loss of the soul; in these words adds another,
of no less force than the former, drawn from the consideration of the last
judgment, wherein all those his sayings shall be fully accomplished: for,
howsoever he was now abased, and rejected, as not worth the following and
owning, yet the time comes that he will come in the glory of his Father,
attended with his most glorious Angels, and then shall he give to every man
according to his works, that is to say, to the wicked, who for avoiding the
cross and peril have rejected him, and the profession of his Gospel,
eternal perdition; but to the godly, who have persisted in the constant
confession of his Name (according to their works) life eternal.

This application of these words to the former matter, is the true connection of
them: wherein consider five things,

1. The person that must come, the Son of man. 5. things to be expounded.
2. The action of coming, shall come. 3. The manner of coming, in the glory
of his Father. 4. His attendants, with his Angels. 5. The end of coming, to
give to every man according to his deeds.
For the first. The person that 1.
must come, is the Son of man: which title is used in the Scripture, either
commonly, or singularly.

In the former sense, for any common man borne of another Christ called the son
of man, how.
Job 25. 6. How much more the Son of man, which is but a worm? In the latter
it is taken for the eternal Son of God, being made man: Matt. 8. 20. the
Son of man has not where to lay his head. For by the son of man is meant
here whole Christ, by an ordinary figure, whereby that which belongs to one
nature, is ascribed to the whole person: so in Mat. 9. 6. the son of man has
power to remit sins: which power agrees not to Christ as the son of man, or
in respect of his humane nature, but in respect of the eternal Person, as he
is God: for, (...) sup(...)ti. ^ohn. 3. 13.
who can forgive sins but God only? Beside, Christ while he was in the
world, said, that the son of man came down from heaven, and is in heaven;
which then could not be in regard of his humane nature, but of his divine.

Nay, by this title our Text must needs understand whole Christ, God and man,
the Son of God, and the Son of man: for though his speech express him the
Son of man, yet the action here refeired unto him (to be the just Judge of
all the world) proclaims him to be the Son of God: and, he is indeed the Son
of man, but coming in the glory of his Father.

Quest. But why does Christ ordinarily, speaking of himself, call himself the
son of man? he might have said, the Son of God shall come in the glory of
his Father: which might seem to have added more weight to his words.

Answ. Yet he uses the other title,

1. In respect of himself. To Why called ordina^ily the Son of man.
note that he was a true man: being not only a man, but the son of man:
that borne man, having flesh and blood no where else but from man. And herein
this second Adam was opposed to the first, who was a man, but not the son of
man: for he was the Son of God by creation, Luke 3. 38. The first Adam was
framed of the earth, and so was made a man, but not the Son of man: the
second Adam took flesh of the Virgin, and so was not only man, but the Son
of man also.

Again, it implies that he was a weak and frail man, as the Hebrew phrase
sounds: Psalm. 8. 5. Lord what is man or the son of man, that thou should
respect him? being so base and vile. Esaias 51. 12. Who art thou that fear a
mortal man? or the son of man, that is, a weak and frail creature. And
hereto serves that distinction among the Hebrews, of filii viri, and filii
hominis: Beni^sh, notes men in excellency, eminency, dignity, and
authority: Beni-adam, obscure persons, and men of common and low condition. In
the same sense Ezekiel, because he was astonished and thrown down by a glorious
vision (Chap. 1.) was so often afterward called son of man, and bid to stand
up on his feet. As if the Lord had said, Ezeki cl, I know thou art a son of
man, a weak man, not able to behold the brightness of such Majesty; but
gather thy self, be of good cheer, and stand on thy feet.

And thus Christ the son of man, takes on him our frailties and weaknesses;
undertook an abject, low and base condition, and appeared in the form of a
servant, in his nativitie, life, and death; in all our baseness like unto us,
sin only excepted. Yea and more, in this very phrase he impropriateth our
misery to himself, that as all sons of men are base and miserable, yet of all
sons of men none was ever so abased as he was; no sorrow was ever like his, no
not all the misery of all sons of men was comparable to his: and therefore
he does after a sort appropriate this title to himself.

2. In respect of his hearers, and men's judgment, who commonly 2.
esteemed him no other, and rose no higher in their judgment of him, than of a
mere man, though perhaps a great and holy man. He would tender the weakness
of his hearers: for scarce the Disciples themselves after a great while could
come to acknowledge the Majesty of the Son of God, in this son of man: and
therefore he speaks of himself, as they are able to conceive him, more
intending their instruction, than his own reputation.

3. In respect of the argument. 3.
For the manner of Scripture in speaking of the last judgment, is, to use this
phrase above other: 1. because this was appropriated to Messiah by Daniel,
chap. 7. 13. to which Christ undoubtedly had reference: I beheld, and there
came as a son of man in the clouds of heaven. 2. To show, that as he showed
himself in the nature of man to be judged on earth, so he would show himself
in a visible manner a Judge from heaven: for it is meet, that the Judge of all
should be seen of all: In regard of which manner of judging the Son only
shall judge, although the Father and the holy Ghost judge also, but after
another manner.

Ob. Christ was as a son of man, Dan. 7. and Revel. 14. 14. I saw upon the
cloulds one sitting as the son of man: therefore Christ is not, but only
like the son of man. So Phil. 2. 7. He took upon him the form of a servant,
and was made like a man.

Answ. For the two former places, Christ was seen figuratively in vision. When
Daniel saw his vision, he was not yet the son of man, but was to be born and be
in time the son of man. And after he was incarnate and ascended, being by S.
John seen in vision, he is said to be (...) the son of man, for that he
was not seen of either in substance, but in figure only.

For the place in the Philippians, well answers M. Calvin, Saint Non loquitur
de essentia humane naturae, sed des(...).
Paul speaks not of the essence of his humane nature, but of his state; he
came a true man, but in a lowly state and condition, even the base condition of
a servant.

Note here, how our Lord does Observe.
willingly acknowledge the humility and baseness of his humanity, Christ
contented with mean titles.
and speaks lowly of himself in such an argument as wherein he shall show
his greatest glory. He might have styled himself the Son of God, as he was,
not only as God by eternal generation, but also as man; though not by
creation as Adam, nor by adoption, as the believing sons of Adam, yet by
personal union of the Deity with the humane nature. Or if he would by his
form of speech make us know, that he is in his humanity visibly to come, and
be seen the son of man, yet he might have used a more royal title, as
that he was the son of David, or the son of Kings. But this base title for
the time of his abasement best pleased him:

1. Because he was to be a pattern And why? 1.
of humility and low linesse of mind. His example was to be our rule, his
action our instruction.

2. His office and calling was 2.
not to be served, but to serve; nor to seek to raise himself in the world,
but to raise our estate. He must abase himself, and make himself of no
reputation, to take our nature and sins upon him. He hid for a time the
glory and divine Majesty of his person. He avoided often the applause and fame
of men, for that he sought not the honor of men. He refused preferments
offered upon bad terms, both by Satan who promised him all the glory of all
Mat. 4. 8.
the Kingdoms of the world: and by men who would have made him a king. He
suppressed Joh. 6. 15.
his own praises, Joh. 5. 34. 41. In a word, his whole life was devoted to
profit and help others, with neglect of himself.

Now let the same mind be in Use. Phil. 2. 5.
you that was in Christ Jesus. Get humility into the mind, the seat most
proper for it, and then it will outwardly appear in speeches and behaviors.
Get the same mind; not the same measure or degree of humility: for no
creature can fall from such height as our Lord did. But, whosoever will be
chief of all, let him be servant of all: for so was Christ. The primacie of a
servant and Disciple of Christ is, to be servant to all Gods Saints. Not that
Christianity brings in disorder or confusion, or does not observe this
distinction of place, gifts, and condition, in Church or commonwealth: for
Saints, as Stars, differ in glory: But to show, that the highest place and
advancement in the kingdom of Christ must express humility of mind, and a
willingness to lay hands under the feet of the least and lowest of the
Saints, for their good.

Now let us try our selves a little.

1. Christ's humble mind makes A trial whether we be humble of mind as
Christ. 1.
him speak lowly of himself, and call himself ordinarily the son of man,
being the Son of God. But how do we boast our selves, that every man shall
know what we are, if we be borne of a little higher stock than ordinary, if
we have a little more knowledge, or wealth, or honor, or friends, than other
men? Alas, what would we do if we had Deity and heavenly glory to stand
upon? Christ might have stood on his royal descent, on his high birth, on his
wealth, being Lord of heaven and earth, and heir of all things. But he emptied
himself, and brought himself almost to nothing: that his example might pluck
down our top-sailes, and we learn to deck our selves with lowliness of
mind.

2. Christ's humility made him bear the infirmities of others, and seek the
things of others more than his own life: Yea though, when he became man, he
ceased not to be God, yet he comes to his enemies, seeks reconciliation with
them, stoupes to help them, and save them with loss of his life. Now if he
be our root, why draw we not virtue from him? if we be implanted into him,
why grow we not up in all things in him? Where is our charity and compassion
to our brethren? yet he was compassionate to his enemies. When do we empty
our selves, to go to our enemies, and to seek reconciliation? nay we can
reject it, and live in rancour, hatred, malice, and contentions, years and
ages almost, more like Scythians and Barbarians, than Christians.

3. Christ cast himself under 3.
all men, to do good unto all. But where is our submitting one to another, and
that better esteeming of every one, than of our selves? no: we stand on our
turret, and full height, and what should I yield to him? etc. Oh how many good
lessons are lost, and abuses unreformed, and godly motions or duties stopped and
crossed! why? because such and such move it, and like of it: and, rather than
please their humors, let all things run to ruin and wrack. Did Christ so?
no: had he stood on his height and reputation, and been so stout against
thee, as thou art to his Ministers and members, thou had ere this been in
the bottomless pit of hell.

What had become of thee, that wilt bear no infirmity in thy brethren, if he
had not stouped to bear all thine? what had been thy lot, who wilt show no
mercy nor bowels of love in the distresses of the Saints? thou passest by, as
the Priest and Levite: thou cloathest not, feedest not, visitest not the
afflicted members of Christ: if he had so shut up his bowels against thee,
where had thou been?

4. As Christ by his speeches 4.
declared himself the son of man, but by his works the Son of God: so must
we be lowly in our speeches, but let our works testify we are the sons
and daughters of God, expressing his virtues, and shining as lights in the
midst of a crooked generation.

So of the first thing in these words.

The second is the action of II. Christ comes in spirit and person. 1.
coming, shall come.

Christ comes to us either in spirit, or in person.

In spirit he comes, 1. in the Ministry, to win and persuade us to come to
him: thus he went and preached in Noah's time, to the spirits now in prison, 1
Pet. 3. 19. 2. In some special manifestation of his presence, in mercy or
judgment. The former when he meets us with comfort, strength, and increase of
any grace: Joh. 14. 18. I will not leave you comfortless, but will come unto
you: and verse. 23. My father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him. The latter in judgment, and testification of
displeasure: Rev. 2. 16. repent, or I will come against thee shortly: so in
Joh. 16. 8.

In person, he comes two ways, 2.
in carnem, and in carne, first into flesh, afterward in flesh; first in
humility, then in glory; first in his incarnation, at his first appearing, the
other in his glorious return at the last day; the former to be judged, the
latter to judge all flesh, and all things done in the flesh, good and evil. Of
this latter he speaks here:

Where consider 1. Whence he comes. 2. Whither. 3. When.

For the first, He comes from 1. He comes from heaven, and why.
heaven: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven, that is,
the third and highest heaven.

And why?

1. Because it was (according to Gods decree) foretold, not only 1.
by the Prophets, as Jude 14. in the ancient prophecy of Enoch: but also by
Christ himself, Mat. 26. 64. Hereafter ye shall see the son of man come in
the clouds of heaven.

2. That was the place whither 2.
he ascended, and from thence he must descend: as Act. 1. 11. Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing into heaven? this Jesus which is taken from you
into heaven, shall so come as ye have seen him go into heaven.

3. It is meet that Christ should 3.
come from heaven to judge, because it is not meet that wicked men and Angels
should come thither to him, although to receive their sentence; for that holy
City can admit no unclean thing, Rev. 21. 27.

4. As it is in earthly judgments, 4.
so must it be in this great Assise, which must be held, and the judgment set
up in the same country, or about the place where the facts and crimes to be
judged were committed.

But whither shall he come?

Some think into the valley of 2 Whither CHRIST comes to judgment.
Jehosaphat, which lies situate between mount Sion, and mount Olivet, near
Jerusalem: so called from the noble victory, which God gave Jehosaphat over the
enemies of the Church: for which they allege, Joel 3. 12. Let the Heathen be
wakened, and come to the valley of Jehosaphat: for there I will sit to judge
all the Heathen round about. But allegorical and typical prophecies are not
to be expounded according to the letter, but according to the type and
similitude; which seems to be this: As that valley of Engeddi (called the
valley of Jehosaphat from the noble victory of Jehosaphat against the Moabites,
Ammonites, and other enemies gathered against the Church) was situate in the
sight of the city Jerusalem, and mount, a type of the Church: so the Lord will
revenge and judge all his enemies, before or in the last judgment day, in the
sight of all his holy people, and Saints, who in their manner shall judge the
world. And hence some godly and judicious Divines have probably conceived, that
the judgment seat shall be set up in some place near Jerusalem, both to
increase the terror of the judgment, and the glory of Christ, to sit there as
Judge where himself was judged. But to conclude it as a resolved opinion, is
rash and ungrounded.

Others think it shall be upon the earth, that the sentence may be given
where the facts have been committed, that Christ may show himself a Conqueror
where the combat was, and justly condemn others where himself was unjustly
condemned. And sundry things of the Fathers sound hereunto. But in vain should
we seek a reason of that, which whether it self shall be, is altogether
unknown. If the Scriptures had said it should be on earth, then the reasons
were good. But, wherever it is, the wicked shall look on him whom they have
pierced. Zech. 12. 10. Rev. 1. 7.


The Apostle seems to settle the place of judgment in the air, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
17. the elect shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the air. And as he was
carried up in a cloud, so the Scripture says he shall come in the clouds of
heaven. So as it is most probable, where we shall meet him, the judgment
shall be, namely, in the clouds of the air near the earth: where the devils
shall be conquered and sentenced in the very place, where they have ruled all
this while as Princes. But whether over mount Olivet whence he ascended, or
above the valley of Jehosaphat, or the City of Jerusalem, were folly to define,
seeing Gods wisdom has not clearly determined.

The conclusion is, that the Judge is of power and wisdom to set up the throne
of his glory, wheresoever himself thinks most fit. 3. When he will come
thereto.


But when shall he come?

In the end of the world. But the 3. When he will come thereto.
particular age, year, or day is not known to man or Angel: Mark. 13. 32. Of
that day and hour knows no man, nor the Angels of The time unknown for six
reasons.
heaven, no nor the Son himself, but the Father only: because, 1. the end of
the world is fit to be known to him only, who only 1.
knew a fit time for the beginning of it: 2. this secret is none 2.
of them which Christ had heard from his Father; for then had he revealed it to
the Apostles, and so to the Church. Neither, 3. was 3.
it among them which the Spirit (promised and sent) revealed or taught the
Apostles, who yet were led by him into all necessary truth, Joh. 16. 13. 4.
Christ 4.
must come as a thief in the night, and as in the days of Noah, when men knew
nothing: which could not be, if the time were known. 5. Of what validity 5.
were all those exhortations, to watch and be wary, because we know not the
hour, unless the time were concealed? Mat. 24. 42. 44. 6. Many are the 6.
reasons, why God would not have us to know it: as, not knowing the set hour
we may Ideo la^et unus dies, ut observentur omnes.
be prepared every hour: our faith and patience may be exercised, and our
hope upheld, not limiting the Lord to times and seasons which are in his own
power.

The greater has been the sin and folly of many learned men, Opinions of the
time
of old and of late, who have set their wits so childishly to play in so
serious a business. Augustine De Civ. Dei l. 10. cap. 35.
relates, that many about his time defined the day of the Lords coming; some
to an hundred, some five hundred, some to a thousand years after his
ascension. Since that time, Joachimus Abbas, who set the year 1258. Arnoldus
de villa, nova, the year 1345. Michael Stiphelius, Saint Lukes day in the
year 1533. Cyprian^s Leovitius Italus, the year 1583. Johannes Regiomontanus,
the year 1588. Adelbertus Thermopedius, the year 1599. and third of April:
Nicolaus Cusanus, the year 1700. Cardanus, 1800. Ostander out of Cabala, 1689.
Picus Mirandula, 1904.

I will not name some worthy Writers on the Revelation, but wish they had
forborne that curiosity in this computation, wherein I think they
ungroundedly troubled themselves, and many others. The most I have named,
carry already the chastisement of their temeritie, and have reaped only the
scorn of their error: that we by them might learn to be wise to sobriety,
Romans 12. 3. and not seek to know or make known that which the Angels, and
Christ himself was content to be ignorant of.

But though Christ knew it not Ob.
then as man, being for our sakes ignorant of many things which he was not
bound to know, as of this day, and the time of figs, etc. yet now he knows
it, and so it may now be communicated to the Angels and blessed spirits: and
why then may it not be revealed to the Church?

True it is, that Christ now Ans.
glorified has laid down all infirmities, and knows both the day and hour,
and in this his exalted estate is ignorant of none of the works of God, which
have been, are, or shall be, his Deity enlightening his humane soul. But
therefore to conclude, that every such thing is revealed to the Angels and
blessed spirits, is frivolous. For if every thing which belongs to the exalted
head, were necessary to be communicated to the principal members, they should
be in the same degree of glory with the head; which they are not capable of.
The King reveals not every thing to the privle Council, but holds distance
from them. And to say they must needs see every thing in him, as in a glass,
because they see him that sees every thing, it is vain, and fails even in a
corruptible creature: for he that sees the Sun, does not see by that sight
all that the Sun by his beams beholds.

Others think the day uncertain, but the hour of an uncertain day certain:
namely, that Christ will come the same hour to judge, that he rose again in:
as Rabanus and Lactantius. But with as little reason: if I should say, he may
come the same hour that he ascended, or shall come to judge at the same hour
that he was judged of men, I shall speak as probably: yet I know not: no more
do they. 1 These. 5. 2.


Of the same strength is their conceit, who say he must come in the night,
because he shall come as a thief in the night, and because the Egyptians were
destroyed at midnight. Yet know they not, whether the Master will come at
midnight, or in the Mark. 13. 35.
morning watch: and forget it is called the day of the Lord.

The conclusion is: Secret things belong to the Lord, but things revealed to us
and our children for ever, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Now if Christ must come Use 1. Against Consubstantiation and Transubstantiation
from heaven, then he is now in heaven, and his body not every where, as
Ubiquitaries teach; nor yet substantial under the forms of bread and wine, as
Papists. That which is every where, cannot come from one place to another. And
Christ comes not in bodily presence from heaven, but visibly, whether we
consider his first coming, or his second. As for any other invisible presence
of his body, such as they say is in the Sacrament, the Scripture knows none.
And whereas they fly to a miracle, let them give us instance of a miracle in
the Scripture, which was not visible, and whereof the senses might not be
judges.

This also serves to terrify wicked men from sin. Christ comes 2.
from heaven to revenge sin and sinners: and coming from heaven to do it, it
shall be done to purpose. If a man were to come out of some corner of the earth
with an hand of revenge, the danger were the less, and the fear not so great:
But the mighty God comes from heaven to do it, etc. Great men may stand upon
their power and privileges, and often by wealth and friends make their party
good against earthly revenge: but when Christ shall show himself from heaven,
the great work of Gods justice shall be done to purpose.

And, if Christ come from heaven, we must look for him thence, 3.
yea and long for him: Phil. 3. ^0. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence
also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Rev. 22. 17. 2 Timothy
4. 8.
bride says, Come: and the Saints are described to be such, as look for his
appearing. A loving wife cannot but look for, and long for the return of her
husband from a far country. A careful servant will look after his Master
through the casements, and expecting his return will make all things ready.
If the bridegroom be coming, let the bride deck her self, as Rebecca
espying Isaac Genesis 24. 65.
a far off. As Joshua exhorted Israel, chap. 3. 5. be sanctified: for to
morrow the Lord will work wonderful things, and lead you through Jordan into
the land of Canaan: so our Joshua commands us to be sanctified, because the
Lord in that day from heaven will do wonders in leading us to heavenly Canaan.

Lastly, if Christ be coming from heaven, meet him in the way. 4. Meet Christ
coming from heaven, how. 1.


1. Meet him in his Ordinances: as the ancient Believers, who waited for his
coming in the flesh, were ever found in the Temple. A loving spouse will enjoy
her husband as much as she can, in his long absence: if she can hear of him,
or receive a letter from him, or a token, she is glad she has something of
him: yea her love will make her meet him afar off, as far as she can see
him, as the father of the prodigal, and as Jep^haes daughter did. And if thou
longest for him indeed, thou will enjoy him on earth as much as thou can, in
his word which is his letters, in his graces which are his pawnes and pledges,
etc.

2. Meet him with thy affections, 2.
prayers, and wishes after him: send thy prayers and holy requests daily, as
presents unto him.

3. Meet him in heavenly conversation. 3.
He comes from heaven the first and second time, to draw thee thither: and
shall he not by all this pains gain thy heart, affection, and conversation,
Rules of an heavenly life.
from earthlinesse to heavenlymindednesse? Begin heavenly life here. First,
spend thy life in cheerful 1.
praises: keep a perpetual Sabbath. Secondly, enjoy God above all means, and
in all means: 2.
he is all now, as well as hereafter. Thirdly, walk by the 3.
Charter of heaven: the law of righteousness must be the rule of all, and
weights to weigh all, in and out. Fourthly, wait still for further perfection
of glory: stay 4.
not in first fruits.

In the glory of his Father. III. Christ's second coming shall be glorious.


Here is the manner of Christ's second coming: wherein it is opposed to the
first: there he covered and veiled his glory, but now he will reveal and
display it, above the shining of a world of Suns. Where consider three
things, and then the Uses:

1. Why he calls it the glory 3. Things in that glory.
of his Father. 2. Whether it be not his own glory. 3. Wherein this glory
confisteth.
For the first of these: Christ calls it the glory of his Father,

1. Because it is a most divine glory, agreeing to none but the 1. Why called
the glory of God the Father.
Father and himself with the blessed Spirit. 2. Because the Father is the
fountain, as of the deity, so also of this divine glory, wherewith he has
crowned his Son. Thence he is called the Father of glory, Ephesians. 1. 17. and
the God of glory, Act. 7. 2. and the King of glory, Psalm. 24. 7. And Christ is
said to be taken up into glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16. namely, by his Father: for we
must conceive God not only glorious by his nature, in himself, but the
fountain also of all that glorious life and motion which is communicated with
any of his creatures. 3. Because, as all glory is from him, so all is due unto
him: whom therefore his Son glorified, and we ought also to glorify.

But was not this glory Christ's 2. Whether it be not Christ's own glory.
own, in which he shall appear?

Answ. Yes: for, consider him as the Son of God, he was of equal glory with
his Father in all eternity: Joh. 17. 5. Glorify me with thine own self,
with the glory which I had with thee before the world was: And his incarnation
abated nothing of that glory. And, consider him as the son of man, and
mediator, 1. he is worthy of all glory by the desert and merit of obedience,
Rev. 4. 11. insomuch that he pleads with his Father for his glorification,
because he had glorified him on earth, Joh. 17. 4. 5. 2. All glory is due unto
him as the son of 2.
man, by the donation of his Father. Mat. 28. 18. All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth: So as it is Christ's own glory, as the son of man; as
that is a man's own, which is given him. Therefore in Mat. 25. 31. the phrase
is changed: Christ challenges it to be his own glory: when the son of man
comes in his glory. But yet in speaking of himself, as on the one hand he
advances that great majesty he shall appear in, so on the other he
forgets not to refer all that glory to his Father: which may be a glass
held before All our glory must still be referred to the glory of God.
our eyes, that when we speak of our selves, or any endowment or gift
belonging to our selves, we so speak of it and so use it, as still our eye be
fixed on Gods glory, from whom and for whom we have received it.

When Christ shall appear in such glory as never creature was capable of, nor
can be, then shall ^e most of all advance the glory of his Father. But
contrarily, when God most honors some men, they most forget his honor: so
they may advance themselves, they little care how his glory be trodden under
foot. Happy is that man, who is so faithful in these small things, as that
the Lord shall be then occasioned to trust him with much.

But wherein shall this glory appear?

Partly in his person, partly in

^is office: both for preparation, 3. Wherein Christ's glory at the last day
consists. 1.
execution.

1. In his person he shall be advanced above all the glory of all ^he Judges
and Princes of the earth; whether we consider his divine nature or humane.

For the former: he shall be manifest to be the mighty God: for howsoever he
shall exercise his judiciary power visibly, and appear the son of man, yet
shall he be mightily declared to be the Son of God; in that the personal
union of his two natures shall shine out as the Sun in his strength, which
before was veiled and obscured.

And for his humane nature, he shall be therein exalted in glory as the head
of his Church; that even his glorious body shall carry such majesty with it,
and be seen in such admirable brightness, as that the sun which dazelleth
our eyes, can scarce resemble it. For if the just shall shine in the glory
which shall obscure Mat. 13. 43.
the Sun in the Firmament, how shall their justifier shine in glory? And if
his Attendants shall be so glorious, as no man is able to behold the glory of
the least of -- Velut inter ign^s Luna min^res.
them, what and how glorious must he be, who shall so far surpass them all
put together, as the Sun does the lesser stars in brightness?

2. If we consider his high office, 2.
we shall behold him as the just Judge of all the world, clothed with all the
robes of glory and majesty; such as shall well suit with the throne of his
glory, and such as shall fit him to the great work in hand.

How glorious and magnificent was the giving of the Law? and how solemn the
preparation? the earth shook, the mountains trembled, the Lord came down in
fire, and out of thundrings, lightnings, and a thick cloud sounded his trumpet
so loud, as all the people trembled and shook, and afterward a terrible voice
was heard of six hundred thousand men beside women and children; yea in such
glory appeared the Lord on mount Sinai, that Moses himself said, I quake and
fear. Heb. 12. 21.


But when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven to judge the
transgression of that law, his glory shall not only shake mount Sinai, but the
whole frame of heaven and earth all to pieces: when fire shall not compass one
mountain, but the whole world shall be set on a light fire: when the last
trumpet shall sound, and not only the living shall hear it as then, but the
dead and all that are in the graves: Joh. 5. 28.
when the Lord of glory with one shout shall not raise one man, as Lazarus, but
all that ever have been dead, from the first man to the last which he shall
find standing on the earth.

But to behold more specially Glorious preparation of this Judge.
the particular robes and rays of glory, wherewith the Judge is prepared to
the judgment:

1. He shall come armed with 1.
an infinite power and dominion over all creatures, which shall be acknowledged
by them all: the Angels shall all observe and attend it: the heavens, and
earth, and all elements shall be dissolved by it: the dead bodies of men shall
be raised by it, and called out of the graves, the sea, the bellies of beasts
in all corners of the world: the voice of the Son of God shall be heard of all
in the graves, and obeyed, none shall be able to resist it.

2. He shall come furnished 2.
with a glorious and unconceivable Omniscience, to which nothing shall be hid
or covered: he shall reveal all counsels of hearts, and all secret
contrivances never so long hid. All things are naked to Heb. 4. 13.
him, with whom we have to do: for to him the day and darkness Ps. 139. 12.
are alike: there can be no concealment of things from this allfeeing Judge.

3. He shall come covered 3.
with divine justice as a robe, which shall confound all the enemies of his
glory: Jer. 2. 16. as a thief is ashamed when he is taken in the manner, so
shall all wicked doers. And there is no avoiding, no deluding, or perverting
the justice, neither the process or final sentence, unless any man's power or
policy were above his.

4. He shall come prepared 4. Diverse sorts of evidences.
with glorious evidence and testimony against all wicked men for their
conviction; that they shall not be able to implead the justice of the Judge or
judgment. For,

First, he shall have evidence and witness in their own consciences, 1.
which shall then accuse them to the Judge, and their own confessions shall be
as a thousand witnesses. Therefore (says Augustine) Do thou fear Judicium
times? corrige conscientim.
the last judgment? rectify thy conscience, and all shall be well.

Secondly, he shall command 2.
the creatures and elements abused by their sins, to give in evidence against
them: Job 20. 27. The heavens shall reveal their wickedness, and the earth
shall rise up against them: all creatures shall serve their Lord.

Thirdly, the good Angels whom 3. Incentores in culpis: tortores in poenis Greg.
they have in their kind grieved and driven away from them by their sin, shall
witness against them. And the wicked Angels who were first in tempting, shall
then be first in accusing, and first in tormenting.

Fourthly, the Scriptures of God against which they have 4.
sinned, yea the word of mercy, the offer of mercies, their abuse of mercies,
the resisting of means of grace and mercy, all shall witness against them; not
so much to inform the Judge, as to convince themselves, and promote justice.

Fifthly, all their sins shall witness 5.
against their authors and patrones. Every iniquity has his secret and still
voice, says Gregory: Omnis iniquitas secretas suas voces habet. Greg.
but then it shall have a loud voice. Blood shall cry, and the voice of it
ring between heaven and earth. Oppression shall cry, usury shall cry, the
wages of hirelings and laborers shall cry in the own conscience. It cries
now, and thy conscience, if thou have any, tells thee of thy wickedness in
defrauding Gods servants, his Ministers, and Christ's members of their right:
but the voice will not be now heard: but then it will be heard, and thou shall
hear it; and thy gold and silver, and the rust of them shall cry against
thee, and never be still till they have cried thee down into the pit, as Jam.
5. 3. 4.

Sixthly, if all other conviction 6.
and witness should fail, there is one more that will be a sure and
infallible witness, and that is God himself: Mal. 3. 5. who can abide the day
of his coming? for behold, I will be a swift witness against sorcerers,
adulterers, false swearers, and all that fear not the Lord.

Thus the Judge is gloriously The execution likewise glorious.
prepared.

And he shall be as glorious in execution, as in preparation. For in passing a
righteous sentence, and irrevocable, he shall shine in surpassing glory,

both in respect of the wicked, godly.

1. Upon all the ungodly he shall 1.
get himself a greater name, than ever he did upon Pharaoh; when all the
wicked Princes and people that ever lived, shall be cited and assembled in the
twinkling of an eye, before his Tribunal, and in terror of his presence shall
fly Rev. 6. 16.
to the hills and mountains to hide themselves; yea when all the powers and
gates of hell, all wicked angels and men, shall be by one word of his cast out,
and commanded out of presence, and confined to their prison, never to molest
him or his Church any more.

2. In respect of the godly, he 2.


shall be mavelous at that day, 1. to the Saints 2. in the Saints.

To the Saints: when they shall behold him that was betrayed, spitted upon,
crucified, pierced, dead, buried, now advanced above all men and Angels, and
crowned with honor above all that created nature is capable of.

But in the Saints also he shall be mavelous: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. for when
Christ who is our life, shall appear, we also shall appear with him in glory,
Col. 3. 4. First, the members shall partake of the glory of the Head, that the
Head may be exalted in the glory of the members. Secondly, the Saints shall
admire, not only his glory in himself, but in themselves. How admirable will
it be to see themselves, who were in the world accounted the outsweepings, and
driven out of the world with obloquie, contempt, fire and sword, yea who were
but even now dust and ashes, newly crept out of the grave and rottenness, so
suddenly to attain that fulness of the glory of Christ, in their souls and
bodies! In their souls, such a wonderful perfection of Gods image, such deep
knowledge of the secrets of heaven and earth, such conformity in their wills
unto God, clothed with such righteousness as God in his presence chamber is
delighted to behold. And their whole bodies changed, and arrayed with
immortality, incorruption, and made spiritual bodies like the glorious body
of Jesus Christ. And the whole man filled Phil. 3. 21.
with rivers of pleasures at Gods right hand, and swallowed up with that
happiness which eye has not seen, nor ever entered into the earth of man.
This glory have all the Saints, in whom the glory of Christ in his appearing is
complete.

Note hence the long-suffering and patience of our Lord Jesus Use 1. Christ's
patience to be noted, who suffers his glory to be so long hid.
Christ, who for his Elects sake is contented so long to be hid, and not show
himself in his glory till the end of the world; nay, not only suffers his
glory to be veiled, but trampled on by the wicked. For,

1. Now the heavens are as a curtain between him and us, 1.
which then shall be undrawne, that all eyes may behold him in a glorious
bodily presence, as the head of his glorious body.

2. He is now out of sight, and 2.
out of mind; not known, nor believed among the wicked, who despise his
patience because he shows not himself in terror.

3. Neither is he so beloved or 3.
admired of his Saints, as he should, while he seems to shut up and hide
himself from their miseries and sufferings, as one not well knowing or weighing
them: And if he did not preserve a grain of faith in their hearts, to make
things absent to be present, his delays would quite dishearten them.

But yet Christ will not always One day it sh(...)l be su(...) revealed.
neglect his own glory, nor will ever be robbed of it: a day comes, wherein
he shall appear in surpassing glory. 1. In himself: not only by that
external 1.
and accidental glory of his attendance, and most powerful manner of
appearing, but by that internal and personal glory whereby he shall obscure
and darken the glory of all creatures: A shadow of which, Peter and John saw in
the mount, when his face did shine as the Sun, and his garments were as the
light, Mat. 17. 3. not as Moses, when he came from the mount, very glorious, so
as Israel could not behold his face: for that glory was not his own, but his
Lords: but Christ shall appear in his own glory. 2. His glory shall shine out
unto 2.
and in his Saints, in manifesting the power of his mercy as never he did
before: v. c. Raising them from the dead by a word, as Lazarus. Gathering them
to himself, as the Eagles to a dead body. Loosing them eternally from all
bands of sin and corruption. Investing them in soul and body with his own
glory. And glorifying himself (as never before) not as head of the Church, but
in his whole body: for some of his own glory was wanting, till his spouse be
perfectly glorified. 3. His glory shall shine out 3.
to the wicked, but not in mercy, but majesty; not in grace, but in the power
of his justice: He will be glorified on them as on Pharaoh, putting forth his
power in their final destruction.

Again, let this be a ground of patience and contentedness, if Use 2. In
obscutitie be yet patient.
we also be despised, if our glory and worth be hid, and appear not in the
world till that day. Shall Christ our Lord be content to be abused and
despised now in his glory, till that day, and shall the servants be above
their Master?

1. Look upon the Lords condition: 1.
if we suffer together, we shell reign together: and if Christ cannot expect
the crown before the Cross, no more may we.

2. Look on thy condition: 2.
thou art a stranger here, among strangers who know not thy birth from heaven,
nor thy parents: they know not God thy father, nor his image on thee, nor thy
mother the Church, and spouse of Christ; nor thy worth through Christ's
worthiness, nor thy inheritance and expectation. Be content therefore as a
stranger, in this strange country, with strange and course usage: only let it
make thee love thy own country so much the better, and hye thee home where
thou may expect better.

3. It is great reason, that Christ's glory should appear before 3.
ours: the members shall show their glory, when their head does: for their
glory depends upon his: Col. 3. 4. We know that when Christ our life does
appear, we shall also appear with him in glory: but now his glory is hid,
and must ours appear? In the winter all the sap, life and fruit is hid in the
root, and then the tree appears not what it is: but the summer comes, and all
that was within, appears: so in this our winter, though now we be the
sons of God, yet it appears not what we are; but when Christ shall appear,
we shall be like him, 1 John 3. 1. 2.

Ob* But are we not now like him?

Ans. Yes, there is now a likeness between the head and members: the branches
must have the same life, sap, and greenness in some proportion to the root:
the spouse is now suitable to her husband. But, first, this is a likeness in
grace, that is a likeness in glory: secondly, this is in part and
imperfection, that in perfection and fullness: thirdly, this is obscure and
veiled, but that manifest, and revealed to men and Angels.

Wait then, and wish for this Use 3. Vaite and ^ish for ^he appea(...)nce of
^is glory. (...) 1. 2.
day of the revelation of Christ's glory, and of thine in his: for,

1. Christ shall come the second time to the salvation of those that wait for
him, Heb. 9. 21.

2. Love to Christ thy head now in a far country will make thee long after
him: Come says the spouse, Oh that I might come to a sight of him whom my
soul loves. This must whet thy desire, that Christ's glory may shine in that
day, yea and enlarged in thy own glory.

3. Have thou received the first 3.
fruits of glory? then thou can not but long for the full harvest: Romans 8.
23. We that have received the first fruits, sigh in our selves, waiting for
the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies.

4. Never was there so happy 4.
and joyful a day; wherein, in their head, all the heads of the Saints shall
be lifted up into unconceivable happiness; who shall stand amazed to see
their nature so exalted in their head, and be swallowed with unspeakable joy to
see themselves, who have been by his first appearing in humility justified,
now by his second appearing in glory to be glorified. When the Disciples saw
but a small glimpse of this glory in the Transfiguration, they were so ravished
and transported out of themselves, that they wist not what they said, Luks 9.
33. How then shall the whole brightness of it so swallow up the Saints, as
that they shall ever think it good to be where He is, to see his glory?
Hereby should we excite our selves, to wish for the longed day of our glorious
deliverance: And as the Jews, the nearer the day of Jubilee came, the more the
joy of prisoners and debtors was increased; so should we lift up our head when
the day of our redemption approaches: and as the bird about to fly stretches
out the wings, so should we our affections and desires to heaven where our
Lord his dwelling is.

Again, prepare for this day: to stand before the son of man in Use 4.
Prepare also for it: and how.
this glory: Luke 21. 36. Watch and pray that ye may be counted worthy to
escape all these things, and may stand before the son of man.

Quest. How should I prepare duly?

Ans. 1. Acquaint thy self with 1.
thy Judge aforehand: which is done by faith and love: Romans 5. 2. By faith we
have access, both here and hereafter. And if love be perfect in us, we shall
have boldness in the day of Judgment, 1 John 4. 17. He that can stand before
his presence of grace, shall stand boldly before his presence of glory. Stand
therefore humbly before him in his Ordinances: enjoy as much of him now as thou
can.

2. Part from sin: watch against 2.
it: let the fire of grace consume it. A malefactor cannot stand before the
Judge. Psalm. 1. 5. The wicked shall not stand in judgment. See Esa. 33. 14. 15.

3. Get sincerity and uprightness of heart: for no hypocrite 3.
shall stand before those everlasting burnings. A sincere heart has this
property, to set it self before God continually, as a witness and Judge:
Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, and be upright. And that soul that can walk
with God here, shall stand before the glory of his power at that day.

4. Get love of the Saints on earth: for the terror of that day 4.
shall devour the Adversary, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. And Christ shall clothe himself
with the robes of glory, to destroy the destroyer out of the earth. Only the
Saints shall stand before him. Stand with them here, if thou would stand
with them hereafter: but if here thou will shake hands with sinners, hereafter
thou shall scarce part company.

Lastly, this glory of the Judge is the greatest terror and torment Use I.
Terror to the wicked by the glory of Christ.
to the wicked. Oh the woeful estate of such persons, when the presence of God
and of Christ is the greatest torment^ yet how can it be other?

For first, the true and proper cause of perdition is in themselves, 1.
not in this glory: the wicked must be cast out for his malice. They have
despised his humility, and were ashamed of him: and now must be ashamed of
themselves, when he shall be ashamed of them. They have contemned his soft
voice in the Ministry of the Gospel, and must hear that dreadful voice to
drive them to their wits ends: they have pierced him with horrible sins, and
shall now see him whom they have Rev. 1. 7.
pierced, and pierce themselves with shame and utter confusion. Yea their own
accusing consciences shall make them shrink and melt as ware at the fire, and
as chafe driven before the tempest of his wrath. Thus shall all wicked men and
Angels perish at the presence of God, Psalm. 68. 2.

Secondly, as a King sitting in 2.
judgment chaseth away evil with his eyes, Prove. 20. 8. so shall they see the
face of this Judge, set against all evil doers, 1 Pet. 3. 12. they shall read
revenge in his very eye and visage: his look shall drive them to the hills, to
hide them: they shall know the wrath of this King as the roaring of a Lion, to
whom Kings are less than worms to men: and if the wicked fly when none
pursues, Prove. 28. 1. much more when pursued with such wrath and power as this
Judge shall be clothed with.

Thirdly, as all the power of the country attends the Judge to execute 3.
malefactors, so Christ has obtained great might and kingdom to destroy the
wicked, Rev. 11. 17, 18. so as his revenge must be proportional to his power,
and his power shall make his process short, and his dispatch speedy. A
resemblance hereof is in Joh. 18. 6. the very word of Christ (I am the man) in
his state of humiliation cast the stoutest of his enemies to the ground: How
much more in his glory, when he shall be armed with power and glory to this
purpose? GOD shall no sooner arise, but his enemies shall be scattered, they
also that hate him, shall fly before him, Ps. 68. 2.

O therefore, considering these terrors of the Lord, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation! 2 Pet. 3. 11. If Daniel (chap. 7. 15.)
was so troubled in his spirit, and perplexed to see but in a vision the manner
of Christ's glorious coming to judgment, how much more dreadful shall the
judgment it self be! when all secrets shall be revealed, as packes and fardels
are opened in the market^: Oh? how careful should we be of the wares we lay
up in our hearts and consciences, seeing that day shall disclose them to a
Judge of such (...) power and glory* With his Angels.


The fourth thing considerable IV. Attendants of Christ in coming to judgment.
(...) the coming of Christ to judgment, is, his Attendants, that is, (...)e
Angels, in whom the glory (...)d magnificence of his second appearing shall
manifest it self. For as formerly we have showed, that he is not sent as a
Legate with commission from the side of any earthly Monarch, but must show
himself from heaven; so now we shall see, that the glory and state wherein
he shall appear, is not from earth, but he shall be wonderful in the glory
of heaven: (Luke 2. 13.) for his guard shall not be a troop of men, but of
Angels; nor an army of earthly warriors, but of heavenly soldiers; nor weak
and feeble, soon overcome, but mighty Angels, or Angels excelling in power,
Psalm. 103. 20. This glorious appearing of Christ is shadowed by the coming in
of earthly Judges, to hold Assizes, attendeded with the honorable, the Nobles,
Justices, and Gentry of the country, yea with the High Sheriffs power,
besides all their own followers and retinue; by which great state and
attendance, they are both honored and aided in their service, and made
formidable to adaunt and quell malefactors, as becomes such public ministers
of justice.

Here consider. 1 Their number, Angels, in the plural number. 2 Their
relation, his Angels. 4. things about the Angels.
3 Their office and ministry in the judgment. 4 How they can come with him.

For the number: he says Angels 1. the number of them.
indefinitely, not one, or two, or a few, but a number finite in it self,
because created, but to our apprehension infinite and numberless. Heb. 12. 12.
the innumerable company of Angels. And the Scriptures express their number by
the greatest and roundest numbers in use among men: Jude 14. The Lord comes
with thousands of his Saints, that is, holy Angels and men attending him. Dan.
7. 10. Thousand thousands minister unto him, and ten thousand thousands stand
before him, when the judgment was set up. But our Lord speaks of many more,
Mat. 24. when the son of man shall come and all his holy Angels with him: not
an Angel shall be left in heaven, which shall not come with him. What a great
glory is it, to see a great Prince in the midst of his whole trained band, and
armed with all the power of his Kingdom? yet all this is but weakness to this
of Christ, who brings the whole host of heaven with him, to make his throne
surpassing glorious.

Next, of the relation, his Angels: 2. Their relation to Christ. How his
Angels:
how are they his?

Answ. 1. By creation; 2. by confirmation in grace: other fell from him, and
became not his; but these by his grace cleave for ever unto him in the
holiness of their nature. Thirdly, His by special attendance and ministry;
he being Lord of the holy Angels, they are his subjects and ministers, ready
to execute his will.

Ob. They are our Angels, and therefore not Christ's; Mat. 18. 10. their Angels
behold the face And yet ours.
of the Father in heaven.

Answ. They are called our Angels, so far as appointed our keepers or
guardians against Satan and impure spirits: but in all this ministry to the
Church, they are his Angels; for they attend us for our heads sake, and attend
his body which is himself.

Next of their office, and why Christ shall bring all his Angels 3. Their
office and ministry in the last judgment. 1.
with him.

Ans. 1. Their ministry serves to set forth the glory of Christ the head. The
most potent Monarchs that ever were in earth, in their most stately and most
magnificent shows were but seely creatures and worms to this, and attended
with weak men and flies in comparison of this presence.

2. That by their ministry the great work of the great day 2.
may be powerful, and speedily dispatched. For,

First, being the Angels of his power, they shall perform it The judgment by
them executed powerfully:
mightily and powerfully. No sooner shall the sentence of absolution or
condemnation be pronounced, but it shall be fully executed. For besides that
every of them is mighty in his own nature, and thence denominated
principalities and powers, and said to excel in strength, Psalm. 103. 20. so
shall now for the time the power of Christ be added to their own, which shall
be of such invincible strength in every one, as Satan and all the gates of
hell cannot, much less the wicked of the world shall be able to resist any one
of them.

Secondly, they shall do it willingly, because their wills are Willingly:
wholly conformable to the will of Christ, whom they love with all their
strength. Their readiness appears, Mat. 13. 28. the servants said, shall we
gather up the tares? Those that desire commission aforehand, will be ready
enough when they have it.

Thirdly, they shall perform Justly:
it justly, purely, ^aithfully, Rev. 15. 6. the seven Angels that had the seven
plagues, are said to be clothed in pure and bright linen; noting their
righteousness, not mingling corrupt passions in their executions, nor
corruptly respecting any persons. And they are girded on their breasts with
golden girdles: gold is the purest of all metals, noting their purity and
faithfulness in performing the will of God, in whole and in every part.

Fourthly, they shall do it diligently Diligently:
and perfectly, in most strict and exact manner. For they could not continue in
their glorious estate, if they should not be every way answerable to the law
of God, both in the purity of their nature, and in the perfection of their
work: for how soever the Angels compared with God are imperfect (Job, chap. 4.
verse. 18.) yet in comparison of Gods Law they have perfection, and no spot of
sin cleaves to them.

Fifthly, it shall be done speedily, Speedily. Rev. 4. 8.
and in the twinkling of an eye, with unconceiveable quickness and celeritie;
which is noted by their wings and girded breasts, ready and pressed to the
business of their Lord.

So of the second thing.

3. Their ministry and office shall 3.
be of use against all wicked persons. First, to force them, and present them
before the Judge, be they never so rebellious: for they shall blow the trumpet,
that all 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. Mat. 13. 41.
shall hear: they shall run through earth and sea in an instant, to gather
out all that offend: they shall compel mighty and rebellious Potentates to
present themselves. Secondly, to be (perhaps) witnesses, and give evidence
against the ungodly, of many secret sins: sure we are, they attend our
Congregations (1 Cor. 11. 10.) and why not in our private chambers? Thirdly, to
be instruments of Gods vengeance on the wicked, Mat. 13. 41, 42. the reapers
shall gather the tares, and cast them into unquenchable fire.

So of the third.

4. Their service and Ministry 4.
shall notably serve for the comfort and salvation of the Saints in that day,
for first they shall with admirable expedition gather the Saints out of their
graves from all the four winds, and bring them into the presence of Christ:
secondly, as they attended them in their humility, so now shall their service
be exceeding comfortable in that day: never was Hagar so comforted by an Angel
in her distress, when he refreshed her with water, as they shall be by the
Angels in this day of refreshing: for,

1. These Angels which had Good offices which Angels then do for the godly.
carried their souls into heaven, as Lazarus (Luke 16.) shall now bring their
bodies out of the earth. As the Angel loosed Peter's chains, and brought him 1.
out of prison, Act. 12. so now shall not one living body as his, but all the
dead bodies of the Saints be brought out of their prisons, and set into
perfect freedom: All stones shall be rolled away, and all chains of
corruption broken asunder.

2. When all elements shall be 2.
dissolved, and set on ^ire, the Angels shall help and hide them, that the
fire shall not hurt them; that look as the three servants of GOD walked in the
midst of the fire, and had no hurt, only their chains were loosed, because
God sent his Angel among them, Dan. 3. 25. so here all the godly shall be
safe in that fire, which shall drive the wicked to desperation, not able to
stand before those terrible burnings. And that fire shall resemble the waters
of the red sea, which was a wall to Israel, but a well and pit to drown Egypt.
Yea and as that fire of Nebuchadnezzar, that sheltred Gods servants from the
Tyrant, but licked up and devoured the enemy.

3. Whereas Satan at that day, being at his last and most desperate assault,
shall be most raging against the Saints, they shall stop the mouth of this
raging Lion, as once they did for Daniel, and by their power quell the forces
of the devil. And their very multitude shall afford this comfort, that there
shall appear infinite more with us than against us, 2. King. 6. 16.

4. As they shall bind the tares, to cast them into the fire, so shall 4.
they carry the wheat into the garner; and so appear glorious ministering
spirits for the good of the heirs of salvation, Hebr. 1. 14.

Thus the office and ministry of the Angels shall marvellously set out the
glory of Christ, promote the work of the great day, be serviceable for the
final ruin of all enemies, and happily advance the comfort and salvation of
the Saints, in these particulars. But I read not in the Scripture a word of
those childish and ridiculous conceits of Petrus Thyreus a Jesuit, who in
Jesuits feigned offices for Angels at that day.
the description of Christ's glorious appearing appoints some Angels to bear up
the cloud, and hold up the seat of the Judge, and some to bear the cross
before him, others the crown of thorns, others the nails, others the spear
and other instruments of his passion: Which he has gravely confirmed, because
he has seen these things finely and artificially painted upon tables: Sound
proofs of Jesuits: when they want grounds from Prophets and Quidlibet audendi
semper fuit aequa potestas. Hor.
Apostles, they can supply them out of Poets and Painters, to both whom was
ever granted equal leave to devise what they listed.

But how can the Angels come IV. How the Angels c^n come with Christ.
with Christ, seeing they are no bodily substances, in their nature being
without magnitude, figure, or sense; and seeing they occupy no place, how can
they move locally from heaven into the a^re, and into the earth?

Ans. The Angels being creatures, though they fill and occupy no place, yet
must needs be definitively in some place, now in one, and then in another, and
sometime locally ascend, and locally descend, after a manner unknown to us.
Hence in Jacobs ladder Genesis 28. 12.
the Angels are said to ascend and descend: and not only in vision, but
actually, Luke 1. 26. Gabriel was sent from GOD to a City in Galilee. So our
souls are spiritual substances, and yet they locally ascend to heaven, and at
the resurrection descend from heaven to be united to their bodies. In like sort
the Angels are described to be of most quick motion, and for their celeritie
and swiftness are compared to the winds, and have wings ascribed to them, as
flying with most swift motion about their Lords commands. And so must it needs
be: for,

1. Their motion is without all The nature of their motion.
resistance of bodily substances: no body can resist an unbodily substance, and
all resistance is between 1.
bodies.

2. Being without resistance, 2.
their motions are without all labor or weariness: they are restless in
their motion.

3. It must be most speedy, because by no means hindered: so as 3. (...).
in a short time, above that we can perceive, they can move between heaven
and earth. I say not, in a moment; for Angels cannot locally move between
extremes, as from heaven to earth, but by passing the mean, which is to be
done in time, though very short.

Thus we conclude, that the spiritual nature of Angels, though it occupy and
fill no place as bodies do, nor has any circumscriptive place assigned them
as they, and though by their motion in place they neither expel nor move any
body out of place; yet are they moved locally, and shall descend with Christ to
judgment, and quickly expedite all things belonging to it by their Ministry.

Observe hence a difference between Use 1. Difference between Christ's first
and second coming.
Christ's first and second coming.

For first, he comes now with another manner of train, than he had following
him upon earth: Then he had twelve poor fishermen, 1. Joh. 18. 36.
despised persons, following him (for his Kingdom was not of this world) but
now his train are all the Angels of heaven. Secondly, 2.
he was then to show himself the son of man, and in the form of a servant: but
now he will show himself the Son of God, and the Lord of glory. Thirdly, he
was then to preach righteousness, 3.
and to suffer for sin: but now he is to judge righteously, and to revenge sin.
Fourthly, he was ever 4.
the Lord of the holy Angels, and therefore in his temptations and agony, they
were ready to Mat. 4. 11. Luke 22. 43.
comfort him: and when he was at the weakest, he was of power to command many
legions of Mat. 26. 53.
them: but that was not the time to show forth his Majesty by their
attendance, as this appearing is. Fifthly, those Angels 5.
which ministered unto him in his incarnation and birth, in his life and death,
were Angels of grace, Preachers to shepherds, Disciples, women and others,
appearing sometimes by one or two, to one or two persons. But these are Angels
of power, appearing in millions to all the world, who in their wonderful
glory shall behold the glory of their Lord.

Again, the Lord Jesus is hence Use 2.
proved the Lord of glory, in that the holy Angels serve him as Advancement of
Christ by the Angels ministry.
their head and King of the Church: so the Apostle (Phil. 2. 9.) proves him to
have a Name above all names, because all things in heaven and earth, and under
the 1.
earth shall confess him: and Christ himself, to prove his headship, uses
the same argument, Joh. 1. 52. Hereafter shall ye see the Angels ascending and
descending on the Son of man, that is, ministering to him as the head of the
Church, as was figured in Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28. 1^. for Christ is the ladder,
by which only we ascend to heaven: this ladder reached from heaven to earth,
noting his two natures, divine from his Father in heaven, and humane from
Jacobs loins on earth: Angels ascend and descend on it, noting their emission
and admission, descending to their office, and ascending to give account.

Besides, he must be greatest of 2.
all, who is honored of all: and so Christ's eminency above all creatures is
proved, because all the Angels of heaven must honor him, Heb. 1. 6. And the
more, and more honorable the Attendants and Ministers be, the greater is the
personage so attended: but the Angels are every where spoken of, as the
excellency of the Creation; and in the glory of these servants behold the
glory of their Lord.

Again, their incessant service 3.
to Jesus Christ advances his glory: Exodus 26. 31. the veil of the Tabernacle
which covered the most holy (expressly signifying the flesh of Christ which hid
and covered his Deity) must be made of broydered work with Cherubims: not
without Cherubims, which noted the multitude of Angels serving Christ. Exodus
25. 20. The Cherubims, signifying the Angels, must lift their wings on high, as
attending Christ, and their faces must be to the Mercy-seat; which lively
resembled Christ, on whom their eyes must still be cast, as the eye of the
handmaide to the hand of her Mistress.

Thus we shall see how they served Christ as man, even in his lowest estate,
as well as in his highest. In his birth they sang glory to God, and were
preachers of him to shepherds. After his temptations they ministered to him,
spreading a table for him in the wilderness, and waiting at his table, Mat. 4.
11. In his agony in the garden they comforted him, Luke 22. 43. In the grave
they roll away the stone for his resurrection, Mat. 28. 2. In his ascension
they wait upon him, and lead him to the Ancient of days, of whom he received
a kingdom over all creatures, Dan. 7. 13. But much more now they attend him,
and assist him in the judgment of the great day, wherein he is to put forth
his greatest power and glory, in the most glorious work that ever was or can
be.

3. Here is matter of terror to Use 3. Terror to the enemies of Christ.
the enemies of Christ, even all wicked and impenitent persons: in that Jesus
Christ comes armed with such power and glory against them: for now he rides
in his chariot of triumph against all his enemies, and now all the mountains
in the world cannot hide them from the Judge, but the power of the Angels shall
present them. Neither can the sentence be avoided, nor the execution reprived:
for if heaven and earth be mingled together, whatsoever sentence of death is
pronounced on them, the Angels shall speedily execute. How comes it then to
pass, that men are so careless, and pass over these great woes as a tale
that is told? shall this Judge pronounce the sentence, and the Angels undertake
the execution, and yet the thing fall of execution? Woe worth the deadness and
security of wilful sinners, that dare contemn so dreadful a sentence as
shall eternally torment them!

4. Here is assured comfort for the Saints: that all this glorious Use 4. Great
comfort to the godly.
attendance of the Head shall be the glory of the members. What a great
comfort shall it be, to see the Angels mustered together, to become our
servants also, and perform the greatest service to us as ever was performed by
them? While the Saints lived here, the good Angels attended them, and kept them
in their hands: when they dyed, the Angels carried their souls to heaven, Psa
91. 11.
which was no mean service. But now in this great day they shall reunite the
souls and bodies of the Elect, they shall separate the whole man from all
corruption, and communication with sin and sinners, and gather out all that
offend, and shall not leave them till they be set quite free from all danger,
as the Angel did Peter, Act. 12. no nor till they have placed them in the
glory of God. Now what an honor is it, that these glorious spirits who dwell
in heaven, should serve them that dwell on earth, yea dwelt lately in the
grave? that mere spirits should serve flesh and blood? and creatures so
elevated in their nature, above all sin and mortality, should stand charged
with them who immediately before were clothed with misery and corruption?

Quest. How comes this to pass, seeing they are his, that is, Christ's Angels?

Answ. This must neither impeach Christ's glory, nor lift us up to glory in any
thing in our selves: For they serve Christ and us, but not after the same
manner, Difference in their ministry to Christ and us.
nor upon the same grounds: 1. Their service to him is immediate, as to the
head of the Church, to us mediate, as members 1.
of this head. 2. Their service 2.
is due to him as to their Creator and Lord, of duty, to us as creatures, of
charge from him. 3. Their service is proper to him, 3.
and invested in him as in his own right, to us communicated only by virtue of
our communion with him. 4. They are his Angels 4.
by special propriety, and they do him all homage and service by special
prerogative, as the author and preserver of all their excellent gifts, and
condition: but our Angels by special commission, and direction from him,
entrusted to employ their gifts for our good. In one word, never did they
minister to a member, but for the honor of their head.

5. It teaches us to admire the surpassing love of our Lord, in Use 5. Honor
Christ for these attendants given us.
that he took our nature, and bound us straiter to him than he did the
Angels of heaven; and has vouchsafed us his own special servants to attend
us, and charged them with our safety in all our ways, in life, in death, in
Psalm. 91. 11.
judgment, till we be set out of the reach of all danger. Well knew our Lord,
what weak creatures we are in our selves, what dangerous combats we were to
stand in, with how many spiritual and invisible enemies we were to be beset:
and therefore out of his love and wisdom has appointed us so many spiritual,
invisible, and more powerful ayders and assisters.

6. If we expect this happy Use 6. Grieve not the holy Angels.
ministry from the Angels, let us beware that in the mean time we grieve not
by our sin these holy Angels, nor drive them from about us, whose protection
under God is safer than if we lay under shield and spear, Psalm. 91. 4. 11.
While we desire they Si vis habere ministerium Angelorum, fuge consolationes
seculi, and tentationibus resist diaboli. ^ern.
should stand for us at that day, beware of ministering matter to them to
witness against us. Yea let us furnish them with matter of our defense, as
those that have been both witnesses and defenders of our pure conversation. 1.
Cor. 11. 10. Women must be seemly in the Congregation, because of the Angels.
And because of the Angels, both in Gods house, and our own houses, and all
meetings, the Saints must walk holily and reverently, a^ those that have not
only Gods eye, and the eye of Christ upon us, as Judges, but the Angels as
witnesses. Let no sinner that shall stand in need of so much comfortable
service from them, go on to grieve or offend them, but rather afford them
matter of rejoicing, in their sound conversion, and daily renewing of their
repentance, Luke 15. 7.

7. Learn to imitate the Angels in their service and ministry, Use 7.
Imitate them, and do service as they.
as it has been described. First, they honor Christ in all their ministry:
so all the scope and aim of our lives and labors 1.
must be the glory of our head. Secondly, they are expedite and ready: they
have besides the agilitie 2.
and swiftness of their nature, wings to fly withal: let their wings speed
us in his service, who are nearer than they: should the members be heavy and
uncheerefull in the service of the Head? Thirdly, they are in all things ruled
and moved by his 3.
mouth and spirit: they do none of their own, but his will: Ezekiel. 1. 20.
Whither the spirit led them, they went. Let us in all things give up our selves
much more, to the leading of his Spirit, not running in any business unsent,
or without our warrant: does the member any thing, or move any way without the
heads direction? Fourthly, they rejoice 4.
in all good things, in the glory of Christ, in the victory of Christ, in the
conversion of sinners, in the eversion of all wicked enemies, in the final
salvation and glory of all Saints, and do promote all these. But why do not
we more rejoice in these things, the benefit of which more redoundeth to us,
than to them? How unlike is it to the Angels, to rejoice in evil, in sinful
courses and company? why hate we and scorn such, as most partake in Christ's
victory, and are set out of the devils power? Fifthly, they are unweariable in
5. Patienter and fortiter perseverandum: ut qui ad coronam land ^am proxima
nititur, durante patientia coronetur. Cyp. de Bon^ Patientiae.
performing their service to Christ: and much less should a member be weary
of being officious to the head. When did any good Angel shrink and recoyle
from the commandment of Christ, or account any thing too much he could do for
Christ, or his members, as many Christians be? Therefore my Beloved (1 Cor. 15.
58.) Be steadfast, unmovable, unweariable, and abundant in the work of the
Lord. The time comes when we shall be in our condition (...), like or equal to
the Angels, Luke 20. 36. and when we shall be children of the resurrection. Let
us frame our selves to the good Angels beforehand in this first resurrection,
that we may have comfort and glory Rev. 20. 6.
in that second. And then he shall give to every man according to his works.



Here is the fifth and last point, V. The end of Christ's coming to judgment.
namely, the end of Christ's coming to judgment: where are five things to be
considered;

1. A just retribution, in the 1. (...).
word (...), which signifies both a return of justice, and a gift of favor:
Matthew. 20. 8. Call the worke-men, and give them their wages, return both to
those that came into the vineyard first, and seem to have deserved it, as also
those that came in last, to whom it was given of favor. For it is observable,
that the compound is changed into the simple, verse. 14. I will give to this
last, as unto thee: and therefore is most fitly (...).
used here, in respect of the two sorts of subjects to be judged: The wicked,
who must receive a just retribution according to their works, and desert of
them: And the godly, who are to receive life everlasting of the free favor of
God in Jesus Christ. And this is the end of Christ's coming; that secondary and
subordinate end, in the felicity of the Elect, and just damnation of
reprobates; which promoteth that chief and primary end of all his great
works, even the praise of the glory of his grace, in the consummation of that
his kingdom which he set up in this world.

2. The person retributing: 2.
He: the just Judge of all the world: he that loves righteousness, Psalm.
45. 7.
and hates iniquity: he that exercised and fulfilled all righteousness in
his humility, shall now much more exact it in his glory. And here in is the
difference between this Judge, and other judges: First, he is appointed to be
judge of all the world, and now to come to destroy 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. Psalm. 82. 1.
and revenge all unrighteousness: they not so. Secondly, the Lord is with them
in their passing of righteous sentence, but he is the Lord: God sits with them,
he sits as God. Thirdly, they may be misled: for they often pass sentence
before due hearing and trial; but not so He, as in Adams case, first all were
examined. Or they when they have heard the right, may be carried away by
affection, petition, money, importunity, or the command of a superior, as in
Naboths case: this Judge not so, most righteous, and will deal righteously.

3. The persons to whom: To every man: he says not, to all men 3.
in general, but the word notes the particular judgment of every singular
man: none shall avoid judgment; Kings nor subjects, rich nor poor: the
greatest Monarch that ever was, must appear, if his power be not superior to
Christ's. The poor soul shall not be neglected, nor forgotten. None shall
answer by Proctours, but every man shall 2 Cor. 5. 10.
receive according to that he has done in the body, be it good or evil. Hence
the Scripture, that it may omit none, rangeth them into sundry ranks: namely,
of just and unjust, Act. 24. 15. of quick and dead, Act. 10. 42. of great and
small, Rev. 20. 12. Christ now calls, and men will no^ come, but then they must
come in.

4. The time: then shall he give 4. 2 Pet. 3. 13.
to every one: now is not the time or place in which dwells righteousness:
now it is well with the wicked, and not so well to the godly: now in men's
tribunals many things are carried unjustly and partially, but we know that then
the judgment of God shall be according to truth, Romans (...). 2. Now in this
world a man may Eccle. 8. 14.
see a just man, to whom it is according to the work of the wicked: A poor
wise man by his wisdom 9. 15. 3. 16.
delivering the City, and none remembers this poor man: The best work
receiving the worst wages, and iniquity in the place of justice. But then is
the time, when the godly shall have a full reward and honor, and the wicked
everlasting shame and sorrow.

5. The rule of this recompense: according to his works: 5.
where,

First, what is meant by works. 1.
Namely, not only actions good or bad: but we must include the (...).
original and attendants of them, even the work of our fall in Adam, which
was our work as well as his; original sin, and corruption of nature, of
which works are the fruits; and so comprehended in them. So out of works of
the Saints faith is not excluded, being the rise of them, and indeed the
noblest of all works, the chief obedience required in the Gospel. The
attendants of good works are also included under them, as namely, thoughts and
speech^^: for according to every idle word and thought Mat. 12. 36.
we must be judged; but the works will manifest what they have been.

Secondly, the appropriation: 2.
his works: His own, not other men's: every man shall give account of himself
unto God: every Romans 14. 12.
vessel must stand on his own bottom: the father shall not bear the sons
burden, etc.

Ob. In the second commandment God will revenge the sins of Parents in their
children to the third and fourth generation.

Ans. Not except the children be found in the same sins: none shall suffer for
another work, further than he is some way guilty of it, as the child often
is by consent or imitation. And thus the Pharisees Mat. 23. 35.
shall go to hell for Abels blood, and Za^haries, shed many thousand years
before their age, because they were not warned by that example to avoid
bloodshedding. But he will visit the sins, that is, first enquire, and, if
he find them not, he will not revenge: see Ezekiel. 18. 14. and the examples of
Hezekiah, Josiah, and other good children of wicked parents.

Thirdly, what is meant by 3.
the phrase according to works?

Ans. 1. The phrase notes plainly, that as our works are good or bad, so our
doom shall be: for so it is evidently expounded, Rev. 22. 12. My reward is
with me, to give to every one as his (...).
work shall be: so as the sentence shall run according to the evidence that
works shall bring in, as sure witnesses either of their faith or infidelity.
2. The phrase implies the quality of the work, but not the merit: which we
observe, because the Papists hence ignorantly build up their merit of works,
and thus argue, God will render to the wicked according to the merit of their
works, and therefore the godly must receive according to the Good works not
meritorious, as evil ar^: why.
merit of their works. Answ. The argument follows not from the merit of evil
works to the merit of good works: for first, good works are Gods, not ours 1.
properly, as our evil works are: faith, and works of faith are the gift of
GOD: secondly, good 2.
works in us are imperfectly good, but our evil works are perfectly evil:
thirdly, good 3.
works are done upon duty, but evil works against duty; merit and debt are
opposed, and what meriteth he, who has but done his duty, and failed in doing
too? fourthly, who can bring these merits? Not the unregenerate: for 4.
the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all the unrighteousness of
men. Or can the sons of God, when Abraham himself has not wherein to
rejoice before God? surely if he could be justified by no other means than
faith, much less can we: Therefore by the works of the law can no flesh be
justified, Romans 3. 28.

Quest. Why then shall good Why works are the rule of judgment, not faith.
works be inquired into in that day, rather than faith? and why shall Christ
judge according to works, not faith?

Answ. 1. Works shall be inquired into, not as meritorious 1.
causes of salvation, which is only merited by Christ's works which only had
perfection; but as conditions of Gods promises concerning reward in heaven,
given not for merit, but of Gods Nil Deus in nobis p^aeter sua dona coronat.
frce grace: for he crowns his grace in us, not our merits, says Augustine.
Works are requisite conditions to the person, but no causes of reward.

2. To show that Jesus Christ 2.
shall accept no persons, but look to causes.

3. To show that faith must 3.
not be idle, but put forth the life in good motions and actions.

4. Because the judgment and 4.
equity of it must be visible, and run into the eyes of all mankind: and
therefore must be passed according to the fruits and works which men may see;
whereas faith, by which alone we are justified before God, is an inward and
spiritual grace in the heart, known only to God who sees the heart, and it
flies the sense of man further than by the works of love, as fruits, it
discovers it self.

Object. But if the judgment Whether the Law or Gospel be the rule of judging.
were according to works, then the rule should be the Law: but God will judge
the secrets of men according to the Gospel, Romans 2. 16. which is the doctrine
of faith, not of works.

Answ. The word (...), according, signifies there not the ruls of judging, but
the certitude of it: and the sense is, According as I have taught you in the
Gospel: my Gospel, or my preaching it among you. Or if it be taken for the
rule, it must be meant of the Elect only, who by the Gospel shall be absolved,
as the wicked by the Law condemned.

But how shall they be judged, Ob.
who have no works, as such who repent at last cast, whose works have been
all against God, and poor men that want means?

For such as repent at last, as Ans. 1.
the thief on the cross, they shall receive according to their works: for
true faith is never without the witness of works, but works Gal 5. 6.
by love, let their time be never so little. So the thief on the sudden
confessed his sin, be wayled his life, professed Christ when his disciples left
him, reproved his fellow, and prayed earnestly for salvation, and would further
have expressed his faith, if he had lived longer. So those that are called in
the article of death, have a true purpose, if they live, to express their
faith, and Gods mercy accepts this will for the deed done. Let not thine eye
be evil, because the Lords is good.

And for the godly poor, who 2.
can give no alms, yet they do works of piety, justice, diligence in the
calling, and works of truest mercy, in prayer, instruction of the family,
comfort, reproof, and the like to these.

Object. But some are not judged Of double punishment for sin.
according to their works, but receive an unequal sentence, Rev 18. 16. Give
her double according to her works, that is, twice as much punishment as her
works are.

Answ. By double is not meant double of punishment to her sin (for no
punishment can be double to the least sin:) but double affliction, that is, a
much more grievous punishment than she has afflicted the Church withal: and
this, Babylon has well deserved, and shall be sure of. So some wicked men are
p^nished for one and the same sin, here and hereafter; as for murder, theft,
or the like: this is not a double punishment, but a further degree of the same
punishment; one begun here, and the other eternally continued hereafter: both
due by that just sentence, In the day thou sinnest, thou shall dye the death.

Doctr. The last judgment shall Doct. The last judgment
be not more glorious than righteous: for if Jesus Christ be the glorious and
righteous.
Judge, and if every person to be judged shall receive according to his works
a righteous sentence, the judgment must be most just. Romans 2. 2. We know that
the judgment of God is true, that is, equal and just. And the Apostle
abhors with detestation the least thought of any unrighteousness in God, c.
3. 5. Is God unrighteous? God forbid: how should he then judge the world? this
will not stand with the proper office of God, which is to be the Judge of all
the world: shall not he deal justly?

1. Where all helps of righteous Reason 1. Helps of righteous judgment in
Christ.
judgementare, the judgment must needs be righteous: but so are they here:
for first, in the person of the Judge there is wisedome^, and piercing
understanding far above Salomans, to find out the truth and equity of
things: He discernes persons and causes truly and infallibly, as they are: He
can disclose and discover all secrets of hearts, intentions, and purposes,
which no creature can discern. All other Judges may be deceived, who judge only
of the work running into the senses, and so mis-judge of men as David himself
did of Mephibosheth. But this Judge sees the heart and hidden counsels of it.
This ground of righteous judgment is laid in Jeremy* 17. 10. I the Lord search
the heart and reins, to give to every man according to his works. Herein is
this Throne exalted above all tribunals, in that the most secret thoughts
escape him not, which the highest seats of justice in earth can take no notice
of. All things are naked to him, Heb. 4. 13. Another help of righteous
judgment is the opening of the books, both in Gods custody, and in the
custody of the parties.

God has a book of providence, in which all things and causes are written,
Psalm. 139. 16. and a book of memory, wherein all the good services of his
Saints are recorded, Mal. 3. 16. and a book of life, in which the names of the
Elect are written, Phil. 4. 3. these books shall be opened and read, Rev. 20.
12. And I saw the dead both great and small stand before God, and the books
were opened, and another book was opened which is the book of life, and the
dead were judged of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works.

The book in the parties custody is the book of every man's conscience either
accusing or excusing, Romans 2. 15. These books shall be opened, and if the,
conscience accuse, God is greater than the conscience, 1 John 3. 20.

2. Where all letts are removed, that judgment must be 2.
most righteous: but so is it here: for this is a white throne, like Lets of
righteous judgment, removed.
Salomons white ivory throne, for the purity of the Judge and judgment.
First, here is no concealment of things, no dawbing 1.
up of bad matters in corners, no pleading of Lawyers to varnish falsehood, and
cloud the truth; no Proctors, no Advocates, but every man must give account of
himself to God. Secondly, here is no respect of persons, but causes: 2.
no friends to gratify: no man's cloth or service shall protect an offender.
Thirdly, here shall be 3.
no inducement by gifts: gold shall gild no bad causes. Fourthly, 4.
here shall be no sanctuaries, no privileged places to disturb the course of
justice, no appeals, no protections to avoid the sentence which shall lie
eternally upon sinners. From all which grounds we conclude the righteousness
of this judgment.

Which serves first, according Use 1. Live well, and fare well in judgment.
to the scope of our Savior, to excite every one in the care of saving his
soul, and work in us self-denial, taking up of our cross, and following of
Christ: for then shall every man receive according to his work: As the seed
has been, so shall be the harvest: As the work has been, so shall the wages
be. He that has sown to the flesh, or to the world, shall reap corruption:
but he that has sown to the spirit, shall reap immortality and life. 1
Cor. 3. 8. Every one shall receive according to his own labor.

Secondly, here is a ground of Use 2. Time to repent of sin before judgment.
repentance, Act. 17. 31. He admonishes all to repent, because he has
appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness. The reason
is strong: now the Lord after a sort hides his righteousness, and uses
patience and connivence with many sinners: but then he shall draw it out. Yea
thou may now hide thine own sin with Adam, and carry it close from men,
but that Romans 2. 4. 5.
is a day of revelation, then shall the books be opened, and all thy sins
(except thou have repented and got a cover in Christ) shall he manifest, and
openly read before God, men and Angels. Think not to avoid or ^lude the
justice of this throne: but stand in awe, and sin not: get an awful
reverence of that God, whose pure Psalm. 4. 4.
eyes behold all the ways of man, whose soul perfectly hates all iniquity,
whose hand will not spare, but without respect of persons judge every man's
works, and whose justice will reward every one according to that he has done
in the flesh, be it good or evil.

By what stronger argument would the Apostle affright the the hard-hearted
sinner, who heaps up wrath against the day of wrath, and declaration of the
just judgment of God, but this same, that God will reward every man according
to his works? Romans 2. 5, 6. So, what more affectuall motive can we use to
terrify wicked enemies out of their sins, than that of the spirit of God?
Rev. 22. 11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still: and he that is filthy
let him be filthy still: let the enemies of grace, of the word of grace, of the
preachers of grace, be unjust, malicious, and scornful still, at their peril:
let the swearer swear still: so the drunkard, harlot, usurer. But take the
next verse with it, verse. 12. Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me,
to give to every one according as his work shall be.

Thirdly, here is a ground of Use 3.
patience in the midst of the confusions of the world, and the many Be patient
in all confusion, and injustice.
contempts and opprobries cast against the godly: seeing every man shall
receive a righteous sentence according to his works. Phil. 4. 5. Let your
moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand. Beware of revenge in
the mean time: commit all to him that judges righteously. Storm not to
receive unjust sentences against us, to see our righteous ways depraved, our
good repaid with evil, every Barrabas preferred before Christ. There is a day
wherein God shall make our righteousness break out as the Sun in his
strength. And even from hence the Scriptures conclude a providence and a future
judgment: Eccles. 3. 16. When thou see iniquity in the place of judgment,
then think in thy heart that God will judge the just and the wicked. and cap.
5. 7. If in a country thou see the oppression of the poor, and defrauding of
judgment, be not astonished: for he that is higher than the highest regards,
and there be higher than they. Now be patient, and appeal to this day, from
all unjust sentences, as John Hus, Jerome of Prague, etc. so did Zachariah, 2 Chronicles. 24. 22. The Lord look on it and require it.

Fourthly, this must teach us Use 4. Be sincere in matter of religion.
sincerity and truth in all our ways before God and men: seeing this
judgment is not according to outward appearance, but according to the truth:
then shall all shows and powerless forms of godliness be blown off, as
leaves in Autumn by violent winds, and thou shall be laid open as thou art,
and not as thou seem: thou may now be as Ananias among believers, and as
Judas among the twelve, and carry it smooth away; but this day will set thee
among hypocrites, and thou shall stand among thy fellows. Then shall the hope
of the hypocrite perish: and only soundness of heart shall abide this exact
trial. It must be gold that must abide the fire of this day, and not a gilded
hypocrite.

Fifthly, this must teach us Use 5. Watch, and judge thy self beforehand.
watchfulness in all our ways, and see they be righteous: Eccles. 12. 13.
Fear God and keep his Commandments: for God will bring every work into
judgment: fear God in his presence, power, and justice: do nothing in secret,
which thou would not have preached on the housetop: And keep his
Commandments; for, whatsoever is not answerable to some commandment, this
judgment must condemn and disprove; whatsoever the word now allows, it will
then justify, and then will condemn whatsoever it now condemns. Judge thy
self aforehand, and put thy self upon the trial, 1. Of How: 1.
the word: how will those words and actions abide that trial, which now it
passes sentence against? 2. Of thine own conscience: 2.
if now thy conscience have a voice against thee, but thou will choke and
sti^le it, yet it shall be heard at this day. 3. Of 3.
thy experience: if any action now bring guiltiness, fear, shame, or
heaviness, what else shall it bring then, when it shall set before the Judge
thy oppressions, cruelties, usuries, wrongs, oaths, revenges, filthiness,
drunkenness, contempt of the word of grace, the day and means of grace, and
shall do God good service in bringing back all old reckonings, not reckoned
for by Christ? 4. Of thine own present 4.
apprehension of that day: if now the mention of this day make thee out of
guiltines to tremble, what shall the day it self do?

Sixthly, out of this doctrine a Use 6. How to know what will become of us in
the day of judgment.
man may gather evidence of his future estate, and whether he shall speed well
in the last judgment. For as the tree leans, so it is likely to fall; and as
it falls, so it lies.

But to help this inquisition, the Scriptures afford us some notes of trial.

1. That in Gal. 6. 7. What a man 1.
sowes that shall he reap. Sowest thou cockle, and would thou reap corn?
sowest thou to the flesh, and expectest to reap any thing but corruption? To
sow to the flesh, is to live according to the lusts of the flesh, and command
of lusts: as to sow to the Spirit, is to live aftet the motions of the Spirit.
Thou art in GODS field, either wheat or chafe: and the reapers of this great
harvest shall gather the wheat into the garner, but the chafe shall be cast
into unquenchable fire.

2. Another note is in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
1. 8. in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that know not God, and obey
not the Gospel. All ignorant and disobedient persons, that love not the
knowledge of God, nor obedience to the Gospel, may now read their doom in
that judgment: nothing but timely repentance preventeth it.

3. Another note is in 2 Thessalonians. 3.
1. 6. It is a righteous thing with God to trouble them that trouble you. It
shall then go hard with those evil servants that beat their fellow servants,
that revile Christ in his members, or disgrace the profession of godliness:
whereas they shall find it had been their happiness to have fed, clothed,
comforted, and honored Christ in his members, Mat. 25. 45.

4. Another note is in the parabl^ 4.
of the talents, Mat. 25. 30. the faithful servant, having received talents,
used them, and gained as many more, was made ruler over much: but the evil and
sloathfull servant, that hid his Masters talent, and employed it not for his
Masters advantage, was taken and cast into everlasting darkness. What shall be
their hope, that are so far from employing their talents, that they declaime
against them that do, and molest them for so doing? Woe to such Scribes and
Pharisees hypocrites, that neither enter themselves, nor suffer others, but
shut up the Kingdom of heaven before men, Mat. 23. 13. What is the sound
preaching of the Gospel, but the key of the Kingdom, given into the hand of
Pastors to open the door of heaven to believers? Where then shall such
Pharisees stand, who not only hinder others by their wicked example, but wrest
the key out of the Pastors hands, and so bolt up the Kingdom of heaven, that
people should not enter? Who sees not half the sentence executed on many such
already? even their talent already taken away: and the other half remains,
the taking away of the man himself, the binding of him, and casting him into
the fire, as a bundle good for nothing but for fuel of the fire of hell.

5. The Apostle in Romans 2. 7. 5.
gives other two certain notes of him that shall speed well in judgment: 1.
He seeks glory, that is, by faith and repentance he seeks the kingdom. 2.
He perseveres in good, and stands out to victory: for good fruits from a sound
root abide, and good works flowing from sound faith are not vanishing. When
those that are contentious against the truth, and given up to unrighteousness,
shall meet with tribulation, woe and anguish, then shall these attain glory
and immortality.

Verse. 28. Verily I say unto you, there be some of you that stand here, that
shall not taste of death, until they have seen the son of man come in his
Kingdom.
IN these words our Savior, The drift of the words.
partly to mitigate the former doctrine concerning self-denial, bearing the
cross, and suffering for Christ, partly to confirm what he had said
concerning his glorious coming to judgment, and partly to support and comfort
his Disciples, who by reason of his base and low estate could see nothing less
than the great glory that he speaks of: does now make a gracious promise,
Vult ut consolationis aliquid habeant tempore crucis and afflictionis, etc.
Bucer.
that although he was now in an abject condition, and after a while was to be
more humble and abased, even to the death, the shameful death of the cross,
and to be laid up a while in the house of death, yet ere long he should
manifest his glory; and though his greatest glory should be deferred till the
last judgment, yet would he before that time shine out in brightness and
glory to the whole world.

And whereas they, as his nearest In desiderio celeritas quoque mora est.
and most faithful servants, might earnestly desire to see him their loving
Master thus exalted, and grieve that it should be so long deferred, as that
they might be worn out of the earth before that time; he meets them in their
desire, and tells them it is not so far off, but some of them should behold it
before their death.

For the meaning. Amen, or verily: a form of speech or asseveration
Exposition. (...).
which Christ the true and faithful witness often used to avouch the truth:
and he that says here, Amen, is called Amen, Rev. 3. 14. these things says
the Amen: to show, that whatsoever he says, is yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
that is, most firm, certain and constant.

I say unto you.] Our Lord propounds his doctrine in his own name, that he
may be known the chief Doctor of his Church, even that Doctor of the Chair,
whose voice alone must be heard of Pastors and people. Thus did none of the
Prophets, but only verbum Domini, the word of the Lord: none of the Apostles,
but delivered what they had heard and seen, 1 John 1. 1. and what they had
received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. Nor none of the Pastors of the Church, but
as good Stewards they dispensed their Masters allowance. 1 Cor. 4. 1.


And further, this being a prophecy uttered in this form, he shows himself
the chief Prophet of the Church, prophesied of by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. like
unto Moses, Act. 3. 21. and like Christ like Moses in five things.
him in 5. things. 1. As the truth has a likeness with the shadow, 1.
the mediation of Moses between God and his people being a shadow of Christ's
mediation. 2.
2. Like him in respect of 3. Heb. 3. 5. 6.
divine calling to his office. 3. In respect of his faithfulness in his
calling, being faithful in all the house of God as the Son, Moses 4.
as a servant. 4. Like him in his authority, he being appointed to teach us
all things, and we to hear him in all things. 5. In the event 5.
or sanction: whosoever will not hear him, must dye the death.

But superior to Moses, as being the Lord of the holy prophets, as being God,
the seer of things properly and a priori, as being faithful in the house as
the Son, as only able to say, I say unto you, preaching in his own name,
which none but the head of the Church can do, and none but he that has power
in the heart and conscience.

Some that stand here, shall not taste of death. [This is an Hebrew phrase: not
to taste of death, is, not to die; but alluding to the cause of death, which
was tasting of the forbidden fruit; this was the first tasting of death. So in
Joh. 8. 51. He that keeps my word, shall not see death: and Heb. 2. 9. Christ
tasted death for all the Elect.

Till they see the son of man come in his Kingdom.] Here is some difference
and difficulty in the interpretation.

1. Some refer it to the last Opinions. 1.
judgment, of which Christ had spoken immediately before, and erroneously
conceive that Christ meant of John, who they thought should not die till Christ
came again to the last judgment. And no marvel though sundry have been
over-carried in this error, seeing the Disciples themselves, till the sending
of the Spirit to lead them into all truth, were wrapped in it. But this is
sufficiently confuted in the Text, Joh. 21. 23.

2. Others, both ancient and 2.
new writers, as Hilary, Bullinger, Chytreus, and Piscator, understand it of
Christ's Transfiguration which immediately followed, as if he had said, Some of
you, as Peter, James, and John, shall shortly see me (so far as you can
comprehend) in that form and habit wherein I will thus come to judgment; as
six days after they saw him on mount Tabor in great glory. But first, the
speech (ye shall see it before your death) seems to carry it to something
beyond the compass of so few days. Secondly, we do no where read that the
transfiguration is called the coming of Christ in his Kingdom. Thirdly, in so
short a time none of the disciples were to taste of death. Therefore,

3. We shall best find out the sense by enquiring, 3. Emphasis hujus loci non
est, in verbo veniendi, sed videndi. Bucer. Kingdom of God general and
special.


What is meant here by the Kingdom:

What is meant by the coming of this Kingdom: and

Seeing the best interpretation of a prediction is the accomplishment, we shall
enquire how some of the Disciples did see the coming of this Kingdom before
they tasted of death. 1. I.


For the first: the Kingdom of

God is twofold, General, and Special.

The former is called the Kingdom of power, whereby the Lord powerfully
governs the whole world and every particular, to the very sparrows, and the
hairs of our head: unto which kingdom of power all creatures, men and Angels,
yea devils themselves are subject.

The special Kingdom of God 2.
is his gracious rule and government over his Elect: called the Kingdom of
Christ, because he is the head of it: and the Kingdom of heaven, because it
tends directly thither: and the Kingdom of the Son of man. Of this Kingdom
are two degrees: of grace: of glory. The difference of these two, is, 1. In
time: the former is begun on earth, the latter is consummate in heaven. 2. In
manner of government: the former is governed mediatly, by his servants and
ministers, the latter immediately, by himself, when he is all in all. 3. In the
manner of subjection: the former in the militant estate is environed by enemies
and assailants: the latter is triumphant, in perfect rest and peace, without
all assault.

Quest. Of whether of these does our text mean? Which here meant, and what it
is.


Answ. Our Savior here speaks of the former Kingdom, of grace, here in this
world, which is an estate wherein men are brought to be subjects to Christ in
this life, being enlightened, guided, and effectually moved to believe the
promises of salvation, and obey the will and laws qf God. For it is a coming
into the kingdom, before the disciples decease.

For the second: what is meant II.
by the coming of this Kingdom?

Answ. The coming of the Kingdom is nothing else but the How the Kingdom of
Christ comes.
erecting of it, by the powerful means of it, in the hearts of men where it is
not begun, and a continuance of it with much success and increase where it is
begun: being all one with that petition, Thy Kingdom come. Mat. 6. 10.


And thus many Interpreters, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Tossanus, fitly apply it to
the power and efficacy of the Gospel, by which the Kingdom of Christ was
far and wide, with great power propagated after the time of Christ's
Ascension: but yet in the days of some of the Apostles. And to this
interpretation the change of the phrase (Mark. 9. 1.) gives light: some that
are here, shall not taste of death, till they have seen the Kingdom of God
come with power: Now what else is it, to see the Kingdom of God come with
power, than to see the enlargement and increase of the Kingdom of God, by the
prevailing of the Gospel, bringing in men to the obedience of faith? whence,
Romans 1. 16. the Gospel is called the power of God to salvation.

But thirdly, let us look into III. Of the ac complishment hereof.
the accomplishment of this prophecy, which will notably enlighten the true
meaning; because we shall here see Christ now ascended, mightily declaring
himself the King of his Church, and that he was not only exalted unto the
right hand of God, but that, even in the days of some of the Apostles, he came
Evidences of Christ's Kingdom enlarged. 1.
in the mighty power of his kingdom of grace: As appeared,

1. In the emission of his Apostles: Christ immediately before his Ascension did
call and send out his Apostles, with special promise of his presence in their
Ministry to the end of the world, Mat. 28. 18. Go and reach all nations:
their commission was, to make Disciples every where. This great work the
Apostle magnifieth, Ephesians. 4. 11. When he ascended, he gave gifts to men, some
to be Apostles, etc. for the gathering (...).
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and the edification of the
body of Christ. This was one most powerful means for propagating his kingdom,
which was herein seen gloriously to come out through the world.

2. In the descending of the 2.
holy Ghost, fifty days after his Ascension, upon the Apostles; when the
Spirit promised came rushing upon them as a mighty wind, and filled all the
house: whereupon forthwith they preached the Word of the Gospel to every
nation under heaven, at Jerusalem, in their own tongue, Act. 2. 2. which was a
fruit of his Ascension and Exaltation, v. 33. and a coming in his kingdom
with power.

3. In the Apostolical gifts, 3.
we may see how powerfully the Son of man came in his Kingdom, in their
days: as the gift of knowledge in deep mysteries of the Kingdom, without
study: the gift of prophecy: the gift of miracles, of healing by imposition
of hands, of casting out devils, of raising the dead, and the like, for
confirmation of their doctrine: the gift of tongues, and of immunitie from
error in teaching or writing: the gift of the Apostolical rod, in smiting
offenders, as Paul did Elymas with blindness, and Peter Ananias and Sapphira
with sudden death. Which peculiar gifts were promised and given them, that by
the admirable use and power of them the Son of man should come gloriously in
his Kingdom, and the Church more and more confirmed in the faith, and more
allured in the beginning and cradle of it, to the love of Christ and his truth,
who a little before was so hated and despised.

4. In the Apostolical diligence, which was wonderful, 4.
and all to this end, that the Son of man might come gloriously in this his
Kingdom. The travells of Paul alone were such, as he carried the word of the
Kingdom, and set up Christ as a King, unto a third part of the known world,
Romans 15. 19. 20. Yea in his time he shows, that the Gospel was preached not
at Colossus only (as Col. 1. 16.) but by the diligence of the Apostles it was
fruitful in all the world, v. 23. How instant were they in preaching, writing,
disputing, and suffering, and all to set up the Son of man glorious in his
kingdom?

5. In the success of the Apostles 5.
in their Ministry: which if we consider, we shall see the truth of Christ's
speech, that they did more in the means of conversion of men, than himself
did. Joh. 14. 12.
Act. 2. at one Sermon of Peter's, three thousand were converted: this was the
first famous draught of this fisher of men, by which three thousand subjects
were added to Christ's Kingdom in one day: here came the Son of man
gloriously in his Kingdom. And what wonderful increase it took in all
quarters, all the Epistles of the Apostles do witness: especially twenty
years after Christ's Ascension, in which times howsoever some of the Apostles
were extinct, as James slain with the sword by Herod, Ast. 12. yet some other
of the Apostles, and of others who heard Christ speak these words, were
living: witness that Synod of the Apostles, which was fifteen years after
Christ's Ascension, at Jerusalem, wherein James son of Alphens was President;
which shows both the flourishing estate of the Church at that time, and that
many of the Apostles were then living: and so this prophecy of Christ was
accomplished. But,

6. Forty years after Christ's 6.
Ascension, when all the Jewish ^orship and ceremonies, together with the
Temple, were so ^olished and destroyed, as one ^one was not left upon another;
^e whole house and all the uten^ls and shadows were burnt with fire, so as
none of them ^ould longer stand up against Christ, the truth and substance of
them: Then was the son of man let into his kingdom most ^erspicuously, all
va^les were ^ow rent, all shadows vanished, ^ll partitions broken down, and
Christ with open face trium^hantly conquering and prevai^ing in the world. And
this, John ^he Evangelist saw, who dyed in the 101. year after Christ, about
^0. years after the destruction of the Temple, as Chronologers have collected.

Object. Christ was come in his Mat. 3. 2.
Kingdom before: so John Baptist preached, Repent, for the kingdom of God is
at hand: and Christ himself said in Matt. 12. If I by the Spirit of God cast
out devils, then is the kingdom of God come unto you.

Answ. True it is, the son of man was come in his kingdom before: 1. in the
beginnings of it: 2. to Judea: 3. in a dim and obscure light in comparison. But
now it is come in the power of it, and to all the world, even in the Apostles
time, whereof our Savior here speaks.

We might add hereto the writing of the Evangelists: Matthew, Of the times
when the Gospels were written.
who wrote his Gospel eight years after Christ, Mark ten, Luke fifteen, and
John forty two; wherein Christ came in his Kingdom apparently to all the
world, in all the Churches of the New Testament. Yea this last of the Apostles,
John, saw Christ's coming in his Kingdom most gloriously, in the undaunted
confession of his Name by many thousand Christians, that gave their lives for
the testimony of his truth. For he lived to see three of those bloody
persecutions of Roman Emperors, as of Nero, under whom Peter and Paul
suffered, of Domitian, under whom himself was banished into the Isle Pathmos,
where he wrote his Revelation, and of Trajan, under whom were many thousand
Christians drawn to death daily, as Pliny the second Eusebius. hist. Eccles.
lib. 3. cap. 33.
testifies, writing in their behalf to Trajan the Emperor; in whose days
John wrote his Gospel, and dyed the 10^. year of his own age. All which has
notably cleared the sense of our Saviors prediction. Now follows the
observation.

Where the Word of God is most Doct. By preaching and obeying the Word
powerfully preached, and most cheerfully obeyed, there Christ comes most
gloriously in his kingdom. The whole 110. Psalm Christ's kingdom is advanced.
is a prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, who is appointed to rule in the midst of
his enemies. 1.
1. The place or country, over which he is King, is Sion, v. 2. that is, the
Church of God, figured by Sion at that time. 2. 2.
His government over his Church is called a Kingdom, for the similitude it
has with earthly Kingdoms: and in all we shall see the coming of Christ's
kingdom to be by the powerful preaching and obeying of the Gospel.

1. Earthly Kings have royal Showed by similitude of earthly Kings and
kingdoms 1.
titles, and styles of honor: So for the name and title of this King, he is
called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. Even that eternal Word (Joh. 1. 1.) which
was before all beginning, but now incarnate. And he is called faithful and
true, verse. 11. not only faithful, in defense of his subjects, but true in
his promises and retributions of reward to those that valiantly fight his
battles.

2. Other Kings have subjects: 2.
and here must be subjects, which hear his voice and follow him, Joh. 10. 28.
called a willing people, Ps. 110. 3. Elect, and drawn of the Father: all
gathered by the word and voice of Christ, and of unwilling made a willing
people, because his redeemed ones, both by price and power.

3. Other Kings have their 3.
laws and statutes for the government of their subjects. The laws of this
King are the laws of heaven, the Charter of heaven, the Word of God in the two
Testaments, the law of entire nature renewed in the former, and the law of
faith revealed in the latter. It is hence called the word of the Kingdom,
Matthew. 13. 19. because his Kingdom is erected and preserved by it. And these
laws are bounded with rewards to the Observers, and penalties to the
transgressors; all these being comprehended in the promises and threats of the
word.

4. Other Kings ride in great state and glory, both to make and 4.
execute laws, as also in their just wars for the defense of their right and
subjects, and just revenge of wrong-doers. So this King rides upon a white
horse, and every where triumphs by his truth, being faithful and true,
fighting and judging righteously, Rev. 19. 11. and Psalm. 45. 4. Prosper with
thy glory, ride upon the word of truth and meekenes. And how gloriously he rode
on upon his word, through all the world, after his Ascension, we have showed.
5. Eminency of Christ above other Kings. 1. Rev. 19 12.


5. Other Kings have their crowns, sword, and scepter, but with much
difference from this King: 1. He has many crowns upon his head, whereas other
Princes seldom have above one; to note the many victories, which according to
the word, and by the word he has obtained against Satan, sin, death, hell,
for himself and his subjects. 2. His 2. Ephesians. 6. 17.
sword is the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, which he holds not in his
hand as other Princes, but in his mouth, Rev. 1. 16. Out of his mouth went a
two edged sword: Esa. 11. 4. He shall smite the earth with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips slay the wicked: where the rod of his
mouth, and breath of his lips are all one, namely, his word; by which sword he
subdued three Act. 2. 41.
thousand at one Sermon. 3. His scepter is that rod of his power 3.
which he sends out of Sion, that is, his word as is expounded, Esa. 2. 3. The
law shall go out of Sion, and the Word of God out of Jerusalem. Psalm. 110. 3.
But, other Princes hold their scepter in their hand, he in his mouth.

6. Other Kings have their 6.
guard and army to attend them: So has he those, who know the time and place
of their attendance, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall come willingly at the time
of assembling thine army in holy beauty: whereby we know who they be, that
wait on Christ as his servants, namely, those that wait at the time and place
of holy assemblies, called his holy beauty: these have free access unto him
in his presence chamber, and follow him into their own hearts, where he is
present by his Spirit to guide and comfort them.

By all this plainly appears, that where the Word is preached and obeyed,
the Lord Jesus comes in glory, and in his Kingdom. His name is the Word of
God, his subjects gathered by the word, his laws the word of the kingdom, his
white horse on which he rides in triumph, is the word of truth, his crowns
are put and held on his head by the word, his scepter the rod of his mouth, his
sword the two edged sword going out of his mouth, his attendants and guard
waiting on him in the place of holy beauty.

Which serves to convince all Use 1. Enemies of the word, enemies of Christ.
the enemies of the truth, as rebels to the Kingdom of Christ: the greatest
enemies and rebels he has, are the hinderers of his word and ordinances, let
their pretenses be what they will: and manifestly are they discovered to be
hypocrites, who will say every day, Thy Kingdom come, and yet by all their
power hinder the passage and power of the Gospel: nothing is such a (...)ion to
them, nothing is such burden to the place where they live, as Christ's coming
powerfully in his Kingdom: themselves will not enter, nor yet suffer such as
Mat. 23. 13.
would enter into the Kingdom. And the like of our wilful Recusants, and such
as refuse to hear the word preached, which is the Proclamation of this great
king, investing him into his kingdom: Were not he a disloyal subject, that
would wilfully deny his presence at the Proclamation whereby the king is
proclaimed the lawful heir and successor into his kingdom? And will not the
Lord Jesus reckon him an enemy, that refuses to be present while he is by
public preaching and proclamation set into his Kingdom, as the Lord of his
Church? has Christ any place in his heart, that cannot abide to hear he
should be set in his lawful inheritance?

Oh that all these, either secret A^^onitions to them.
or professed enemies of Christ, would seasonably consider what a fearful
thing it is, to enter into combination against Christ's Kingdom and government!

1. Has his Father established 1. Psalm. 2. 6.
him on his Throne, and set his King on Sion, and will the rebels displace him?
will they wrong and resist him, whom the Lord has set up? will they pull his
crown from his head, dethrone him from his government, wrest the sword out of
his hand, break his scepter in pieces, violate his laws, and think to
prosper in their high treasons, and in taking up arms against the Lord?

2. Look on the dangerous 2. (...). Hom.
issue and estate of enemies, Luke 19. 27. Those mine enemies that will not I
should reign over them, bring them hither that I may destroy them. Will thou
not stoop to the rod of his mouth? his rod of iron is ready in his hand to
break thee to pieces as (...) potters vessel, Psalm 2. 9.

On the other side, it must be Use 2. Rejoice in the thriving of the Gospel.
the greatest comfort of a godly man, when Christ comes most powerfully in his
Kingdom: so our Lord here comfort his Disciples in their sorrow, that they
shall see their Lord after a great deal of contempt and passion, lifted up
again in the glory of his Kingdom. A child will rejoice in the advancement of
the Father: a servant in the honor of his Master: especially a loving spouse
in the advancement of her husband: And how should we cheer up our selves and
others, to see the Lord Jesus honored in a powerful Ministry, his enemies
thrown down before him, our brethren drawn by multitudes under his
allegiance? etc. Contrarily, it should be the grief of our hearts, when any
thing crosses his kingdom, when any design prevails against his word, when
any holy Ministry is cast down, when the Lord loses an ensign, etc.

We must also every one do Use 3. In helping the word, help up Christ into
his throne.
our best to set up Christ in his Kingdom, and that he may lift up and hold
up his scepter every where: thou prayest his kingdom may come, use means for
that thou prayest, in what place soever.

If a Magistrate, thou must punish 1.
offenders against his laws, as well as against the Kings: thou must order thy
government as well by his Jaws, as the Kings: By thy example thou must grace
the word, as well as by thy presence thou will grace the execution of the Kings
laws.

If a Minister, thou art the Lords 2.
Scepter-bearer: thou must hold up this Scepter and mace of Christ, preaching
the word plainly, purely, sincerely, instantly: as John's, go next before him,
and make way for him: as friends of the bridegroom, be sure he increase Joh.
3. 30.
though we decrease. How do they this, that preach not at all, or now and
then, or preach against preaching, and declaime against those that most
zealously advance the Scepter and glory of Christ? that were not Christ too
strong for them, and truth stronger than all, Christ should never come in his
Kingdom: if he were a King, he should be such an one as Ishbosheth, a King
without a Kingdom, without subjects or laws.

If thou be a private person, show thy self a good subject to 3.
this King, and set up his Kingdom both within and without thee.

Without thee: thou must set up his laws and authority in thy family, by
instruction, catechizing, prayer, and holy orders, by which faith and the fear
of God may be planted and cherished; that there may be a draught of a Church
in thine house: and by Christian conference admonishing and exhorting one
another, to contain every one in his allegiance and subjection to Jesus
Christ.

Above all, we must be careful to set up this Kingdom within our selves,
and maintain the rule and soveraigntie of Christ by his word in our own
consciences.

Quest. How may we do this?

Ans. 1. If as good subjects we How Christ's Kingdom is erected and maintained
within us.
frame and compose our selves to this Kingdom: Both to the laws of it, for
Christians are a people under laws, and he that acknowledges not the
fundamental laws of this Kingdom, 1.
and will not be ruled by the word of Christ, is none of Christ's subjects: As
also to the holiness of it, by daily putting on a divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
The subjects of Christ are people of a pure language: and though sanctity be
Zeph. 3. 9.
scorned, and hunted with disgrace out of the world, this is the Rev. 15. 3.
King only of Saints.

2. If as good subjects we serve 2.
with cheerfulness and joyfulnesse this King of glory. With cheerfulness: for
his people are a willing people, and bring free will offerings, Psalm. 110. and
besides, to serve him is to reign, all his subjects are Kings, the estate of
the meanest Christian is a Kingdom. With joyfulnesse also: Psalm. 149. 2. Let
the children of Sion rejoice in their King: bless GOD that has showed us the
way to this Kingdom, who else had been still in the Kingdom of darkness:
and that he has made an entrance for us into this Kingdom, Col. 1. 12, 13.
and the rather, because he has passed by the Angels that fell, and made no
entrance for them, yea passed by many nations and millions of men, and out of
all the world brought us under the subjection of this King.

3. If as good subjects we maintain the honor and authority 3.
of our King, and our own liberties and privileges obtained by him for us.

First, we maintain his right, Christ's right defended, how.
when we set up his word every where, and suffer it to command and rule our
own thoughts, words, actions, and (...)tions, 1.
and bring all into the (...)dience of Christ. If we cannot prevail, that his
word may command and rule others, yet see it rule and command our selves.
Again, 2.
when we maintain war, and take up arms against all his and our enemies,
that rise up against his honor and our salvation. We must be stout and
invincible against all that would incroach and reign over us in stead of Jesus
Christ, as namely, we must levy forces, and serve in his wars against the
temptations of Satan, the corruptions of the world, and our own lusts, and the
evils of our own hearts and lives: all which we must resist instantly, for
the Adversary is restless in assaulting: wisely, standing on our watch, and in
the complete armor of God: stoutly, for the war is difficult, but the
victory certain and glorious.

Secondly, as good subjects we And likewise our own right.
must maintain our own liberties: Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke
of bondage. Resolve never to come under the bondage of sin and Satan any
more: it was baseness and madness in Israel, that being free from Pharaohs
oppressions, they would run back into Egypt in all haste. Nor under the yoke
and bondage of humane traditions, or yokes of Antichrist, Christ's greatest
enemy. Of all slaves and vassals let us esteem the slave of sin the greatest:
and seeing the Son has Joh. 8. 36.
made us free, let us highly prize and stoutly maintain this freedom.

To persuade all this,

1. Consider what an absolute Monarch Christ is, of what power Motives to be
loyal to Christ.
to constrain obedience, and restrain rebels: he can get himself a name, and
lift up his Scepter 1.
without thee, and against thee, being God and man, and Lord of all things: but
for thy good he would take thee in as anassistant in his government, and if
thy service be his, his honor is thine.

2. Consider what a good and 2.
gracious Lord thou servest, one that no way burdens his servants and subjects,
but every way enricheth them, by bestowing large gifts upon them, even his
whole Kingdom to every of them; yea whose love is experienced by his death for
his enemies.

3. Consider his presence with his subjects in all places and occasions: 3.
He sees who makes his heart a presence-chanber for Christ, who sets up his
chair of estate there, who they be that take care nothing be done or defended
against his laws in his own presence, and who they are that suffer his word
to sway against lusts. The very sight of the Kings sword should adaunt
offenders: that is, the presence of his word in the heart: How Ps. 119. 11.
much more should his own presence provoke us to all duty and subjection?

FINIS.
THE CHRISTIAN RACE.
1 COR. 9. 24. Sor^nne that you may obtain.
THe holy Apostle has at The Apostles drift in this place.
large dissuaded these Corinthians, late ly converted from heathenisme, from
sundry relickes of superstition still continued among them; as namely, from
eating meats in the Idol-Temple offered unto Idols; from which feasts and
meetings they were the hardlier restrained, because they were much addicted to
gluttony, and pampering of the flesh: And therefore more strongly, both from
his own example, and by other reasons, he urges the duties of Christian
sobriety and mortification: as if he had said, If ye shall object, that now
your Christian liberty affords you more interest in the creatures, and comforts
of life, than before; I answer, that I have as much liberty in them, as any,
but for the Gospels Verse, 12.
sake I forbear my liberty in greater matters than these; I might marry a
wife, or I might require my maintenance from the Church, as my right; but I for
the Gospel deny my self in all, I work with my hands to avoid offense: so
your liberty in Christ allows you not any use of the creature with the
hinderance of the Gospel, or the scandal of others. The si(...)ilitnde he
here uses


And to this he adds a strong reason, from a pleasant similitude, comparing
the life of a Christian to a Race: those that run in a race, either for
praise, or a garland of flowers, or a small temporal reward, pamper not their
bodies, nor load and stuff themselves with meats and drinks, but are
abstinent, and put themselves into a spare diet, and forbear and strip
themselves of al encumbrances, and the use even of the best things, which would
make them heavy and unweldy in their race. Much more should you, in this
spiritual race, for the attaining of another manner of Crown or prize, cast
off all things that press down and encumber you, Heb. 12. 1.
and so run the race set before you, as you may obtain, and not be frustrate
of your expectation.

These Corinthians were well Thereason of it.
acquainted with the manner of runners: Know ye not, that they which run
(...), in a race, etc. as if he had said, Ye cannot but know. There were the
games of Olympus, celebrated every fifth year in the honor of Jupiter: and
there were the Istmian games, instituted of Theseus in the honor of Neptune,
their Sea-god, which were every fifth year exercised at Istmus, a straight in
Gre^ce, in the sight of Corinth.

Obi^ct. But why does the Apostle draw his argument from Ita simili* tudo
Circensium Augustin^ana c^nvertit (...)pium Confess. l 6. c. 7.
profane games, used among heathens in honor of their Idols?

Answ. The Apostle approves not the games, nor shows how well or ill they do
in running, but from them deduceth what we may turn to a good use in a better
race, for a better prize. Our Lord approves not of an unjust steward, but only
shows Luke 16. 8.
how we may and ought wisely to provide for our selves, as he did. Christ
approves not a thieves coming in the night, when he compares himself to one,
Rev. 16. 15. only he excites our watchfulness to be always ready for his
coming.

And even from this practice Note. A rule of Christian prudence.
of the Apostle we may gain a rule of prudence: when we must see many things
we mislike, but cannot reform, to make the best use of them we can. A wise man
may gather good, from that which is not so good. A man may sometime light of a
piece of gold on a dunghill: and will he not take it up? The Be will suck
sweet honey, even out of stinking herbs. We may not presently tumult against
things Use.
we dislike, no more than our Apostle: but if we cannot amend them; so to take
notice of them, as they may do least hurt; and if we may, gather some good
from them: and we see, that we may make good use of things we approve not.

Now to the words. In this Parts of the Tex's three.
short Apostolical injunction are three things: 1. The precept, to run: 2.
The manner, so run: 3. The end, that ye may obtain; namely, the scope and aim.

In the Precept are, I.


1. Who must run. 2. Why he must run. 3. When he must run. 4. The use
thereof.
For the first of these. Every Doctr. 1 Christian life is a kind of race.
Christian must run: for, Christianity is nothing but a race, and every
Christian must run the race set before him, Hebr. 12. 1. In other races, as
that of Istmus near Corinth, to which our Apostle alludeth, some run and
some stand still, or look on: but here, in this Christian race, all must run,
men and women, high and low, rich and poor, and none must look on.

Now Christian life is compared And that in siv^ respects,
to a course or race, in Scripture, for five respects considerable:

1. As all running must be in a way, and within bounds and 1.
limits: so here, the way to run in, is the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm.
119. 30. This is the right and good way, the lightest and shortest way, the
fairest and cleanest way, without all windings or turnings to the right or left
hand.

2. In running is a strife and 2.
contention: so in the Christian race: but the strife is not by speed or
swiftness of feet, but a spiritual strife, of faith, virtue, piety, good
conscience and obedience. And as in a race the whole man runs and striveth
and every part of the runner: so in this race, a man cannot have religion in
his mouth and profession, and say he will run, but scarce move hand or foot
in any good duty: no man can run with his tongue, and his foot stand still.
Israel professed, that whatsoever the Lord commanded Deu 5: 27
they would do: here were good words: but how often did they tempt him in the
Desert? Paul would not run, as beating the air with bare words, 1 Cor. 9.
26. Neither does the kingdom 1 Cor. 4. 20
of God stand in word, but in power: which is, when in all things we labor to
keep faith and good conscience, in all things, before God and all men.

3. In running there is a goal 3
or prize which we run for. The prize or Crown for which we run, is
everlasting glory: not a crown or wreath of flowers, but an incorruptible
crown, 1 Pet. 5. 4.

4. As in a race are spectators, 4.
and the Vmpire that gives the crown or prize: so here, the spectators are men
and- Angels, 2 Cor. 4 9
and the Vmpire is God, an incorrupt Judge, who, having appointed the race,
gives the crown to every one that runs well.

5. As at the end of the race, 5.
the wager is won or lost, and the crown received or mist: and as the race
is run, so it is disposed: so at the end of our life, the prize of eternal
life is either won or lost; and if it be in the race lost, it can never be
recovered, neither by bribe nor entreaty. If in this life we win it, we wear
it, or else it is lost for eternity.

Thus Christian life is a race.

Next, why must we run this race? 2. Reasons why we must run this race.


Answ. 1. There is no standing in Religion: and the way is very long which we
have to go: we have a large journey, as far as betwixt heaven and earth; and
1
though we run, we shall come in slow enough.

2. The time is short which 2.
is allotted to run this race: namely, the time of this life, which is but as
a vapor, a post, an arrow flying in the air: the day is short, the night
hastens, and our fear of being benighted should hasten us through.

3. The parties against whom 3
we run, are very swift and cunning to supplant: sor we run against
Principalities and Powers, the devil, our flesh, sin Ephe. 6. 12
and sinners, who incessantly seek to slack our course in this race;
sometimes casting in our way (as Medea) a piece of flesh, and sometimes golden
Apples (as the Poets feign, of Atlanta) that is, the profits or pleasures of
this life, all to cast us back in our way: nay, our own encumbrances are so
many, as we need no other to slow our pace: So as the swiftest runner shall
come slow enough; and if the runner scarcely be saved, where shall the loyterer
appear?

4. We must run, to witness 4.
both our disaffecting and distasting things below, which we hasten from, as
also our earnest affecting and desire of the goal and crown which is in our
eye: as the two Disciples, Peter and John, run to outrunne Ioh 20, 4.
one another, through earnest desire which of them should first see Christ
being risen: so the Christian must hasten and strive who may enjoy Christ first
and most, and see him as he is.

But when must we run?

Answ. Our whole life must be 3 Al our life, the time of this race.
a race. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Pass the whole time of your pilgrimage here in fear.
Now is the time to win or lose the goal. Eternal life is won or lost in
this life. Spare thy pains here, and there shall be no spare of thy pains
hereafter. Now therefore take the time, even this day: as a wise runner will set
out betime, and get the start if he can, of his Adversary: Psalm. 119. 60. I
made have, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

Many foolish men in their life and health stand still, and idle all Not the
end of life only. Reasons.
the day, and would same run apace when they are sick or dying. But consider
in time, 1.
1. What an unfit business a race is for those times: a man to run had need of
health and strength and not be bound on his bed of sickness. 2. It is very
unlikely, that he should run to 2
heaven in his death, that has been running to hell all his life. for as the
tree leans, so commonly it falls and lies. 3. Wisdom will tell a man, 3
that sickness and death are the time to end our running, not to begin it:
and that Christianity is a race to heaven, not a jumpe: and the way is long,
and needs both a long time, and good speed to attain it. 4. Use. 1.


Now if we must run in the Christian course, we learn how Conceit aright of
a Christian course.
to conceive of the sound Profession of Religion; namely, that it is a
laborious and painful course, as running is a violent motion, and a straining
exercise wherein the whole man must run; especially when a man runs up an
hill, as we do toward heaven. And therefore Who do not.


1. They are deceived, that 1
think a sound Christian can live at ease, or in security. Is a garland of
flowers denied to him that loves his ease better than the toil of the race;
and is the Crown of eternal life given without labor? or can it stand with
the excellency of salvation to be so easily attained? or is it not worth all
our diligence, to 2 Pet. i. 10
make our election sure?

2. The lukewarm Gospeller 2
deludes himself, that thinks to get heaven with good hopes and wishes, but
will be at no strife either against sin, or in performance of good duties:
as if Christianity were such a Gentlemanly life, as to have their rents come in
by Stewards, whether they sleep or wake, work or play. No: thou must strive
to Luke 13. 2^
enter, and run, and pant, and sweat, and be happy if all thy labor can
attain the Crown. But if heaven be worth nothing, take thine ease, stand
still, or lie still, meddle not with grace. But if it be worth any thing, thou
shall know it is not gotten with nothing.

Again, if Christianity be a Use 2. Ourgo one another in holiness. Instat
equis auriga suos (...)ntibus illos pr^teritos tem* neus, etc. Hor. sermon. 1
sat. 1. Motives. 2
race and strife, then must we all strive to go one before another in
knowledge, faith, obedience, and all graces. Runners in a race strive who may
be foremost: and runners in a spiritual race must contend, who may first
apprehend the grace of eternal life in the means and beginnings of in. For,

1. This is the only holy and warrantable ambition, emulation, and
covetousness, to covet after the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31.

2. We see how men strive 2
to be before others in wealth, in good bargains, in pride of apparel, in
dainty fare, and whatsoever may set forward the delights of this present life.
And ought we not much more to strive to be first in the bargain of eternal
life, in the riches of grace, and in the wealth of an haavenly inheritance? why
should the children of this world be wiser in their generations than the
children of light? Luke 16. 8


3. See we not wicked men run fast to hell, and strive who 3
may be soonest there, and which may fill up his measure first? See we not how
wretched and debaucht persons glory when they can out-sweare, outdrinke, or
out-brave another? and yet the issue of all is that hire that belongs to
Captainesinners, and such as being in the highest form of sin, must also be
in the deepest dungeon of wrath and revenge. And shall we, who have so fair a
mark in our eye, to encourage and improve all our labor, suffer every one to
get before us in the way of God, who yet are behind us in the means and
encouragements?

These are the Motives:

Directions for running aright follow in the next point. And so from the
precept we come to the manner: So run.

Not every runner or striver II. Manner of running. 2 Iim. 2. 5
obtaines, but he that runs and strives lawfully, which is so to run, namely
with limitation.

Quest. Which are they?

Ans. They consist, 1. In right preparation: 2. Conditions.

No man can run so as to Preparation to run, necessary, and wherein
attain, that is not rightly prepared to the race. And the preparation stands
in two things: Putting off all hindrances: Providing all needful helps.

First, we must cast off all burdens Hindrances put off and removed
and weights that priest us down: Heb. 12. 1. the Apostle enioynes first to
cast off all that presses down, and then run the race that is set before
us. And thus the runner for a temporal prize will cast off such garments and
carriages as he can well part withal: we much more. The Scripture points us
to sundry burdens which must be cast off: as,

1 Sin, which presses down as an intolerable clogge 1 (...).
and burden: Hebr. 12. 1. The sin that so easily besets us: and as a garment
that wraps us about and hinders the free use of our joints and limbs: so many
sins are so many chains and ferters; and hardly can a man run, with his
fetters on his heels: Iam. 1. 21. Lay aside all filthiness.

2 The immoderate care of the world must be cast off: for, 2
how do we see worldlings, who have clogged themselves with the weight of
earthly cares and desires, run but hoblingly? no duties of piety or mercy can
be seen in their hands: no incitements or persuasions can prevail to quicken
them: earthly cares, as thorns, choke Luke 8. 14
all the seed. How can a man run through a thicket, or stiff ^lay? so here,
Hab. 2 6.

3 We must cast off the immoderate use of the world, and 3
the things of it, and beware we oppress not our selves with surfeiting, Cap.
21. 34
or drunkenness, or pleasures of life; but by mortification keep our selves
thin and spare, If he that were to run a race should stuff himself with
eating or drinking, following his appetite, he would run but heavily, his
adversary would wish no greater advantage. Therefore the Apostle Paul would in
his own example teach us to beat down the body, and bring it into subjection,
lest we should run in vain, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Full diet breeds gowt in the
feet, which spoils our running.

These are the hindrances.

The second thing in this preparation, is the providing of needful helps to
^further us in our race: for so do runners. I will only mention three. Helps
in running the Christian race, 1


1 Faith, to get Christ with us, without whom we can do nothing, and by whom
we shall be able to do all things, Phil 4 13. Joh. 15. 4. If we abide in the
vine we shall bring forth fruit. Faith establishes our union with Christ: whom
we must take with us, to draw us that we may Cant. 1 4.
run after him, to quicken us with new life, and to enlighten us in our way:
else we run in the dark, to our own ruin. To give influences as an head,
and also a cover for all defects.

2 The Apostle advises us to provide patience, Heb. 12. 1. and 2 Heb. 10. 36
we have need of patience, that we may enjoy the Promises: also to endure the
crosses and afflictions, wherewith all the way is strawed. And indeed Patience
notably speeds the runner in his way; because it helps him over many rubs and
hindrances that lie in it. If a runner should stoop to take up and remove out
of his way every straw, or pibble, or obstacle, he should lose much ground,
and cast himself behind; and therefore with courage and resolution he leaps
over all, and speeds himself by them: So patience makes us pass by the
reproaches of Atheists, that are so far from running themselves, that they
scorn others that do; and suffers us not to take notice often of such things,
which we might trouble our selves withal, if our eye were not fixed on the
goal and prize, in the end of our race. Besides, Patience is of notable use to
make the Christian runner long-winded, and so enables him to hold out the
labor to the end.

3. Another help is prayer to God for good speed: so the 3
Church, Cant. 1. 2. Draw me, and I will run after thee. For we are not
sufficient of our selves to any thing, but all our sufficiency is of God, 2
Cox. 3. 5. And therefore David every where prays the Lord to direct him, to
lead him in the way, to uphold him in the way, and to enlarge his heart for
receiving grace that he may run the way of his Commandments, 2 ^orditions
of running the Christian race a^ right* five.
Psalm. 119. 32.

This is the Preparation for running

Then the conditions of running are five:

1. At a right mark. 2. In a right way. 1 Run at a right mark
3. With a right foot. 4. With a right motion. 5. To a right end.
First, for the right manner of running, we must be sure to run at a right
mark: Christ must be our mark to run at, as he was Paul's, Phil. 3. 10. to
know him, and the power of his resurrection. If we must run for life, we
must run to him who is our life: And the rather, because he is no dead mark
Col. 3. 4
that affords the runner no help in his way, but he runs as fast to us, that
we may run to him: Oant. 2. 8. As a Roe or young Heart he comes leaping and
skipping over the mountains: and being come, he calls us after him, (Come to
me all that are we ary and heavy laden,) that he Mat. 11. 28.
may refresh us: and whereas we come not at his call, himself draws us to
run after him.

Now consider, if Christ be the chief and only aim of thy life, thy prize,
thy purchase, thy all in all, in comparison of whom all else is dross and
dung. Men run after wealth and riches most painefully: others run after
honors and preferments: many after ease and pleasures: some after knowledge
and profession of Christ: on these they fix their eyes and minds, as their
chief mark; and having attained these, they sit down and rest in them. But
very few make Christ the mark whereat they run: few hold him in their eyes
and thoughts. And what can they hope to attain at length, that never run at
a right mark? O silly men! can they choose a better mark? may they choose
another, and not choose death by refusing the Lord of life?

The second condition is, to run 2 Run in the right way.
in the right way, and within the lists, or else the faster thou runnest, the
further thou art from obtaining. Now Christ is the way: and there is no running
Ioh. 14. 6
to Christ, but by Christ: thou must still keep him in sight. Papists must
needs fall short, that run from Christ to Saints, Angels, merits, humane
satisfactions. Heathens must miss of salvation, who run without Christ. And
many str^gling Christians who profess Christ, but break out into by-lanes of
lusts and fleshly courses, and so miss the goal.

Now to those that are careful to enquire of the ancient Notes of the way that
is right.
safe way, they may discern it by these notes: 1. It is a clean way: the way
is holy, and the path is holy, and the holy walk Esa. 35. 8 Hos. 14. 9
in it. 2. It is a strait way, and few walk in it, in respect of the Mat. 7.
14.
multitude. 3. It is all strawed with crosses: and all that will live godly in
Christ, must suffer 2 Timothy 3. 12
persecution. Christ and his cross are inseparable.

The third condition in the 3 Run with a right foot. What is requisite thereunto
right manner of running, is, We must run with a right foot: Hebr. 12. 13.
Make straight paths for your feet Hereunto are required, 1. Light of the Word
to direct us, that we may run stedily and boldly, not staggering or wavering;
but do all things in says, which ever leans upon the warrant of the Word;
Whosoever walks by this rule, walks boldly. 2. The Prove. 10. 9
eye of wisdom and discretion, looking at the same time both to our feet, and
to our mark: the Commandment is, to ponder the path of our feet: and a Prove.
4. 2^.
note of a godly wise runner, to order his way with discretion. And the wisdom
of a man is, to observe his way. 3. Sincerity and uprightness: not to run
Psalm. 112. 5
halting or dissembling: Gone. 17. 1. Walk before me, and be upright.;
Politicians run halting between God and Baal, between the Arc and Dagon,
between Protestants and Papists; as Peter in policy would play on both hands,
between Jews and Gentiles, Galat. 2. but the Text says, that he dissembled,
(...).
and went not the right way to the Gospel: so do these men of two hearts, but
of no Religion; Gallio's, neuters, unstable in all their ways, being
double-minded, Jam. 1. 8. The like of formal Protestants, who dis-joyne
justification from sanctification, and ^^ver remission of sin from
mortification of sin: they run crookedly and lamely, and are far from
uprightness.

The fourth condition is, to run with a right motion: and 4. Run with a ^ight
motion. What it is
then is the motion ^o, when it is performed humbly, cheerfully, constantly.

1 Humility quickens the 1.
soul, when it considers, that, what progress soever it has made, yet he
has not hitherto attained. The Apostle Paul did therefore follow hard to the
mark, Phil. 3. 13.
because he had not yet attained. Do thou likewise nourish low Good cause to
be still humble.
conceits in and of thy self, as knowing, 1. that thy knowledge and faith is
but in part, till that perfect come: 2. that the high prize is not here wholly
below, nor the prize of immortality to be had in this mortal estate. Away then
with that proud conceit of merit: thou have attained enough, that have attained
to merit: thou art gotten far beyond the Saints in heaven. Away with the
frantic conceit of perfection here: the Gospel and faithful Preachers cast
down such high imaginations 2 Cor. 10. 5
against grace. Who art thou that art got before the Apostle Paul? he forg^t
all that he had done, and pressed hard to the mark before him: as good runners
look not back to see how much they have run, which would cast them back,
but their eye is on that before them, by which they see how far they are
behind that they must reach. Bewail then thy slownesse, stiffenesse, or
lamenesse in running, and press forward still.

2 The motion must be 2
chearefully performed. We must run our race in earth, as the Angels in
heaven run theirs: now they are described with wings to fly: so must we do
all our services willingly, not by constraint; and earnestly, with all
earnestness of affection, as those that mean to attain, and of action,
putting forth all our speed, as he that runs, intends the whole force of
his body to advance himself forward, and (as the Apostle) presses hard to the
mark. Phil. 3. 14


3 Our motion is right, when 3
it is constant: both without intermission, and without cessation.

First, we must not sometimes run, and sometimes sit still, Be constant
without inter mission.
and rest us as being weary: nor as some, run apace in the Sunshine of the
Church, and stand still or go back in her storm: nor as some, that will be
good and run apace, while some sharp affliction, as a spur or goad, is
thrust into their sides, but afterward grow as lazy, or worse than before. But
our course must be as the course of the Sun, which comes forth as a Giant to
run his course from East to West, and never Psa. 19. 4, 5
stands nor remits of his speed. And as a man who is to run for a great
wager, hyes himself with all speed through thick and thin, so we, having
so great a prize in our eye, must hold our pace through all estates of the
Church, and of our selves, holding it the greatest favoring of our selves, not
to favor our selves in any condition.

Secondly, we must run As also without cessation. Motives
constantly without cessation; not making good our race a great way, and then
failing, but to the very goal: for 1. It is unsoundnesse, 1
that is a temporizer: the Jews rejoice in John's light but for a season: and
many begin Ioh. (...). 35 Gal. 3. 3
in the Spirit, but end in the flesh. Much seed springs up, fhoots forth, and
^ladeth, but never seeeth perfection, nor the garner. 2. Both natural and
supernatural motion is swifter to the center-ward. 2.
True piety never wants the crown of perseverance: and this never wants the
crown of eternal life. 3. Unhappy runners they are, 3
that lose all even at the goal: and unhappy passengers, that suffer
shipwreck in the haven and harbor.

Object. I have run apace; but now I cannot run so fast.

Ans. With distinction. 1. Art How this is to be understood.
thou in temptation, or wrestling with God, as Jacob? then, though thou go
halting, yet go forward, it is toward Canaan. 2. Art thou weak? yet a child,
though never so weak, will creep when it cannot run to the fathers house and
bosom. 3. Art thou secure? oh repent, do thy first works, overtake thy
self, bewail thy sin, and in all pray the Lord to enlarge thy heart, and
enable thee again to run the way of his Commandments.

So of the fourth condition.

Lastly, to run in a right manner, we must propound to our 5. Run to a right
end.
selves a right end in running: and that is, first and principally Gods glory,
1 Cor. 10. 30. secondly, the obeying of Gods Commandment; the love of God must
constrain us to run: 2 Cor. 5 14
thirdly, that we may obtain the crown of eternal life, as here it is in our
Text.

Quest. But must our obedience and service be mercenary? for so it seems to
be, if we run in expectation of the reward.

Answ. No: it is not mercenary: for first, faith subordinateth We run for the
prize, yet no mercenaries: how.
our salvation to Gods glory: secondly, looks on a reward freely promised and
performed, not merited: and so, thirdly beholds the reward; as the eye of the
soul is principally fixed on Christ, who has merited it by his death,
propounded it in his Word, and now holds it in his hand, in our eye, to sweeten
our labors and sufferings in the way unto it.

These cautions observed, the Saints may run in expectation of reward: so
Moses had respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 16. so Paul pressed on,
as having the mark in his eye. Nay, our Lord himself for the joy set before
him, endured Heb. 12. 2^.
the cross, and despised the shame. And the Scripture every Mark held before
us, why?
where holds the mark in our eye: 1. To contain us in the right way to that
mark. 2. To maintain and cherish in us a servent love and desire of heaven,
and of eternal life. Faith will be wishly looking at things 2 Cor. 4. 18.
within the veil. 3. To encourage and sustain the Saints in all the
difficulties of the way; the more easily to digest and ^verpasse them, and so
to hasten them to the fruition of that they believe. That ye may obtain.


From the action, and the manner, III: The end of running this race.
we come to the end. As we have enquired whether we must run to attain, so
now we must enquire whether we may attain by running.

Answ. We must run for thi^ prize, which we attain not without running;
yet not for our running, as the merit of it, but by it as a means of
obtaining. Obtaining is not of merit, but mercy.
Romans 9. 16. It is not in him that wills, or runs, but in God that shows
mercy. For, neither is our running our own work, nor undue, nor in any
proportion to the crown, nor yet perfect, but in the best very heavy and
blameworthy. And therefore, howsoever lawful running attaineth, yet it is not
as a cause, for the work or merit of it but as a way and means of obtaining
mercy.

Quest. But is not the prize the reward of our running?

Answ. Yes: Matthew. 5. 11. Great is your reward in heaven: How it in called
(...) reward.
and none shall run well, and be unrewarded. But first, it is called a
reward, not properly, but by similitude, because it is given at the end of the
work. Secondly, it is a reward, not legal, but Evangelicall; promised in
mercy, and in like mercy performed to the runner, though not for his running.
Therefore the Apostle ran hard for the prize (Phil. 3. 14.) but for the prize
of the high calling of God; that is, not which he could attain for running,
or for the merit of his strife, but for the merciful calling of God,
vouchsafing him a part in the free promise of his free grace. Hence it is also
called (Col. 3. 24.) the reward of inheritance: Now an inheritance is not
merited, but freely descends on sons, because they are sons: and how
absurd were it for a son to go and offer to buy his inheritance of his father?

Object. But I may run, and no^ Whether al runners do obtain. Luke 13, 24
obtain; as it is said, Many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able.

Answ. They run, and attain not, that run amiss, not observing the
former, conditions of right running: but every one that runs aright, shall
attain the crown. Here is a difference: In temporal races many run, and
one gets the prize, that comes first: but here, all that run through, attain
the crown, whether they come first or last.

Quest. What are the best directions, How we may be able to run rightly, and
so obtain.
to help us to attain, and improve all our labor, and make good our race at
the last?

Answ. The directions are sundry:

1. Put thyselfe in good brenth; I. The holy Ghost p^ (...) (...) inbreath for
this race.
be cherishing the Spirit of God, and preparing him a sweet room in thy heart,
who will notably fit thee to the race. For first, he is the Spirit of liberty,
and will set the feet of thy soul at liberty: 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is liberty. He is that holy an ointing, that brings the
oil of grace to supple and make nimble the joints and sinews of the soul,
and supply activity and agility to speed thee forward: as David professes,
Psalm. 1 19. 32. I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall
enlarge my heart, Secondly, he not only strengthens the inner man, Ephesians. 3.
16. but helps all our infirmities, which would faint and fail us, Rom 8. 26.
Thirdly, he is the Spirit of supplication, Zach. 12, 10.
and makes us able and willing to pray, and so helps us as it were with wings
toward the mark. Great need is there of this breath of the Spirit: and great
is the strength of prayer: and therefore holy men have been much and often in
it: as David, that the Lord would make his way plain before him, Psalm. 5. 8.
and would hold up his goings in his paths, Psalm. 17. 5. and that his good
Spirit would convey him into the good land, Psa. 143. 10. Whosoever knows that
no prayer but of the Spirit is heard of God, will easily discern the need of
the presence Romans 8. 26.
and assistance of the Spirit, and will be so much more careful not to grieve
him by sin.

2. Take the rule of our Savior, Beware of looking back. 2 Take heed of
looking back, in this race.
Remember Lots wife; and Luk 9. 62. no man that sets his hand to the plough,
and looks back, is fit for the kingdoms of God. They look back, that turn
aside from received truths to old damned errors, and lay themselves under Saint
Paul's check, O foolish Galathians, ye did run ^ell, who has bewitched you?
Gal. 3. 1
and under that heavy threatening 2 Pet. 2. 21. Better had it been, never to
have known the way of truth, then after knowledge to depart from the holy
Commandment. And they look not forward, that look asquint with the
Galathians, partly at Jesus, and partly at Moses; partly nt faith, partly at
merits, as Papists; whereas the eye of faith looks right forward at Jesus, the
author and finisher of faith and salvation, Heb. 1. 2. 2. How many look back
to the profits, honor, ease, or favor of the world, as Judas and Demas? But
where is now the mark? is it before thee, or behind thee? if the mark be not
behind thee, why look thou back?

3. Intend thy way, not thy company. Many will net run 3 Mind not thy
company, but thy way.
in that way, wherein they see not multitudes and great ones run with them:
who attend not the mark so much, as their company, and enquire not so much
whither, as who run. But we must remember; first, wisdom walks by rule, not
by example; looks at truth, not Gal. 6. 16.
at numbers; cares not so much what is done, as what ought to be done.
Secondly, it is better to walk or run with few to heaven, than to hell for
company. Thirdly, if we look at company, we must run with such as fear God,
who have set their faces toward heaven: this is the most helpful and fruitful
company: these will further thee by their counsel, example, and prayers.

4. To attain in this race, 4. Despise carnal counsels, friends, and scorns.
we must contemn carnal counsels, carnal friends, and the scorns of carnal
men.

First, carnal counsels. Many will not run with such a sect, as they hear
every where reviled 1 Acts 28. 22
and contradicted, though Paul himself be of that sect, and such as adhere to
his doctrine. But in this way, generally esteemed heresy, must we worship the
God of our fathers. Others will not run in that Cap. 24. 14
way, being all strawed with crosses, but will choose a fair broad way though
it carry them clean from the mark. Why do they not consider, that they leave
the way wherein Christ himself walked, and his Apostles? and that the way to
heaven is a strait way, and few find it?

Secondly, carnal friends and 2
bad society is as a chain to fetter, and as a leaden weight hanged on the
heels of many, that say they run for heaven: These will persuade, as Peter did
Christ, Master, pity thy self, Mat. 16. 22.
cherish thy self, deny not thy self, thy liberty, thy reputation, and force
them, not to stop only in the race, but to fly back, as Peter among a
company of rake-hels will deny and forswear his Master as fast as any.

Thirdly, scorns of carnal men. 3
A Christian runner must not be much moved, or much regard the speeches of
men. Lookers on will have their sayings: some will say thou runnest too fast,
some that thou set out too late, and a softer pace would go further; some
that thou outrunnest thy fellows, but in hypocrisy, and that thine eye and
aim is on every thing but the mark, etc. But thou must be wiser than to
attend them: thou have thy course to intend, and thine umpire, and thy prize.
Pass on thy way therefore, 2 Cor. 6. 8. 1. Cor. 4. 3
through good report and evil: resolve with holy Paul, I pass not to be
judged by any man, it is the Lord that judges me; I must stand or fall to
mine own Master.

So of the fourth rule.

5. To attain this mark, thou 5 Renew strength continually: and how this may
be.
must be careful to preserve and renew thy strength: for so must a runnner do.

Quest. How may I do so?

Ans. By three rules: First, hold fast the doctrine of grace: hold it strongly,
both in thy judgment, and in thy affection: get not only knowledge, but the
love of knowledge: stick conscionably to the means, both public and private.
For spiritual strength is maintained by spiritual means, as natural by
natural. And by meeting God in Sion, in his own Ordinances, Gods people walk
from strength to strength, Psalm. 84. 7. Secondly, hold fast the degree of
grace, that thou fall not from thy first love, first zeal and heat. What hope
of his attaining the Rev. 2. 4.
mark before him, that goes backward? Now the way to keep grace in the
degree, is, partly to repent of all, to cast out and keep out all sins,
small and great, open or secret; partly to respect all Gods Commandments,
Psalm. 119. 6
even the most difficult, costly, and dangerous. Thirdly, hold on the act of
grace: by keeping al graces in exercise, and blowing up every grace which else
will lie hid and covered in corruption, asfire in ashes. Every new act will grow
into an habit and custom, and habits are easy. Thou that intendest to
attain, must get forward, and gain ground; never contenting thy self with
one gift of grace, nor with one degree of that gift, nor with one or a few acts
or exercises; but be adding, as to virtue, faith; so faith to faith: see 2 Pet.
1 5. and Romans 1. 17.

6. A runner, through haste in his way, may easily stumble 6. Recover speedily
out of every fall.
and fall: and if thou fallest in thy running, thou must speedily rise by
humble confession, prayer, and repentance. He that lies in his fall, shall
never attain the mark. We say it is no shame to fall, but it is a shame to
lie still. But in our spiritual course it is a great shame, in such light and
means to take a fall, but a far greater to (...) still in it. Have thou
fallen in (...)y way? remember whence thou have fallen, up again, and do thy
first work, repent and arise, Rev. 2. 5. which is the only way to prevent
utter shame and confusion.

Quest. But how may I be encouraged, Motives so to run, that we may obtain 1
thus to strive to attain?

Ans. 1. Consider this: whatsoever else thou attainest, is nothing but a
shadow, smoke, vanity: all thy wealth is but beggary, all pleasure but
bitterness, all mirth but madness. If thou attainest not this goal, nothing
that thou attainest can make thee better, every thing makes thee much worse.

2. As good never run, as not 2
attain: for, not attaining, thou losest all thy beginnings, and proceedings,
and all thy labor is lost; thou have done and suffered many things in vain.
Besides, thou loosest all thy talents, graces, Call 3. 4.
profession, hearing, prayers, sufferings: all is lost. Finally, thou loosest
all thy righteousness, charity, mercy, reward and glory; all thy hope and
expectation: E^ek 18. 24. Righteousness departed from is soon forgotten.

3. It is far worse and more 3
unhappy, to run and not attain, then not to run at all. For, not to run, is a
note of an Atheist: but to run and not to attain, is a note of an Apostate, a
dog, 2 Pet 2. 22
a swine, returned to filthiness, whose end is worse then the beginning.
Beside, it gives Satan a stronger possession then before; he was a slave before
to one devil, but now to ^even worse then before.

4. Consider the goal, for 4 Excellency and eternity of this goal.
which thou runnest: both for the excellency, and the eternity of it: and if
any spur can pierce and prevail, this will.

The Excellency is in the worth, content, fullness, perfection.

The worth: thou runnest for a crown of life and glory: nothing 1
in earth is so worthy, as a crown and kingdom: but these are dead things in
comparison, and may end in dishonor.

The content and delight is in 2
enjoying a perpetual rest from labor, an everlasting Sabbath, a lasting
feast and supper of the Lamb, a marriage feast for eternity.

For fullness and abundance: here we only taste the goodness 3
of God, there we drink at the wellhead, even fullness of joy at Psalm. 16. 11.
his right hand. Here we have drops, there we shall swim with rivers of
pleasure. Here are spoonfuls, there a Well of life.

For perfection: we shall attain spiritual bodies, perfectly renewed 4
souls, a full image of God, perfect vision of God, and society with Jesus
Christ, in perfect glory: and this is the top and perfection of our happiness
when in our selves we shall attain complete holiness, without spot or
wrinckle, and full perfection both of nature and grace

Lastly, add to all this the duration, which is the crown of all. This good
attained shall never perish, nor ever change. Of this Kingdom shall be no end.
The pleasurs at our fathers right hand are for evermore. The crown at which we
run, is incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9. 25
and so we shall find it in all eternity.

If all this will not excite us to earnest labor, that we may attain, nothing
will.

THE DIVINE TEACHER AND SCHOLAR.
PSALM. 119. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes; and I will keep it
unto the end.
THIS Psalm notably draws The scope of this whole Psalm.
and allureth men to the study and love of heavenly doctrine, in the knowledge
and practice whereof consists the holiness and happiness of every
Christian. The Sun in the heavens were unprofitable to us, if we had not
some beams from his body. The huge Ocean were unusefull to us, if some of his
streams were not derived unto us. So all that light of knowledge and wisdom
in God, the Sun and father of lights; and all that Ocean of grace and glory
in God, the full Sea, were helpless and uncomfortable unto us, further then
the beams of this Sun, and streams of this Ocean are conveyed unto us, yea
into our minds and hearts, to enlighten and purify the dark and nasty
corners of them.

This our Prophet well knowing, The Prophets holy desire.
makes no end of study, pains, prayers, search and inquisition, how he may
store and furnish himself with that Divine Doctrine, which as a stream may lead
him back to the Sea again, and bring him to the true knowledge of God in the
Messiah, which is eternal life. A good glass and pattern to see how far
our negligence has cast us behind that we might and ought to have attained:
that shaming our selves, and bewailing our former security, we may now provoke
and excite our selves to lay better hold upon wisdom, and redeem our future
opportunity in the means of grace and salvation, so graciously still continued
unto us. Parts of the ^ext.


This verse has two parts:

1. An holy prayer, Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes: 2. A religious
promise, or vow, And I will keep it unto the end.
In the prayer we have

1. The Object, God, O Lord. I. Of the prayer.
1 The Petitioner, teach me. 3. The Petition, to be taught in Statutes.
Which Statutes are described, 1. By the Author, or efficient, thy Statutes: 2.
By a metaphor or similitude, the way of thy Statutes.

For the meaning of the words, we must enquire and find Exposition.
out,

1 What be these Statutes. 2 Whose they be: thy. 3 Why called the way of
Statutes. 4 Why David desires to be taught in this way.
For the first of these: By Statutes, sometime the Scriptures 1. What these
statutes are.
understand the Ceremonial or Leviticall Law of Moses, distinct from the
moral and judicial: as in many places of Deu. 6. and 7. where Ordinances or
Statutes are opposed to Laws and Commandments. So in Psalm. 89. 30, 37. are
four words: Laws, that is, the whole Doctrine of the Word: by Judgments are
meant Judicials: by Statutes, rites and ceremonies: by Precepts, the moral Law.

But in this Psalm, David Reasons of several
uses many words to express titles given to the Word.
the same thing. The whole Word extant is called a Law, because it binds to
obedience as a Law. A Testimony, because it testifies the Will of God
concerning his Service: and his good will and fatherly affection concerning his
servants and children. Judgments, because in them right and truth is discerned
from wrong and falsehood. Commandments, implying the sovereignty and authority
of God the Commander. Statutes here, a statuendo: 1. Because as a statute law
the Statutes for two reasons.
Word written sets down limits and rules, how far we are to go, and what to
do, and leave undone: for all Kings make statute-lawes for their subjects. 2.
Because as statutes are enforced with rewards and penalties, so are the Lords
precepts, in keeping of which is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11
and no less danger in transgressing any of them.

For the second general (...). Whose Statutes they are. 1
Whose be they? thy statutes.

1. Because God is the Author of them all: and although he used his
Aman^enses, who themselves used great diligence in writing of the common
salvation, Jude 3. yet all holy men wrote the whole Word as they were moved by
the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21.

Object. But it seems uncertain, whether all were written by the Spirit of
God: for Saint Paul (1 Cor 7. 6.) speaks by permission, not Commandment: 1
Cor 7. 6. opened.
and verse. ult. I think I have the Spirit of God: he seems to doubt of it.

Ans. 1. Saint Paul speaks by permission, not Commandment: not in respect of
the Efficient, by whom he was moved, which was the Spirit of God: but in
respect of the matter, which being a thing not of such absolute necessity, he
was directed to choose a manner of delivery proportional; conceiving it ^itter
to persuade them in a thing indifferent, as more convenient, than to lay an
absolute command, as if it were a thing absolutely necessary. 2. Where he says
he thinks he has the Spirit of God, he speaks not doubtfully, (for he was
sure he had:) but humbly, by an emphaticall meiosis or diminution, so to
check the boasting of proud and false Apostles, who to magnify themselves,
and extenuante and elevate Paul's authority, made great brags of the Spirit of
God, which they said Paul wanted.

2. They are called Gods statutes, 2
because he is also the principal object, or subject matter of them: as the
books of the Kings were so called, not because they were Writers of them, but
because themselves, their persons and acts are the principal matter of them.

3. Because he is the preserver 3
and maintainer of them: for else had they long since been lost and perished,
by the rage of Tyrants and Heretics, but chiefly by the wrath of Satan
against them.

4. His by eminency, for the 4 Eminency of these statutes above other
excellency and perfection of them, and to distinguish them from all the laws
and statutes of men: for,

First, all men's laws are imperfect, 1
alterable, abrogated or changed at their pleasure: but Psalm. 19. 7
the Law of the Lord is perfect, and as unchangeable as himself.

Secondly, they are temporary, and for this present life only, 2
and bind not beyond it: but these are eternal, the charter and rule of heaven.

Thirdly, they may direct and command, but give no ability to 3
perform, as they do. They may curb and repress the evil of nature, but
cannot change the nature, nor alter the man: but Gods statutes not only direct
the way, but lead into the way; not only restrain corruption, but abolish it.
It converts the soul, and changes the heart and life:

Fourthly, they for their end conduce to a well ordering of a 4.
civil and sociable life amongst men, in peace and honesty: but Gods statutes
to the ordering of a spiritual and holy life among Saints, before God, for the
attaining of grace and glory.

Fifthly, those being transgressed, 5
the Lawmakers may pardon; or he may give a dispensation to himself to violate
them, and none is above him in his Kingdom to punish him. David the King needs
not much to fear any law of man: but Gods statutes transgressed, none but God
can pardon; from whom no flesh can get dispensation to offend in the least
branch but it shall be revenged in himself or his surety.

So of the second general.

But thirdly, why does David 3. Why it is called the way of Gods commandments.
Metaphor of a way, what it implies. 1
call the word the way of Gods statutes? which has a metaphor, and notes
singularity.

Answ. 1. The Metaphor implies, that we are all travelers here in a strange
country, and traveling home, Heb 11 13, 14 But the way we know not, nor can
man or Angel teach us the way, unless God show it to us, as he did to Adam,
who could lose his way, but of himself could never find it.

2. It implies, that God has 2
made known the way in his word: called the way, both because it points us the
way, as also because it leads us to heaven and happiness, as a way tends to
some end, or intended place. Hence it is called the way of God, Acts 18. 26.
the way of peace, Luke 1. 79. the way of salvation, Act. 16. 17. the way of
life, Psalm. 16. 11. because it leads us to these, as a way to a City.

3. It implies, that this way 3
and word of God must be known of us, as the way must be of a traveller: And
therefore as travelers, and as David here, we must be ever asking after the
way.

4. It implies, that as a traveller must keep the beaten and 4.
highway, so must these Statutes be pathed and trodden of all the travelers
of heaven; neither must we turn out of this way to the right or left hand.
Our thoughts must not stray out of Esa. 30. 21
the way, as it is said, Thou shall not covet. Our words must be kept in this
way, seeing of every Mat 12 36
idle word account must be given. Our actions and metions must be held in this
way, whether natural, as eating and drinking, all must be to the glory of God:
or (...) Cor. 10. 31
civil, authority, subjection, marriage, and duties of the special calling,
and oeconomicall duties, all must be contained within the limits of Gods word:
or religious, duties of Gods worship, public or private; Whatsoever Deu. 12. 32
I command thee, that do only: all the Tabernacle, the whole and parts, even
to the smallest pinnes, must be framed to the pattern in the mount: or
ludicrous, sports, recreations; Gods statutes must direct, which are lawful,
which not; how far lawful, or not: and so for circumstances, of time, place,
and persons; and for manner and end, all to help matters more serious.

5. David implies in this similitude, that whosoever are 5
out of this way, and transgress these statutes, they wander from the God of
peace, and from life, are out of Gods protection, and liable to all the curses
of the Law, as men out of the Kings highway are out of the Kings protection.
Hence it is said of wicked men, Psalm. 14. 3. They are all gone out of the way:
and, the way of peace they have not known. And as a man having lost his way,
knows not where he shall lodge, so such as go on their own ways, following
the lusts of their hearts and eyes, are blind-folded and carried by Satan to
the lodging of death, even eternal.

These things lie in the Metaphor.

Then for the singularity of 2. Singularity of this way.
this way: he says, thy way, not ways: for Gods way is but one, but bypath
are many. Many are the sciences, and other knowledges worthy our labor and
pains: but David above all, desires the knowledge of this one, and only way
of God, and of salvation.

Object. 1. The heavenly Jerusalem has twelve gates: therefore Rev. 21. 12.
the way is not one.

Ans. The place speaks not of so many ways, but that from all coasts the
Israel of God enters by this one way.

Object. 2. We read of the ways of God, Acts 13. 10.

Ans. Those be so many steps in the way of God, but not so many several ways.
David knew but one way of statutes, which he would be taught, that he might
avoid all bypath, and so come happily to the end of his way.

But for the fourth general: 4. Why David desires to be taught in this way.
why does David desire to be taught of God? he had Gad and Nathan, the
Prophets: he had ordinary Levites: he had the Scriptures: why then does he
not apply himself to the means to which God tyeth him?

Ans. 1. David had good 1
means, and was most diligent in the ^^se of them: he was a diligent reader,
and spent nights and days in meditation of the Wo^rd: but yet to all these,
and above all these he desires Gods teaching, without which all th^se are in
vain. Paul may 1 Cor. 3. 6.
pl(...)nt, and Apollo water, but God gives the increase.

2. He knows that all other Teachers can but teach the ear: 2
God alone teaches and opens the heart, as Lyd^a, Acts 16. 14. And whereas
Satan and wicked men may have a great deal of speculative knowledge, and go
to hell; he desires an inward Teacher, and to be inwardly taught by the
teaching of the Spirit.

3. He here ^raveth four 3 Four things desired which man cannot reach.
things in this one petition, beyond all men's teaching.

First, teach me to attend the way of thy statutes, that I may understand them,
and thy word 1.
be not a clasped book unto me; Esa. 29. 11
neither may I, by missing the right scope, pervert the same 2 Pet. 3. 16
to mine own destruction, a^ many abuse many places to strengthen their own
lusts, v. c. that place of providing for the family, to maintain
covetousness; and the sins of Patriarchs to defend the like, where the right
scope and sense is not attended.

Secondly, teach me to affect 2
the way of thy statutes, that my heart may melt as Iosiahs at the hearing of
the Law, and be pricked and broken with the threats of it, as were those
Converts that cried, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Acts 2.
37. When the Promises are preached, or promulgated, let my heart dilate and
open it self, as the thirsty ground, and rejoice that it understands the,
Word taught, as Neh. 8. 13. This must we pray, that the more we know, the more
we may love God: that the Word of God, by the work of the Spirit, may be as
fire, not only for the light of knowledge, but also for the heat and warmth of
affection, etc.

Thirdly, teach me to believe thy statutes, for all true and 3
comfortable knowledge is applicatory: it rests not in the understanding, but
is a firm assent in the Will, laying hold on the thing known. And this must
we pray, seeing all knowledge, not mingled with faith, is unprofitable. Heb. 4.
2
And then we are taught to believe, when according to the word of the Law we
choose and worship the true God for our God: and according to the voice of the
Gospel we believe in him whom the Father has sent, acknowledging him not only
a Christ and Jesus, but Ioh 20. 28. Job. 19. 25.
mine, at Thomas said, My Lord and my God; and as Job, My Redeemer lives; and
that Jesus Christ brings salvation to me through remission of sins, Luk 1. 7.
7.

Fourthly, teach me to obey 4
thy statutes: for all sound knowledge is practical: and to know Ephesians. 4. 21
22.
Christ as the truth is in Christ, is, to cast off the old man with his lusts,
and put on the now. This must be our prayer, that the Lord would so teach us
his way, as we may walk in it: that he would so take us into his school as
to become both more skillful and more holy: that seeing not Iam. 1. ^5
hearers, but doers are ^ustified, our portion may be in their blessedness,
that hear the Word Luke 11. 28.
and keep it. This was David's aim in this prayer,

Quest. But why is he so earnest, being a man of so deep Why David, a man of
such knowledge, desires to be still taught. 1
knowledge and understanding already?

Ans. 1. A good heart, inflamed with love of God, can never be near enough:
love loves and lives in union. If it be in the way to him, it would get
further still.

2. Though he be taught in 2.
part, yet he sees what a small measure he has attained, and desires to be
taught further. No marvel, if he that has (...) taste of this knowledge,
desire ^is fill and satiety. He that see(...)th but in part, desires to see
more perfectly. Nature abhors ^acuity and emptiness: and much more, grace.

3. He is earnest to know the way, to show that he shall never 3
come at God, who cares not to ^eepe the way to him. Many desire to come to
God, but it must be in the way of the world, or of pleasure, or of custom, or
carnal fellowship, or lusts of their own hearts. All these are dead desires,
leading from God. David will desire the way, as well as the end. And we also
must not bawke the means, if we aim at the end.

This of the Exposition of our Text.

Now follow the instructions. Doctr. 1 All true knowledge is from God. 1 Pet. 5.
10


Doctr. 1. In that David goes to the Lord to be taught, learn, that all true
knowledge is from God: whence he is called the God of all grace: and 2 Cor. 4.
6. God that commanded light to shine in darkness, has shined in our hearts.
Dan. 2. 20. the God of heaven reveals secrets. And therefore he is called
light: not 1 Ioh. 1: 5
only essential, in himself, but by participation.

Reason 1. Gods way wants a Reasons. 1
teacher, the way of sin wants none. And this teacher must not be man
himself, but God: for the natural man perceives not the things of God (1 Cor.
2. 14.) nor can discern them, no more then a blind man can judge of colors.
He walks in the dark of his own night and nature, and knows not whither he
goes Ioh. 12. 3. 5. The veil upon the heart must be removed (...) Cor. 3.
16.) and the Father must draw, or else none can ^ome to the Son.

2. A natural man is so far 2
from helping himself out of darkness, that he increases his blindness
every day, and thickens the mist of his mind. And were it a bodily darkness,
Darkness of soul far worse than that of Egypt.
^s that of Egypt, it were less dangerous: but this is far more desperate.
That was on the body, endangering the outward man: this on the soul,
endangering that. In that, men desi^ed light: in this they hate the ^ight, and
love darkness. In that, they would be glad of guides: in this, refuse
guides, (...)orne, and revile them. In that, they were afraid and sat still
three days together: here ad^entrous, more forward to lead then a seeing man
to follow. In that, they were sensible of their misery: in this, they think
themselves in a good case, and in the way to heaven till they find themselves
at the gates of hell; as the Aramites thought themselves going to Elisha his
house, 2 Kin. (...). 20
till their eyes were open and saw themselves in Samaria, in the midst of their
enemies. So as no way can a natural man wind himself out of his natural
darkness.

3. True knowledge has two things above the reach of nature. 3 Two things in
true knowledge, beyond natures reach
First, a sound Object, namely holy things, Prove. 9. 10. Now all the strength
of Nature is too low and weak to reach them. A natural man may be wise in
natural things, or in civil actions, yea wise to do evil: but to do well in
spiritual things, he is without all wisdom. For nothing works beyond his
ability. Secondly, it must have a sound Agent: it must be wrought by the
Spirit: it is the inspiration of the Almighty that gives understanding, Job
32. 8. Flesh and blood reveals it not, Mat. 16. nay the holiest men cannot
reach it without Gods teaching: Esa. 54. 13. they shall be all taught of God:
and, 1 Cor. 2. 12. we have received the spirit of God, that we might know the
things of God.

Then if any want wisdom, Use 1. Iam. 1. 5 Psa. 119. 18
let him ask it of God: with David, let him go to God for the opening of his
eyes. Solomon begged true wisdom, and an understanding heart, and obtained it
of God, 1 King. 3. 9. And the rather ought we to do the like, because we see
in Solomon how God is well-pleased with this petition; who suffers not a suit,
so pleasing to him, to go away unanswered. And how can it be other unto the
Lord, when in this request we acknowledge the mournful darkness and
blindness of our own minds, the infinite depth and boundless Ocean of
wisdom and knowledge in him, and that we depend on him for knowledge, which
we profess a treasure in his custody alone, and that in the seeking of sound
knowledge we have an earnest desire to obey and please him?

And as this is a great means of Gods glory, so also of our own good: for by
this means, as by a key, we unlocke unto our selves the rich treasury, and
full storehouse of grace and wisdom; prayer being the key of heaven.

Object. But has not God decreed unchangeably what to do, whom he will teach,
whom not? so as our prayer or not prayer can never alter his decree?

Ans. 1. God has decreed as well how to do things, as what he will do: and
therefore Gods decree takes not away prayer, but stablisheth it.

2. God has decreed to do some things immediately, by himself; other things
mediately, by the creature. Immediately by himself, without the concurrence of
the creature, he decreed to create Adam. Mediately, by the concurrence of Adam
and Eve, he decreed the being of Cain. So for the effecting of many things, in
matters of regeneration and salvation, he has decreed that his servants shall
concur with him, or else the thing shall not be done: as in this instance,
no prayer no teaching.

Never therefore seek knowledge in the means, without Use 2. In the use of
means ^paire to God.
prayer to the Lord, whose only it is to give. Thou come to Church to hear
the Word, to get thine eyes opened, to be taught in the way of Gods statutes:
why now failest thou of that thou seek? but because thou seek it at the
mouth (...) man, and failest in seeking God for blessing. Many hear and read a
long time, but the Word thrives not, prospers not, lives not in their hearts
nor lives: they are ignorant, not infirmed; they are profane, and not
reformed: And why does that word, which prevails with others, do them no
good, but because one prays for blessing, and seeks higher than the Minister,
the other prays not, or to no purpose? And mark such as having heard the
Word, run out before prayer for blessing; never look the Word should prosper
there: ye shall never see a sound work in such persons, on whom is the brand
of such profaneness, as to fly from the face and presence of God. Luther
professed he got more knowledge by prayer, then by all his study: And thou
shall never prosper in the Word, that neglectest prayer.

Ministers especially must pray for themselves and their people.

1. For themselves, as Daniel, Use 3. Ministers should pray for themselves
cap. 2. 17. he and his fellows beseeched the God of heaves for grace in
those secrets: and much more need we for grace, to open to us the mystery of
this Kingdom. Many good wits which are as laborious in study and reading, are
not so profitable, and marvel that they cannot reach to such a gift, as some
other. The very reason is; they study, read, and meditate, but pray not, or
slightly; and not craving a blessing, they have none.

2. For the people: that God And their people.
would prosper his Word to them, and add his teaching to theirs. 2 King 6 20.
Elisha prayed, that the Lord would open the eyes of the Syrians, that they
might see themselves in the midst of their enemies: so must Ministers be often
on their knees in secret, that their people may see themselves in the midst of
their hellish enemies, and discern the danger, so as to apprehend the means
of their safety.

Thus of the first point.

2. In the person praying, teach me; David a man after Gods own heart, a
Prophet, a Teacher, a Penman of Scripture one that had a singular measure of
knowledge already, yet he desires to be further taught; learn, that

Sound and saving knowledge Doctr. 2. Sound knowledge is ever humble.
is an humble knowledge. Gods child thinks his knowledge to be ignorance,
his sight to be blindness: not out of baseness of mind, or mistaking the
gift, but

1. Because no man sees himself so well, as he that is in the Reasons. 1
clearest light: and he that has most wisdom, best sees his own wants. How
does Moses, learned to admiration, debase himself, and derogate from himself,
when God calls him? Exodus 3. And how does Agur deject himself, as not having
the understanding of a man in him, Prove. 30. 2. whose prayer, what is it but a
mournful complaint of his own ignorance?

2. True knowledge shows a man his own imbecility, even 2.
after conversion, that although he be now light in the Lord, yet he shall see
he sees but in part, Ephesians 5. 8
and knows but in part, because of his own weak capacity, 1 Cor. 13. 9
to comprehend the mysteries Causes of defect of knowledge.
far above his reach; clouds of corruption left in him, obscuring the
Sunshine of the Word, in it self clear enough, but we look through
black glasses; resistance of will, which is but in part renewed: obedience
being but in part, plainly argues our knowledge so to be: Ioh. 7. 17. And the
understanding is not yet so captivated, nor the affections so pure, but that
they would shape the Word to themselves, not themselves to it: hence they see
themselves as the man (Mark 8. ^3.) restored to sight, but at first saw men
walking like trees; they are not stone-blinde as before, but have now a weak
and indistinct sight, so as Christ must follow his own work again, and again
put his hands on them; so as their sight grows still clearer, but never perfect
till they come to see God as he is: the case of the Believer being the case of
Paul in his Conversion, being struck blind, his sight was restored by the
falling off of the skales before his eyes. These (...), skales of false
conceits and natural opinions are long in falling off our eyes, even from our
conversion till our dissolution.

3. Sound knowledge is humble, because of the excellent object 3 A double
Object, which keeps it humble.
of it, which is twofold: first, the statutes of God, the matters of God which
are deep and high mysteries, far beyond the reach of highest capacities:
there are mountains as well as valleys, gulfes for Elephants to swim as well
as shollow fords for Lambs to wade: there are the depths of Predestination,
Incarnation, Trinity, and the like, in which the Angels may pose their
understandings. Secondly, God himself whom we must know in Jesus Christ, the
nearer whom we come, the more humble we will be. Moses, as familiar as he was
with God, yet coming near unto him, cast himself on his face, and professed
that he was but dust Exodus 34. 8
and ashes. A man by beholding the Sun discernes the weakness of his eye:
so here.

4. Sound knowledge is humble, given only to the humble; and in such a measure
as they may be kept humble still. For the Lord in great wisdom gives not
knowledge, either in kind or measure, to puff us up, but in his dispensation
preventeth the Laodicean pride of our hearts, knowing how hardly we could guide
any perfection here. Again, he deals with us as Parents with children under
age, and gives us knowledge in the measure of children, and not of strong men
Paul himself knew as a child, and in part, 1 Cor. 13 and the best must know
they have but inchoation of grace here, and must grow in grace, and 1 Pet. 3. 18
in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Besides, God gives such a measure of grace
here, as may stand with an holy covetousness of wisdom, and such a desire
after it, as is insatiable; that we might search the Scriptures, with those
noble Bereans, as for silver and gold, and know the price of wisdom to be
far better. Lastly, that we might not rest in this dark and petty School
on earth, but long and desire that happy estate of heaven, where is
understanding without error, knowledge without ignorance, wisdom without
folly. This made Paul cast his eye beyond the present, and set his affection
upon that perfect which was behind: 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. N^w we know in part: but
when that perfect is come, then that which is in part, shall be abolished. Now
we see as in a glass, but then we shall see face to face. And withal, it will
make us prize Jesus Christ, and fly unto him, in whom we recover perfection of
knowledge, being made to us of God wisdom as 1 Cor. 1. 30 Use 1. See thy want
of wisdom and knowledge.
well as righteousness.

Hence then the best men that know most, must see they want much wisdom, and
much knowledge. Let me see a man gotten beyond David in found knowledge of God
and himself: and yet in this Psalm he can make no end of this desire: and let
this serve to beat down the idle conceit of knowledge: if David who was of
extraordinary knowledge and grace, saw such darkness in himself, and wanted
so much of Gods teaching, what do we? what may we? shall any man content
himself with his measure attained, as needing no more? shall David's measure
humble him, and shall thy measure make thee swell? Consider the Apostles check
to the Corinthians, 1 Epist. 8. 2. If any man think he knows any thing, let
him know he knows nothing as he ought to know. And cast thine eyes upon the
best examples in Scripture: see the errors of Saints both in judgment, as
Peter (Gal. 2. 8, 9, 11.) and in practice, as David, and tell me whether the
best had not need be still taught in the statutes.

Again, examine thy knowledge, Use 2. Difference of good men, and evil, in
respect of knowledge. 1
and the soundness of it by this note, if it be humble: For there is a notable
difference between the godly and wicked, in regard of their knowledge.

1. The wicked man is proud, and boasts of that he has not: the Pharisee of
a key of knowledge: an ordinary man, of as much knowledge as the Minister, or
as much as he needs: whereas the godly man, being humble, scarce
acknowledges the treasure that he has.

2. Whereas the wicked man, having a slight measure of 2.
knowledge, gives up the means, and rests in that measure: the godly, what
measure soever they have, still follow God in the means, even for that they
have, as if they had it not. David being well taught, prays to be taught more.

3. Whereas a wicked man, having a small measure of knowledge, 3
referres it to himself, as gotten by his own means or industry, and for his
own ends; as also fwels in himself, and despises others, and will be known
to have something above others: the godly still flies to the same grace that
first gave it, and referres it to the praise of the giver; and yields to all
other, though not in gifts, yet in his mind and affection.

Thus the true knowledge of Christ, as the truth is in Christ, teaches to be
like Christ who is meek and humble. Whence ^at 11. 29. Co^ollarics. 1
must follow,

1. That a boasting of puffing knowledge is not sound. Good men never boast of
sharpness of sight, or quickness of understanding, but see the veil
unremoved, and the skales not quite fallen off. They are not blind as before,
but by reason of fogs and lusts, and mists of sinful affections and motions,
can sometimes see as little the things before them, as Agar could the Well
before her (Genesis 21.) by reason of her passion or grief, as Calvin judges.
And although their eyes be open, yet they see how beavy they be, and hardly
kept open; as the Disciples when Christ warned them to watch, by reason of
sleepiness and dullness of flesh: ^o as they may say with the Church, their
eyes sleep when their hearts Cant 5. 2.
awake. They may indeed profess with the blind man, Ioh. 9, 25. One thing J
know, whereas J was blind, now J see: but must add withal; yet I see how
little I see, even a glimmering of things rather than things themselves.

2. It must follow, that sound knowledge must continually bewail 2.
ignorance and darkness: for why has the Lord left it in us, but to humble
us, that with the rest of the law of the members it might be as the Canaanites
to exercise us, or as the prick in the flesh lest we should be exalted out of
measure by abundance of revelations? Nay, as light and darkness have a daily
and interchangeable fight in nature: so the soul must maintain a continual
combat between knowledge and ignorance.

3. It follows, that found 3.
knowledge cannot be that which in sense of want or weakness striveth not in
the means to a further measure, that of weak is not made strong, that rises
not to a further assurance, or the like: for all sound knowledge is Prove. 4. 18.
proveable, and the way of the just shines more and more till perfect day.

Thus of the second point.

3. The child of God most earnestly Doctr. 3.
desires to know the ways Good men ever desirous of more holy knowledge.
of God: as our Prophet through this whole Psalm. Daniel, though a most worthy
Prophet, yet read the Prophecies of Jeremy, Dan. 9. 1, 2. And all things are
dung to Saint Paul, in respect of the excellent knowledge of the virtue of
Christ's death resurrection, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. But why?

1. Because they know it to be the way of God, and there is Reasons. 1.
no other: the way, not only wherein God himself walks, who is the most
perfect pattern of his own law, but especially because it is the way he has
chalked out for us to walk in, who can walk toward him in his own way only;
as we can see the Sun only by his own light, and come to the Sea by his
own streams. 2 Fearful effects of ignorance 1.


2. They only discern the danger of spiritual darkness and blindness: How
it wraps in manifold errors of judgment; false doctrines and opinions against
the Word: Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22. 29. and, Prove. 19
(...). Without knowledge the mind is not good; How it wraps in errors of life 2
and conversation; for so the Scriptures ascribe all corruption of manners to
ignorance: Paul persecuted and wasted the Church, why? the did it of ignorance.
And in ignorance the Rulers 1 Timothy 1, 13
put Christ to death: had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord
of glory. How it wraps men under the power of sin, and delivers 3.
them as voluntary subjects in kingdom of darkness, under the Prince of
darkness, to be ruled at his will, as 2 Timothy 2. 26, and, when men regard not
to know God, how justly does he give them up to a reprobate sense as he did
the Heathens (Rom 1. 24.) to commit things against reason and nature? And
finally, how it wraps them under the 4
curse of God, both temporal and eternal. My people perish Hosea 4. 6
(says the Lord) for want of knowledge; that is, are in state of perdition:
they lie in unbeleefe; for, no knowledge, no faith; and not believing, they are
condemned already, Ioh. 3. 1^. And they are liable every where to those
judgments which the Prophet prays to be powered out upon them that know Ier,
20. 25.
not the name of God. Then for the eternal curse: when Christ shall come from
heaven in flaming fire, he shall render vengeance on all that know not God,
Ephesians. 4. 18
2 These. 1. 8. and justly: for death has seized on them already: they are
destitute of the life of God, by the ignorance that is in them: their mind and
conscience is dead, and being strangers to the life of God, they are thrust
under the power of eternal death: Prove. 10. 18. The fool dies for want of
knowledge.

Therefore the Saints seek after knowledge, as David here.

3. They see the necessity of 3
the word of God, and the knowledge thereof: the Word is the food of the soul;
an hungry man longs after his food; and a good heart hungers after the Word.
Hence the Prophets and men of God are said to eat up the little book (Ezekiel. 3.
1.) Rev. 10. 10
and to fill their bellies with it, as hungry men when they come at a good
meal.

The word of God is the water of the Well of Life: and how necessary is water?
how does a thirsty man desire to be refreshed with water? so does the godly
after the knowledge of God: and none but thirsty souls are called, or do come
to these waters, Esa. 55. 1.

How earnestly do blind men ^esire to see the light? so do ^he Saints, seeing
what a weak ^immering and sight they have (...) Divine things. They know ^he
Sun in the heavens is not (...) necessary to enlighten the world, as is the
Son of grace and righteousness to enlighten (...)e Church. And as without
the ^unne there would be a perpe(...)all night, so without God and (...)e
saving knowledge of him, (...)ere were an eternal night in (...)verlasting
darkness.

4. They earnestly desire saying 4. Benefits of knowledge within us.
knowledge, because they (...)ee the profit and high excellen(...)y of it, both
within themselves, (...)d without them.

First, within themselves, they (...)ee Gods Image renewed in (...)em by
knowledge, and themselves Col. 3: 10
framed to his likeness, who is light, and in whom is no (...)arknesse. Also
they see themselves brought into better frame by it daily, and changed into
(...) self from glory to glory: with 2 Cor. 3. 18
out which they could never attain any right motion in their wills, or
affections, nor any righ^ manner or end of doing any thing, nor any happy fruit
o(...) their endeavors, but the loss o(...) all their labor, time, hope, and
reward.

Secondly, without them; they And without us.
see the worth and excellency of this knowledge above all other things in the
world, and that nothing else can make them truly happy: Prove. 3. 13. Blessed i^
the man that finds wisdoms, and that gets understanding. But how can
Solomon prove this?

By two reasons: The former in the 14. verse, by comparing this wisdom of God
with silver and gold which are so desirable: but the gain of this is better.
Oh but some things out-weig(...) silver and gold, and are in much more request,
as Diamonds, Ru^ies, and Pearls: True; yet these are but the shining dust of
the earth: but wisdom (faith (...)e) is better than all pearls, be their
price never so great.

Object. But some things a man may desire above all these, ^s life, liberty,
health, honor, etc.

Ans. In verse 15. All things thou can desire, are not to be compared to
wisdom.

The second reason is from the ^ffects: showing what wisdom bestows and
brings with her: (...). Riches in her left hand: (...). Length of days in her
right: (...). Honor, advancement, and prosperity: 4 Life, the sweetest of all:
She is a tree of life (...)o them that lay ^old on her. And so he concluds as
he began, ^h blessed is he that retains (...)er.

We see now what reason the godly have, and on what just grounds they most
eagerly desire with David to be taught (...) the way of Gods statutes.

The Use is three fold;

1. Of incitation. 2. Of reprehension. 3. Of examinati^n.
1. It serves to incite us to the Use 1. Incitation to get heavenly knowledge.
holy and earnest desire after th(...) word of God, without whi(...) no man can
have any comfort (...) any sound grace.

For first, as light was the fir(...) thing in the Creation, so the fi(...)
Motives. 1
word of this second Creation, i(...) Fiat lux, let there be the lig(...) of
heavenly knowledge: a(...) as the word of God let light i(...) to all his
work, which befo(...) was a confused Chaos, and (...) things rolled up in
black darkness; so till this word of G(...) let light into the soul, t(...)
whole man lies in a confusion (...) black darkness, without a(...) light of
direction or conso(...) on.

You know, no babe is bor(...) alive into the world, but it cries for the milk
and breast; and if it do not, it is still-borne. So the newborn babe in
grace, cries after the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. and without
this, thou art not borne of God. Nor the friend of Christ, no acquaintance or
kindred of his, no Christian but in name, unless with an hungring heart thou
hear the Word and keep it. Mark. 3. 35
And, an ignorant heart is not only a graceless heart, but destitute of desire
of grace: it cannot ask grace, Ioh. 4. 10 had thou known, thou would
have asked.

Secondly, consider the comeliness 2
and seemelinesse of sound knowledge in him that professes himself to be the
Lords: Prove. 4. 9. Solomon calls it a comely ornament and grace for the head,
and a chain for the neck; yea, and a crown of glory. And what else makes a
man's face to shine, but wisdom? whereas, what an unseemely thing is ignorance
of Gods statutes to a man, either as a man, or as a Christian?

1. As a man: God having Ignorance unseemely to a man, as a man.
given a man a mind and reasonable soul, beyond a beast, whereby he has
enabled him to conceive of heaven and heavenly things, and has elevated him
with a particle of Divine nature for this very end, that he should rise above
the beasts in high contemplations of Divine things, and in the knowledge and
obedience of the mind and will of his Creator: how unseemely is it, that that
Divine mind should be taken up with base, transitory, and sinful things?
that a man should thus degenerate, and fall back to a brutish condition,
forgetting he has a reasonable soul, which David rates in himself, whose Psa
73. 22.
ignorance or inconsiderateness in one point of Gods providence and
administration, makes him as a beast before God.

2. As a Christian man, yet Especially as a Christian man.
much more unseemely: for a Christian professes himself to be a Citizen of
heaven, heaven to be his Country, God to be his King, his Word and Statutes to
be his Charter: now is it not absurd and unseemly, that a man should be
ignorant of the fashions, laws, and customs of his own Country? A Christian
professes himself a child of his heavenly father, and his fathers house to
be his house: and is it not unseemely a man should neither know his father, nor
his fathers name, nor pleasure, nor how to demean himself in his fathers
house? A Christian professes heaven to be his home and inheritance, and the
Word the deeds of that Inheritance, without which he has no^ title to one foot
in heaven: how unseemely and unreasonable were it for him to cast away the
deeds of his land, to break off the seals, to be wilfully ignorant of the
clauses that convay such an estate unto him and his?

So of the second Motive.

Thirdly, consider the delight and pleasure in the Statutes of God, which are
full of sweet ravishments to such as attain them, and should quicken us to the
taste and feeding on them. In other things we see what pains men will take to
compass their pleasure. Now as ignorance is most uncomfortable, fitly
therefore compared to darkness, to blindness, to falling into a pit, and to
lying in a Prove 4. 19.
black and stinking dungeon: So knowledge and wisdom, which is compared to
light, and the bright shining of the Sun, Prove. Knowledge delightful to man's
understanding.
4. is most delightful to the soul, as the light to the eye:

1. In it self: because knowledge is the proper work of understanding, and
the highest part of man: and as a man naturally delights in the knowledge of
natural things, so an enlightened mind in the knowledge of Divine and
spiritual.

2. And especially in respect Specially for the excellent objects.
of the Object, which is spiritual things: This made Solomon say Prove. 3. 17.)
all the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasure. For what man, unless he have
an infinite distemper in his soul, would not be ravished to know in some
measure those infinite perfections of our heavenly Father, whereto we are
commanded to strive? yea, to see in some sort the unsearchable depths of Gods
wisdom and knowledge? and to apprehend in some measure the bottomless
mystery of man's redemption and salvation? Was it not an admirable delight, when
Moses stood upon the top of mount Nebo, and viewed all that land of Promise?
yet Moses must see it, not enjoy it: see it a far off, but not come near it:
he must dye there, and go no further. But for a man to stand here on Mount
Sion, the Church of God, and view all the promised Canaan, that heavenly
Jerusalem, with all her towers, and enjoy them, together with all the pleasures
at the right hand of God; can the knowledge of any thing be so delightful to
an heavenly mind? The taste of the Word in this one particular, makes it
exceed the sweetness of the honey and the honey-combe, if a David taste Psalm.
19. 10:
it.

This of the third Motive.

Fourthly, consider the way wherein we are to walk: the 4. Excellent
properties of Gods way.
way of Gods Statutes: the properties whereof are such, as may allure us into
it: for,

1. It is the old way, which 1
we must enquire of, Jer. 6. 16. beaten by the feet of ancient Believers, and
Patriarchs; all the Prophets, and Apostles, and all holy men, yea of Jesus
Christ himself; and therefore is the way wherein we shall want no good guides
nor company.

2. Every one in his journey would enquire and choose the 2
rightest way: but the ways of the Lord are right, and the just walk in them,
Hos. 14. 9. Elymas ceased not to pervert the right ways of God, Act. 13. 10.
All other ways are crooked paths, and by-lanes, Psalm. 125. 5.

3. This is the lightest and most 3
comfortable way: Psalm. 19. 8. the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing
the heart. In this way is peace of conscience, joy of the holy Ghost, comfort
of heart in life and death: and this joy shall none take away. No marvel when
Ezeki^l ate this little book, that it was sweet as honey in his mouth, chap.
3. 3. Queen The divine saying of a gracious Princess.
Elizabeth, of blessed memory, laying the Bible to her heart, said It was her
comfort in her trouble, and therefore should be in her Rule her rule. But the
way of the wicked is darkness, Prove. 4 19. they know not where they shall
err and fall.

4. This is the cleanest way: 2 Samuel 4.
22. 31 the ways of God are incorrupt and pure: Esa. 35 8 The way shall be
called holy, and the polluted pass not by it: Deuteronomy. 4. 8. What nation has so
righteous laws? what passengers have so fair a way? Silver tried seven times
is not so pure as these statute,, Psalm. 19. 9. who would prefer the myrie and
dirty ways of sinful pleasures before it?

5. This is of all other the safest 5
way, freest from robbers and thieves, in which thou art under the Lords
protection, being the Kings highway; yea, wherein thou have a guard of Gods
Angels to keep thee safe to the ways end: Psalm. 91. 10, 11. they are charged
with thy safety.

6. It is the shortest and most compendions way, leading to 6.
life; and in keeping this way shall be great reward. All other are by-ways,
that lead to the gates of death.

Now let the wisdom of God rule us to choose this oldest, rightest, lightest,
cleanest, safest, and shortest way, as ever we desire to come to an happy end
of our way.

This is the Use of incitation.

Now follows the second, of Use 2. Reprehension of them that desire not
knowledge in the means. 1
reprehension.

And first of Recusant Papists, who wilfully refuse the knowledge of God,
scorn and contemn the Preachers and expounders of those statutes; yea, hate
them to the death, and shun all the means of skill and instruction in those
Statutes. Can they be good subjects, that will not know their Princes laws,
that burn the Statute-bookes, and their expounders too? yet such good subjects
are these to God: who have chose the curse that Cain bewailed, namely that he
was cast from the face of God in Genesis (...). 14.
his fathers house: they willingly excommunicate themselves.

And add unto these our mungrill Church-papists, who sometime slip into the
Church for odd respects: Recusancie proves disgraceful, or chargeable, and
would put them to more cost then their Religion is worth, They can hear the
Word, when and of whom they list, or must: but to hear Popery refuted or
disgraced, is, to cast dust in their eyes. They can hear a Sermon, but detest
and rail upon the Preacher. Very devout they seem, and scrupulous in the
least ceremony, but like those devout women who stoned Act. 13. 50
Paul.

To both these our Lord says, If ye were of God, ye would hear Ioh. 8. 47
his voice. Were their Religion of God, they would love his statutes above
their daily food: and love the bringers, so as to account their very feet
beautiful. Romans 10. ^5
Did they love Christ, they would not hate his Disciple: neither could the
Temple of Dagon and the Arc stand together in the Temple of the heart. Hear
the counsel, to be as thou seem, or seem as thou art: assuredly God will
have no part of a divided person.

Secondly, they are far from 2
the comfort of a good estate, who will not be brought out of their doors,
their shops, their Counting-houses, to learn the way of Gods statutes, but
living in places of knowledge, suffer ignorance to reign in their hearts How
far are they from David's mind and desire? his heart brake within him for the
desire of Gods judgments, Psa. 119. 20. he esteemed the place of Gods worship,
Bethel, the very house of God, and the gate of heaven: he accounted them
blessed that might dwell in or near the house of God, Psa. 84. But so far
are many from discerning this an happiness, that they esteem every Sermon (as
the old prophecies) the burden Prove. 1. 7
of the Lord: a straw-matter can keep them from Church: and they are of the
number of Salomons fools, that scorn wisdom and instruction.

They will allege their hearts Object.
are good enough, and their meaning is good though their skill be small; and
God will accept their good meaning.

But 1. that is false: no meaning Ans.
is good without knowledge: Prove. 19. 2. Without knowledge the mind is not
good. 2. Mean what thou will, if thou hear not Gods word thou art not of
God, Ioh. 8. 47. 3. What a deceit of heart is it, that can shroud all under
good meaning, while it means never to be good? or think that God will accept
an ignorant and unregenerate heart for a good heart? 4. Examine this good heart
of thine by that which issues thence: see if there come not out of it,
adulteries, oaths, blasphemies, lies, rotten speeches, injustice, contempt of
Gods Ordinances and servants: And is this good?

Others love God above all, Object.
and their neighbor as themselves: what needs more?

But nothing is more bold than blindness. Neglect the means Ans.
of knowledge, thou neither love God, nor thy neighbor, nor thy self. Not
God: for if ye loved me, says Christ, ye would Ioh. 14. 15.
keep my Commandments. Not thy neighbor: if not him that begat, not him
that is begot. Ioh 5. 1. 2.
Not thy self: he that hates wisdom, hates his own soul, Prove. 8. 36. and,
chap. 4. 13. she is thy life. If thou lovedst thy soul, thou would hear
and hide the Word in it, and not hide thy self from the Word.

Others will pray, and let others Object.
preach: they will be devout, let others run to Sermons: they will be active
Christians, while others are passive.

But 1. this is from the foolery of some Preachers, who sever Ans.
what God has joined, and set two so near friends, and twins of the same
womb, by the ears.

2. Can thou pray without teaching and hearing? Consider; will thou pray to
an unknown God, or a God whom thou will not know? Can thou call on him, on
whom thou beleevest not? or believe without hearing? or can a right Romans 10. 1^
prayer be severed from much knowledge, both of thine own wants and
unworthiness, of Gods mercy, power, and will to supply, of the means of
meriting that supply, which is by Jesus Christ made thine own, and how to
expect patiently, and be delayed or denied thankefully, or else Christianly to
use mercies received, to the glory of the giver, and good of the receiver? Come
hastily, without all this knowledge, and offer the sacrifice of fools, Eccles.
5. 1.

3. Can God hear thee praying, who rejectest his Word? Prove. 28. 9. He that
turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer is abominable.
Besides, prayer is a seeking of God: and can thou find him whom thou seek,
while thou runnest from him who seeks thee?

But we have callings to follow, Object.
and families to maintain, and cannot spare an hour in a weekday to hear a
Sermon. Ans.


I say as Solomon, Eccles. 7. 20. it is good to lay hold upon this, but
withdraw not thy hand from that: worldly business must be followed, but never
so as to be worldlings; and this is, when the whole time is engrossed, to
profane or worldly uses, and none set apart for holy, or the one thing
necessary.

Again, to feed the body, men can allot two hours in a day, but not one in a
week to feed the soul: as if bread that perishes, were to be preferred
before that which endures to eternal Ioh. 6. 27
life, or the soul were to be less regarded than the body.

And can these men spend four, five, or more hours at cards, dice, bowls,
vain Enterludes, to the destruction of much time with themselves, and not one
hour in a week for their instruction? Can some of them watch whole nights and
days at Satan's suit, and the service of sin, and not possibly watch one
hour with Christ in the day, yea in many days? Cannot they sit up one half
hour later, or rise one half hour sooner, to redeem one hour for their
everlasting good? or will they find it profitable to win the whole world with
the loss of their souls?

Lastly, how have we heard not a few such careless men rate themselves on
their deathbeds; with horrible terrors in their consciences, that so wretchedly
they stopped their ears at so many calls of God, and neglected the hearing of so
many Sermons, and too late wish, that they might hear but one Sermon more? and
now all their hunger and thirst after the world, only enlarges their hearts
sorrow, and can no way ease it.

Others say they are not Object.
book-learned, and cannot attain this knowledge.

But thou ought to be book-learned: Ans.
God has given thee both a book and Teachers, and wisdom is easy to him
that will understand, and she invites thee into her School, calling the simple
to be wise in heart, Pro. 8. 5. and pronounces those blessed, that watch daily
at he gates, verse. 34.

But I am so crossed in the Ministry, that I cannot endure it, Object.
nor will hear such and such.

Know: 1. All the frowardness is in thy self, there is no Ans.
frowardness in the Word, Prove. 8. 8. 2. Cross thy sin, and the Word will
not cross thee: but if thou will rather cross the Word than thy sin, thank
thy self, God and his Word will meet with thee: as in Ahabs case.

Now we come to the use of Examination, whether God has Use 3. Notes of divine
and saving knowledge. 1 Enemies of it: fix.
taught us in his way, or no. The notes of trial are three.

First, a continual strife to remove all the hinderers of saving knowledge;
for light ever fights against darkness. And the lets to be removed, are,

1. Original corruption: a chief part of which is darkness of understanding.
Labor in mortifying natural corruption, which as a black cloud hinders the
shine of this Sun.

2. Hardness of heart: Heb. 3. 10. They erred in heart, and have not known my
ways: and verse. 12. Take heed of an evil and unbeleeving heart to depart from
the living God. The light of the Sun may shine on the outside of a stone, but
cannot get within it, while unbroken.

3. Satanicall temptation: the god of the world blinds Infidels, that the
light of grace should 2 Cor. 4. 4.
not shine upon them: whom we must therefore resist, steadfast in the faith. No
marvel if Satan can blind the wicked, seeing he can raise a cloud of dust to
trouble the sight of the godly themselves, and let them see every thing in a
false glass; all to hide the light of Gods countenance from them.

4. Actual sins: the nature of all which is, to increase ignorance, and
blind the mind yet further. Of these, some keep out knowledge, some drive
(...) out. Of the former sort are covetousness (resembled by choking thorns,
Luke 8. and Ezekiel 33. 32. they hear, but jest, for their hearts go after
covetousness:) and wrath, envy, hypocrisy, with the like, which must be laid
aside, or there is no growing by the Word, 1 Pet 2. 1, 2. Of the latter sort
are the foul sins of flesh, as whoredom, drunkenness, intemperancy, which
besot men, and diminish even natural knowledge: see Hos. 4. 11.

5. The pleasure of sin: as Eve in tempting, and Adam in attempting the
sin, the very sight and beauty of the Apple dazelled the clear knowledge of
innocence. And as the sin of the Sodomites smote them with blindness of
body, that they could not find the door: so does it much more the soul of
the sinner, that he cannot find Christ who is the door of life.

6. Custom of sin: the pleasure of which has begot an habit: this keeps and
holds under the dominion of the Prince of darkness; and the Lord will not put
his precious liquor into so nasty vessels, but gives them up ordinarily to
reprobate sense, Romans 1. 28.

Now as nature teaches us to fight for all these, so grace leads us into the
field against them: for, till they be in part subdued, there is no possibility
of saving knowledge, no more then of Sunshine at midnight.

This is the first trial.

The second is this: As all that indisposition must be removed, 2 Disposition
to saving knowledge, in 4 things.
so there must be a disposition wrought in the party, whom God teaches in his
way; which where it is, the Lord has begun to teach that man.

Quest. Wherein stands the disposition to saving Knowledge?

Ans. 1. In humility: God teaches the humble in his way: and he that must
receive the Psalm. 25. 9
Kingdom, must be as a little Man. 18. 4
child. Esa. 28. 9. whom shall I teach, or make to understand? not conceited
persons, who make Divinity only a matter of discourse, or fill their brains
and speech with vain questions and idle speculations, or such as come to sit
as Judges, or Critickes, on their Ministers gifts; but such as are weaned from
the milk, or drawn from the breasts. It was a proud and profane speech of
Hermolaus Barbanis, and Angelus Politianus, that by reading the Bible they
forgot Latin.

2. A soft and tender heart. A sure sign that God has spoken to it. For none
can reach the heart, to change it, but only that Doctor whose chair is in
heaven. He only can write in the Tables of the heart. Ier. 31. 33.

3. A crossing of humane wisdom: which nature teaches not. Self-denial is a
note of a Disciple. For, who can frame Mat. 16. 24.
the affections, to hold and fasten on such a doctrine as crosses nature,
mortifieth lusts, depriveth of dear pleasures, and sweet profits, which are as
near as right hands and eyes? can the worldling, who esteems his profits
before his profession, and therefore turns a deaf ear to such voices? no:
only he that made the affections at first, can thus renew them, and change
them at his pleasure.

4. An embracing of all truths, one as well as another, because all are from
the same fountain: and a constant cleaving to all truth, in judgment and
practice, then, when reason, custom, practice, sense and common opinion cross
and contradict it: Now who can teach wisdom in a mystery, but God alone? 1
Cor. 2. (...). that a Virgin should bear a Son: that a Son should be
eternally begotten: that all things should be made of nothing: that life dyed
upon the Cross, and fetched life out of death: that heaven must be had out of
hell, and death swallowed up by death, and the same body arise again. Who can
give simple and shallow wits capacity, to reach these high mysteries which
Festus accounts madness, and Jews think the Apostles out of their wits to
utter them, and the great wits of the world account foolishness and fables? Is
it not he that chooses weak things to confound the mighty? Nay, who is it
that can persuade these high and strange things with such certainty, as the
simple Beleever-dares, and does dye in defense of them? Surely (as Christ said
to Peter) Flesh and Verse. 17.
blood reveals it not, but the Father that is in heaven.

This is the second sign of saving knowledge.

The third is a conscionable and 3
fruitful following of the means of knowledge: as 1. An humble sitting down
with many at the feet of Christ. 2. Binding the Word to our eyes, by frequent,
constant, and orderly reading. 3. Whetting it on the heart, by deep
meditation, so to make it our own. 4. Tying it to the hands and fingers, by
practicing it: If ye do these things, ye Ioh. 7. 17
shall know the Doctrine: a good understanding have all they that do
thereafter. 5. Prayer, to be continually taught of God, as in the Text, and
Iam. 1. 5. Ask Wisdom of God. 6. Teaching, strengthening, and comforting of
others: this return increases Dum d^ces, di^cis.
thy Talent, as oil in the Cruise increased by imparting.

Add hereunto a fruitful use of the means, prospering and profiting daily in
the Image of God, and conformity with God in true wisdom, holiness, and
righteousness: 2 Cor. 3. 18. We behold i^ a mirror, and are changed from glory
to glory. This is, to be taught by Christ, as the truth is in Christ. To be led
by God in the way of God, is, to get nearer God every day than other. We must
walk in the light, as he is light, and so have ^Iohn 1: 7.
communion with him. To walk in light, is, in regard of God to walk in the
light of his directions: in regard of our selves, to walk in truth and light
of sincerity: in regard of our brethren, to walk in love, as the Apostle John
expresses it; here by the vision of faith, and hereafter by the vision of
fruition. And I will keep it unto the end.


Here is the second part of the II. Of the vow: where.
Text, containing a religious vow or promise of David, in case the Lord will
vouchsafe to teach him.

Where consider,

1. Why he voweth. 2. What he voweth.
For the former: 1. He voweth, (...) Why David thus voweth. 1
to show his resolution, and forwardness to keep the way of God. A maine
help of godliness is to resolve to be godly: and the beginning of goodness
are good purposes and resolutions to be good: which if we find, we must
cherish; and if they fail, renew them.

2. He voweth, to move the 2.
Lord after a sort, to grant his desire, because he desires it for a right end:
if God will make him know his way, he will keep it: so Hanna moved for a son,
which if God vouchsafe to her, she will dedicate him to his service, and God
heard her, 1 Samuel 1. whatsoever we ask of God, it will be an easy suit, if we
resolve to refer it to his glory.

3. To show his thankfulness for the blessing received, as also 3
Hanna did: which cannot better be expressed, then in an obedient and holy
course, which is the tribute and return the Lord expects for all his
goodness received. And actual mercies call for actual thankfulness. 1 These.
5. 17, 18. Pray continually: In all things give thanks.

4. To bind himself more 4
firmly to duty and service: which is not superfluous, though we be tied
already, as Bellarmine De Monac. l 2. 19.
affirms. For as it is contrary to Christian liberty, needlessly to bind our
selves where God has left us free; so in things commanded and necessary,
directly and immediately concerning the worship of God, we may bind our selves
more straightly.

For first, we are bound by the Good vows not superfluous.
law of Creation to serve God: and is therefore the vow and promise of Baptism
superfluous?

Secondly, look to the practice of the Saints. Jacob was bound by Creation,
and by Circumcision, and yet (Genesis 28. 20.) he vowed a vow, that the Lord
should be his God. David here, having made the Covenant in Circumcision,
renewes his uow: and Psa. 119. 106. I have sworn and will perform: that a
threefold cord might not easily be broken.

Thirdly, in the defiance of evil, and strife against the lusts in the members,
resisting the law of God, besides the general bond of Baptism a Christian may
advisedly and profitably lay on himself a particular vow as a remedy and help
against some evil, or a furtherance to some good: As for example: a man
subject to be drunk with wine or strong drink, may vow for a time to abstain
from it, and so cut off an hand or eye offending. One finding the stirring of
concupiscence, may solemnly vow to refrain the company and presence of wanton
women and make a covenant with his Job 31. 1
eyes, as Job, not to look on them. Or finding dullness, slacknesse, or
distractions hindering prayer, reading, or other duty, he may vow to bestow
some time thereupon.

For the latter.

1. In general, David vows 2. What he voweth.
a lawful thing. 2. In special, to keep the way to the end.
In general he vows a thing commanded, and acceptable to God, a thing within
the compass of his calling, and not against Christian liberty. He vows not
perpetual single life: for it is better to marry, than to 1 Cor. 7. (...)
burn. Nor voluntary poverty: for the Commandment is, Let there be no beggar
in Israel, Deu. 15. 4. Nor to go to Rome, or Compostella, to worship an Image,
against the Commandment. Nor to visit the holy land, or kiss the Popes feet;
in all which the calling is laid aside, for idle and impious devices. Nor to
revenge an injury, which is against the Commandment of charity. Nor impiously
not to eat or drink till they have slain Paul, Act. 23. 12. Nor any such
sinful thing: whereof the rule is good, In case of ungodly or dishonest vow,
alter thy In turpi (...) (...) (...). (...)(...) non si (...) vi^cu^um
(...)iquitatis.
purpose. And, a vow must never be the bond of iniquity. David's vow helps
forward Gods worship, and Gods way hinders not. Thus frame thy vows, and it
will be commendable.

In special, he vows to keep the way that God shall teach him. Where are two
things:

1. How he will keep, the way: 2. How long, to the end.
For the former: There is a twofold keeping of the way:

Legal. Evangelicall.
The Legal stands in perfect Keeping o^ Gods way legal and evangelicall.
fulfilling of the law. But holy David was no Papist, nor Perfectist: he knew
he could not thus keep the Law, and much less attain a further perfection,
which were to get beyond Adam in innocence.

The other is Evangelicall, The latter wherein it stands.
which stands 1. in an endeavor and desire of keeping, and is rather in
affection than action: 2. with condition, so far as humane frailty and the
state of this life will permit; in which all things are in part, and imperfect:
3. in imputation of Christ's perfect righteousness, so as the sinner is reputed
a perfect keeper: 4. in condonation of defects and wants, seen and bewailed.
Thus David professes he will keep the way: he will retain a study and
endeavor to keep it; and if by humane weakness he be turned aside, he will be
careful to return into the way again: and because all his endeavor and
strength is nothing, he will by faith fasten upon that perfect obedience of the
Messiah, which being imputed unto him, all his wanderings shall not be imputed,
but he still in Christ accounted a keeper of the way.

But for the latter: how long will David keep the way? eved to the end: else
all labor is lost: the end crowns the work.

But is not this presumption? how can David promise this of Quest.
himself?

1. His vow is dependant on Ans.
grace, as all deliberate vows are. 2. So far as God gives strength, and
confirms his resolution and endeavor. 3. Still with prayer for grace, that he
may keep it, verse. 106. 107. quicken me, etc.
Now shall David, in a duty absolutely necessary to salvation, and ordinary to
all Gods children, vow with condition, so far as God gives grace: and shall a
bold Papist vow an arbitrary vow absolutely, and without all condition, never
consulting with his own imbecility? as suppose that of perpetual chastity,
which is neither absolutely necessary, nor an ordinary gift to all Christians,
nor promised without condition from God. And yet presumptuously will they
promise it to God without all condition, or limitation.

Doctr. The scope and resolution Doct. End of sound knowledge is obedience.
of every godly man in hearing the Word must be, to keep the way of God. In
which similitude is employed, 1. That the whole life of a Christian is a very
pilgrimage on earth: 2. That the Christian Pilgrim, now absent from God, must
be very choice of his way, in which he must come back again unto God. 3. That
seeing the Sun is seen only by his own light, and every man is as a blind
man in the things of God, without all direction in himself, therefore every
one must pray with the Prophet, that the eternal Sun would strike if it be
but one beam of this saving light upon his heart; and by that, he will be
directed to the whole body; with holy resolution, that if the Lord please to
afford him but a small stream out of his fullness, he will follow that riveret
until it bring him to the wellhead.

But why is this the scope of a godly man in learning Gods statutes?

1. Because this is the condition Reasons. 1
of Gods teaching, and his intention in teaching: Deuteronomy 4, 5, 6. These are the
Statutes and Commandments, which I have taught you: keep them, and do them,
for this is your wisdom. And the Lord chearefully teaches him the way, who
with David resolves to keep it: Psalm. 25. 12. What is the man that fears
the Lord? him will he teach the way, that he shall choose.

2. The knowledge of a way 2
will bring none to his end and desired place, but the keeping of the way:
whence the Lord enjoynes a narrow keeping of the narrow way: Prove. 7. 1. My
son, keep my words, hide my Commandments, bind them on thy fingers; that
is, keep them in thy whole practice: nay, keep them as the apple of thine
eye; implying, that as nothing can be so small or slight, but it hurts and
disturbeth the eye, which naturally shuts it self against the least dust, so
not the least erring from the Word but disturbeth in this way. And therefore we
must take up that holy counsel, Prove. 4. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and
let all thy ways be ordered aright.

3. So many as are the Lords, 3
have the guidance of the Spirit, who leads and preserves them in this way:
whence the godly, who are taught of God, are described to be led by the Spirit,
whose office is to lead out of error, Romans 8. 14
into all truth. And from hence is this way called the way Prove. 2. 20.
of good men: because only they have the conduct of the Spirit in it: and it
is unknown, or unfrequented by the wicked.

4. To hold this way, is to improve all our labor, and promote 4.
our own comfort. But all the labor is lost, when the way is lost. Thou can
never so little decline this way, but thou slidest into some one of those many
roads that lead unto destruction. But in keeping this way is great reward,
Psalm. 19. 11. for it leads to God, who is an exceeding great reward. Again,
only this is the way of comfort and pleasure. It has comfort for the present:
whereas straggling Christians have no comfort in the way: a wandering man is an
uncomfortable creature. Also it has comfort hereafter: for it leads to life,
Prove. 7. 2. keep my Commandments, and thoa shall live. It is the way of life,
showed by God, leading to fullness of joy in his presence, and to the pleasures
of his right hand for evermore, Psalm. 16.

Has God then taught thee this way? be conscionable to Use. Keep the way,
^hen once known.
keep it, sin not against the known truth, Psalm. 119. 3. Surely they work
no iniquity that walk in his ways.

Now because Satan and his instruments will make this way as uneasy and
asperous as they can, and assault thee on every hand to turn thee out of this
way, thou must come armed with such means as may help to contain thee in
this good way: as,

1. Resolution to hold it, as Means
here David, J will keep it to the end: sound purposes and resolutions 1.
in godliness promise continuance.

2. Selfe-denial and contempt of the world: for thou must 2
make account, that all who are out of this way, will scorn thee, and reproach
thee for a dissembler, a Puritan, or the like, for thine endeavor to keep the
way. But Gods Spirit never reproached any for walking with God, even
accurately. When Israel goes out of Egypt, they must look for Egyptians to
pursue them: And thou, as a good Soldier, must suffer afflictions, 2 Timothy 2. 3.

3. Zeal and courage for the 3
truth, for God and every good course: arming thy self against the looseness
of the times, and contrary persuasions. If a man walk haltingly in this way,
and make no great bones of tripping or stumbling in it, or appear not precise
above the scantling of a civil, wise, and wary man, he may pass not much
disaffected, and yet in good shows not be altogether allowed. But if he will
be strict in keeping his way, that he will walk with God as Enoch, or set the
Lord still in sight as David, or with the Apostles endeavor to have a good
conscience in all things, and yield to no corruption of times, no not an hoof
at Pharaohs request, no not a grain at the Emperors: oh these men are sit for
another age, and another Climate, not worthy to live in this: Away with such a
fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live, Act. 22 22.

4. Fence thy self with spiritual armor. Israel in their 4
way to Canaan must gird up their loins, and take sta^es in their hands: so
the Christian traveller being set out of Egypt, must gird up his loins with
the girdle of sincerity, faith, love, hope; the staff of the Law and Gospel in
their hands, to establish their feet; their feet shod with preparation of the
Gospel, to go wheresoever the Gospel calls, What man runs into the field
without his weapons and provisions.

Conclude with notes of a Notes of one careful to keep his way. 1 Ier. 6. 16.
man careful to keep his way.

1. He will be very inquisitive, and will ask of the simplest that knows the
way better. Being in the wilderness, he will enquire of the way to Canaan.
The Iaylor asks it of his prisoner, Acts 16. 30.

2. He is circumspect, doubtful, sollicitous, lest he have stepped 2
out of the way. He is easily reduced, if he have erred. He knows it is
easy to wander, but a mad part not to be willing to return: and that he can
only attain his end in this way, and no other.

3. He goes in the day, and walks in the light, and so knows 3
whither he goes; he walks and works while day lasts, afraid to be cast
into the night: Ioh. 12. 35, 36.

4. He suspects every fair 4.
way, for his way is strawed with crosses: and every foul dirty lane; for his
is an holy and clean way: and every cross way, where are many turnings, to
the right or left hand, for his is a right way, without turnings.

5. He follows Christ his guide, and will not walk without 5
him as the heathen; but wisely so fix his eyes on Christ, as that he look
warily both to his own feet, and the end of his way.

6. He will be sure to go with 6.
good company: he joins himself with men fearing God, and Psalm 16. 3
the Saints that excel in virtue, with whose feet this way is beaten. Nay, not
content with these he will get God himself to go with him: as Jacob prayed
the Lord to go with him in his journey: and Moses, Exodus 33. 15. If thy
presence go not with us, carry us not uphence.

7. He goes on constantly, 7
through droughts and drops, through thick and thin, through all estates,
without intermission, as the Sun like a Bridegroom hastneth his course. He
leaps over blocks, pibbles, rubs, oppositions, wrongs, slanders: none can cast
him back, nor turn him out, but with our Prophet he keeps the way, even to
the end.

EPICURISME DESCRIBED, AND DISGRACED.
EXODUS 32. 6. And the people sat down to eat and to drink^, and rose up to
play.


AFter that God had delivered Coherence.
his Laws in the former chapters, here we see how his own people address
themselves to obedience For, w^ile Moses in the (...)ount stays with God to
receive more directions, somewhat longer then they think fit, they fall to
commit most horrible Idolatry: which in the first verse the people propound to
Aaron, make us gods: and verse. 2. Aaron against his conscience yields to it,
setting them in a way to bring their Jewels. Verse. 3. the people contribute to
it, being as ready to bring, as he to desire them. Verse. 4. Of the Jewels an
Idolis made by Aaron, and with the Calfe an Altar set up. Then is an holy day
proclaimed to the Idol, on the morrow after, verse. 5. Afterward the
consummation of their idolatry, verse. 6. the people offered sacrifices before
the golden Calfe. Lastly, in the Text is set down the inseparable adjunct of
Idolatry, namely, excess and idleness, or luxury and wantonness, The people
also sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

At this time consider.

1. Who did this, the people. Parts.
2. When they did sit down to eat and drink. 3. Whether it be a sin to eat
and drink. 4. The use thereof.
For the first of these. Who I.
did this? The people: who had impiously presumed to set up a worship without,
yea, against God. They think much to spend whole forty days without some
ceremony, or public testimony of duty: And they had seen such a worship in
Egypt, wherewith God (of whom they heard nothing) might perhaps be appeased:
and therefore as the Egyptians worshipped their Apis in the form^ of a Bull,
for their tillage sake, so would they worship the Calfe, and afterward Note.
Idolatry ever attended with sloth and luxury.
give themselves to excess and idleness.

Whence note, that feastings and idleness are the undivided companions o^
Idolatry. These people are first Idolaters, from Idolatry they fall to
gluttony, from gluttony to wantonness. Yea, such inseparable attendants they
are, that the Apostle (1 Cor. 10. 7.) proves the Isra(...)es to be Idolaters,
by this testimony, because they sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play.

It appears in heathenish Idolatry: for the Heathens, in all their false and
idolatrous worships, celebrated the honor of their gods with feastings,
banquettings, plays, and dancings. Both the Greeks and Romans used many
filthy sports and actions, in their solemn services. The Romans, to magnify
their heathenish idolatry, instituted their Saturnalia, that is, a feast of
five days, ordained by Ianus in honor of Saturn^, in who^e time all things
were used in common. These five days were kept in December, with great cost in
sumptuous feasts, with variety of sports and games, and presenting of rich
gifts. In these days servants had equal power with their Masters, and
authority to sit at table with them, and have a common command with them. We
read also of the obscene spectacles in the sacrifices, called Floralia, wherein
harlots were brought in naked on the Theater, etc.

But whence comes this? Reasons. 1


1. Because the Heathens would imitate the Jews, who by Gods Commandment must
eat and drink, and feast before Deu. 14. 1^
the Lord in offering their sacrifices; whence both Jews and Gentiles took
occasion of all carnal liberty and excess, and to add what God never
prescribed, as to rise up to play.

2. Because idolatry must be 2.
contrary to the true worship of God, wherein repentance, godly sorrow, and a
contrite heart is most acceptable. Of all creatures an Idolater is most
departed from God, and expresses it in these carnal fruits: so Ambrose,
alleging this Text, ^e^ose luxni committit, nisi qui recedit a praeceptis Dei:
epist. 4. 36.
No man gives up himself to luxury, but he that departs from the
Commandment of God.

3. As the Idolater is furthest gene from God, so God is furthest gone from
him, and leaves 3
him to vilest and foulest lusts, as the heathen, Romans 1. 26. to infinite
bodily uncleanness, the Lord revenging spiritual whoredom with corporal: as
his own Israel, joining with Baal-Pe^r, Number. 25. 1, 2.
not only committed spiritual fornication, in bowing to their gods, but
defiled their bodies with the daughters of Moab.

4. Our nature is most propense 4.
and ready to pleasure and carnal delight: so as we willingly annexe unto
Gods worship, whatsoever pleases us, that under that cover or pretense we may
more freely enjoy it.

The counsel then of the Apostle, Use.
upon this ground, is not unseasonable, 1 Cor. 10. 7. Be not idolaters, as they
were. Hard it is for us to sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play, but
we must make our belly our god, and offer sacrifices to it, as the Romans did
to Bacchus in their Bacchanalia.

Object. But we are the people of God, and baptized in the name of Christ:
there is no fear we should be Idolaters.

Ans. The Jews were Gods people, yet set up the golden Calfe. The Corinthians
were Christians, converted, and baptized into the name of Christ, and yet they
must beware of the sin of the Jews. And if we be Christians, we must avoid
not only the Calfe it self, but even the shows and appearance; excessive
feasts and wantonness, which are inseparable fruits of it: and think how
easy it is, to be found in the skirts of this sin: which is the use the
Apostle makes of this allegation, 1 Cor. 10. 7.

For the second general. II. The sin aggravuted by circumstance


When did this people sit down to eat, and rise up to play?

Answ. Even when their case was most miserable, then were they most insensible:
for,

1. They had robbed themselves, and made themselves 1
poor, in that the eare-rings and jewels which God had given them from the
Egyptians, they bestow upon an idol.

2. They had committed an horrible sin, aggravated sundry 2.
ways. They had turned the glory of an incorruptible God into the similitude
of a Calfe that eats hay. They that had opened their mouths a little before
in singing praises to God for their deliverance out of the Sea, and for the
destruction of the enemies, with the same mouth sing now to their Idols, These
are thy gods, O Israel, that brought thee out of Egypt. They had used their
feet, not many days or weeks before, to walk through the Red Sea by a
miracle, and now with the same feet they dance before the Calfe. Thus was their
sin great.

3. For this fearful sin they 3
lie under an heavy punishment: they were now naked, and God was coming to
revenge upon them: and after he was entreated, at the instance of Moses, to
spare them, yet for example 3000. of them were presently slain the same day.
They had more need have been fasting, and praying, and weeping for their
sin: but now they sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play.

Observe this: Never are men nearer mischief, then when they Note. Secure in
sin, nearest to mischief
are most jolly and m^rry in their sins. Commonly when men cry peace, peace,
then is peace furthest off: and God comes on the wicked, when they look least
for him, as David on the Amalekites (1 Samuel 30. 16.) when they were drinking
and dancing, and most secure. We in this land specially, if we would Use.
enquire what causes of mourning we have, should find small cause of sitting
down to eat and drink, and of rising up to play.

1. If we behold the inundation of sin, the increase of sins against God
and the light of the Gospel, horrible Idolatry, excess of pride and
wantonness, a deluge of drunkenness, a confusion of manifold disorders, etc.

2. Our security in the midst of judgments: the sword has fed upon us, and
we have forgotten it: the plague has destroyed thousands of us, and threatens
still, hovers about us, Preached ann dom. 16^0.
and shows his Commission to be still in force: and other warnings serve not:
we are corrected, but not instructed: We eat, and drink, and play, as those
that remember not what reckoning is behind for all these things.

3. Would every man seriously look over his own accounts he might find
himself other business, then sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play.

But is it not lawful to eat and drink? III. Use of creatures most lawful,
and how.


Yes, it is not lawful only, but necessary to nourish our life, to repair
strength decayed, and enable us to our duties and callings. Nay, more: we may
use the creatures, not only for necessity, but for delight: God has given us
leave, liberally to use his mercies, and furnished us with variety, far
beyond necessity: he has not given Psa. 104 15
bread only, to strengthen the heart, but oil to make the face shine. And he
has allowed us to feast together, and to invite one another, for the
maintaining of Christian love, and cherishing of mutual fellowship: as in the
case of Jobs sons, which was not unlawful, though their feasting ended so
fearfully: and the Primitive Churches had their Agapas, or love feasts,
mentioned and approved, Acts 2. 46.

Quest. What then did this people other?

Answ. They failed in many How the Israelites ^ff^nded herein. 1
things:

1. Whereas the chief end of eating and drinking, is, to glorify God, 1 Cor.
10. 31. the end o^ this eating and drinking was, to dishonor God, and honor
the Calfe.

2. Whereas eating and drinking 2.
should sit us to our duties and callings, both general and special, they by
eating and drinking made themselves fit for nothing but play and wantonness.

3. Whereas men ought to 3
eat and drink according to the call of nature, in sobriety and moderation,
the Text notes an intemperate and excessive wast both of time and creatures;
they sat down to it, addicting themselves to the creature, and nothing else.

4. Whereas feastings are seasonable in times of joy and 4
gladness, these feast in a time when Gods judgments are coming on them for
their sin, and so the deepest sorrow would better beseem them: as also did
they in Noah's time, They ate and drank, etc. and Esa. 5. Luke 17. 17
12. not considering the work of God.

Now these are types to us Use.
(says the Apostle) that is, common examples for our instruction, 1 Cor. 10. 6
to beware of immodest, intemperate, and sinful eating and drinking, that it
may not be said of us, as of them, The people sat down to eat and drink.

Hereunto must sundry rules Rules to ^e observed in eating and drinking 1
be observed:

1. We must eat and drink our own: the sweat of our own brows, not other
men's, as many that cut large shives into other men's loaves; I mean, that which
they know is not theirs, but other men's, if all debts were paid: this were an
high kind of injustice, condemned, 2 These. 3. 12. Yea, we must so eat and
drink, that we allow some part for the poor, and other occasions, public or
private.

2. For measure, it must be 2
according to the call of nature, or of honest and moderate delight, to keep
us in a fitness to godly duties, of hearing, and the rest. All that eating or
drinking, by which we make our selves heavy, sleepy, unweldy, and unfit for
duties, is sinful. For this is not a refreshing, but oppressing; not a
refection, but a destruction of nature.

3. For season, it must be so, that we eat not up too much 3
time, which would hinder our callings: but rather redeem time, Ephesians. 5. 16.
A sin it is, to sit down to feasting, and not feel the passage of three or
four hours; whereas perhaps one hour is tedious to sit out a Sermon.

4. We must eat with moderation 4.
of affection; not to fit at it, as men that have nothing else to do; nor
suffering our selves to be brought under the power of the creature, as those
that cannot be without the pot or pipe, corrupting themselves with the
creatures, oftentimes losing sobriety, modesty, chastity, health and reason it
self; thereby utterly perverting Gods Ordinance, who has ordained them for
servants and helps, not masters and hindrances.

5. The best appetite is, to taste the sweetness and goodness 5
of God himself in his creatures: saying within our selves, O Lord, how sweet
and good art thou in thy self, who can put such sweetness into thy
creatures!

6. The best Sawee is good and 6. Col. 4, 6
savoury speech, as salt on our tables: acknowledging Gods bounty and
goodness, both to praise him, and edify others: whereas commonly our barren
and empty hearts know not how to wear out the time of feasting, but either in
trifles, or inviting others to eat and drink, who need in truth rather bridles
then spurs.

What? no other speech but Quest.
of Scripture? how then shall we be merry?

Indeed commonly all speech Ans.
but carnal is unsavory: but first, we must eat and drink before the Lord,
and our speeches must be such asbeseeme his presence, and may be approved of
God that hears them. Secondly, all speeches of Christians ought to be better
then silence, and to savor of ^obriety, wisdom, and grace in the heart: for,
whom call we to our tables, but Gods children by profession, who must every
where be like themselves and their Father? Thirdly, God has given us leave to
be merry, but with this only restraint, Be merry in the Lord, and not against
him. Psalm. 32. 10.
Never must God be set out of sight, in our merriments: as do they, who never
think they can be merry, but in rude and ungodly behavior, and wanton naughty
speeches, unbeseeming Christians. Plato and Xenophon thought it profitable,
that men's speeches at their meals might be written. If Christians should do
so, what kind of books would they be?

7. In eating and drinking we must season our hearts with 7 Meditations in
eating and drinking. 1 Chap. 1. 6.
these or the like meditations:

1. How prone we are to immoderate joy, and so provoke God in our feasts. Job
suspected his sons, being in likelihood good men, and sent to them to
sanctify themselves, and himself sacrificed for every one of them all.

2. Watch against incitements 2.
which we shall not want to forget our selves, and arm against them. We read
of Antigonus, that being invited to a feast where a notable harlot was to be
present, he asked counsel of Menedemus, what he should do? who bade him
only remember, that he was a Kings son. So good men may be invited, where
none of the best may meet: the best counsel is, Keep ever in mind that you
are Kings sons, Gods children, and a base thing it were for such to be
allured by the wicked to things unseemely.

3. Mingle our feasting with a meditation of our end and 3
mortality. Joseph had his tomb in his garden, to season his delights with
meditation of his death: The Egyptians had a Skeleton or carcass brought into
their feasts, for the same purpose. So set thou thine own carcass before the
eye of thy mind, and it will moderate thee from pampering it: alas (say thou)
this feeding and feasting is but a little repair of a ruinous house, that must
down shortly.

4. Consider how many of Gods servants want some part 4.
of thy superfluity, and how many of them never sat down at such a table:
then follow the meditation, Who am I that I should be full, when so many are
hungry? that I should abound when so many do want? how am I engaged to God for
thankfulness? how should I sin to requite his love and bounty with such
unkindnesse, as by it to grow wanton, idle, forgetful of him most when he is
most mindful of me? must I eat and drink, to rise up to play? Oh no, I must
bestirre me in duties, in which I may express love for love: neither may I
sin as those great men, Amos 6. 6. who ate the fat, drank the sweet, and had
wine in bowls, and forgate the afflictions of Joseph: no, if I eat the fat,
and drink the sweet, I must remember to send some part to them, for whom none
is prepared, Nehem. 8. 10.

This of the peoples eating and drinking.

Now of those words, And rose up to play.

This being a practice condemned Sports and recreations, lawful and how.
in this people, it will be a question, Whether it be not lawful to sport, or
play? To which I answer: it is lawful: as in the former branch, not eating and
drinking were condemned, but their sitting down to eat and drink: so in this
latter not all play and sport is taxed, but their rising up to play: for,

1. There is a time to laugh, Eccles 3. 4. but this time, when 1.
they lay under the curse of God, and danger of sin, was not it.

2. We are commanded to 2 Phil. 4. 4
rejoice, yet in the Lord, not against him. But these were laughing, and
singing, and dancing about the Calfe, in honor of their Idol.

3. Recreation is Gods Ordinance for the necessary refreshing 3.
of body or mind, or both; and the sitting of either or both to the calling.
But these rose up to play, thrust themselves out of their callings, and did
nothing but eat and drink to play; as many turn their recreations into
vocations, and intend nothing else.

4. The Scriptures allow, both 4.
exercises of body, as the use of the bow, 2 Samuel 1. 18. and of music, Neh.
7. 67. and of hunting, hawking, or birding, so that such sports be without
swearing, disorder, and needless tormenting of the silly creatures: As also
exercises of the mind and wit, suppose honest riddles (Judge. 14.) and such
games, as the ground of which is wit or skill, Chesse, Draughts, and the like.
And far are we from disallowing any delight, which Gods Word allows his
children. And as far be it from any Christian, not to be governed or bounded
by Gods word in every thing.

But note here: though play and recreation be lawful, yet Note. In sports is
much sin.
much play as we so call, is sinful: and much sin lies oftentimes in plays
and sports, lawful in themselves, as our Text gives instance. And I think the
rule will prove generally true, that Christians do more multiply their sins
in abuse of things lawful, then in adventuring on things unlawful; and faster
do they rivet themselves in those sins which lie in lawful things, then in
such as are easily convinced to be unlawful. An hard task it is for a Teacher
to win Christians by profession, either from wicked practices if they please
to call them play, oh meddle not with mine eyes! or from the usual sins
attending such recreations, as in the substance of them are not unlawful: In
both, resembling Salomons madman, that casts darts and firebrands, and
says, Am I not in sport?

But a wise and teachable Christian will confine himself to Gods allowance,
and neither in jest catch at any forbidden fruit, be it never so pleasant in it
self, or strongly persuaded; nor in the use of allowed delights, strain
beyond the bounds and limits of the Word; nor complain of us as injurious,
when we disallow in men nothing, but what God himself in the Scriptures
restrains them in.

And if we will be ruled by God in our sports and rejoycings, we must listen to
his directions, 1. in the choice, 2. in the use of our play.

First, our choice must be of sports in themselves lawful. 1 Choice is to be
made of sports.
We may not play with holy things, suppose Scripture-phrases: we must fear
the holy name of Iehova, not play with it: nor with oaths, our own or others:
nor with lots, which are a part of the Name of God, yea more solemn then any
oath, and must not be vainly used, or for recreation. Neither on the other side
may we play with sin, or things evil in themselves, viz. to make one drunk
or swear, or to laugh at such persons: it is a matter of sorrow, to see Gods
Image so defaced, his honorable name so disgraced; and David's eyes will gush
out with rivers of tears Ps 119. 136
for such sins. So in other sinful merriments.

Or if we have not warrant for them, by general rules of the Word: if the
laws of the land prohibit them, as unlawful: if honest heathens have on good
ground condemned them: if the Fathers and judicious Divines have blotted and
disgraced them, etc. Here pause on that rule, Phil. 48.

And Christian wisdom will also guide us to the choice of the best spots. A
spiritual mind will choose spiritual recreations, as a carnal mind will use
carnal. And although there be time and place for bodily, yet a wise Christian
must in the highest room set heavenly delights, vi^. comforts of the Spirit,
joy in God and his Word, walking in the garden of Christ, where is most sweet
and ravishing delight, in hearing, reading, meditating, holy conference, and in
gathering and smelling the sweetest flowers of knowledge, faith, love, hope,
holiness. Here is a profitable, and a lasting delight. And here is a trial of
the constitution of thy soul: the soul that more contents it self with
carnal delights, then these, is of a carnal constitution, if it be so
constantly.

Secondly, when we have chosen warrantable sports, we must 2. Use lawful,
lawfully.
beware we sin not in the use of them. And to keep us from sin in our
recreations, we must look to our neighbor, to our selves.

1. For our neighbor, the rule of wisdom to be observed, is, we must wisely
sort our selves 1
in our sports, with the most sober, godly, and wise of our degree, condition,
and sort of life, that may rather watch over us, that we offend not in them,
then any way draw and provoke us so to do. No pestilentiall air so
contagious, as where swearers and riotous gamesters are met. And as thy company
is, which thou chusest and usest, so art thou.

2. We must look carefully 2 Our selves how to be ordered in sports.
to our selves.

First, for our affection; that it be moderate. We may use lawful sports, but
not love them. He that loves pastime, 1.
shall be a poor man, says Solomon, Prove. 21. 17. And the Apostle commands
Christians to rejoice as not rejoicing, 1 Cor. 7. 30. that is, to be so
moderate and retired in our joys, as not overvalue them, nor set affections
on them, as having greater things to do. Moderation will observe due
circumstances: it suffers not a man to be given over to sport, nor to sit up
night and day, and turn days into nights, and nights into days, as
intemperate and riotous gamesters do: nor will it let the duties of general
or special calling lie aside for days and weeks together; because the least
commanded thing is better than the best that is indifferent, and sports were
not ordained to hinder our callings, but to fit us for them, as whetting a
sithe to forward the mower; but if a mower shall do nothing but whet, whet,
for a whole day together, we would say he is mad, etc.

Secondly, for our ends. Our 2
ends must not be, to pass the time, which passes whether we will or no, and
we ought to redeem our time, and not let it pass without gaining something Ephesians
5. 16
better than it self. Nor yet to maintain idleness, as men that cannot tell
what to do with themselves else, which is no better then idleness; for
idleness is not only not-working, but a doing of trifles, and that which we
dare not bring to God in accounts. And is not the case pitiful, that
Christians having so much good work to do, and so many means, and so many
calls, and so little time, should find nothing so necessary as cards and dice?

Again, the end of sport is preservation of our health, both of soul and
body, and not to impair the health of either; as many by watching at play, and
forgetting or forgoing their diet and rest for play, destroy their health, and
call in numbers of disease ^^on themselves, and oftentimes untimely death.

Lastly, seeing nothing can be lawful, wherein some glory accrewes not to God,
therefore if the end of our sports be not to enable us with cheerfulness in
duties of Religion and Christianity, it will all be returned as sin in our
reckoning. Thus of the ends.

Thirdly, we must guide our selves in our sports by remembering 3 Rules for our
sports
these rules:

1. That we may not recreate the outward man, but to better the inward: for
Gods wisdom has subordinated all inferior things to the furtherance of the
best things; the seeking of all other things (even necessaries, much more
indifferent) to the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness. And he wills, that
all Mat. 6. 33.
earthly joy^^ help forward our spiritual joy, in God and his Christ, and the
eternal joys of Kingdom. But when they will step in competition with these,
they are to be snibb'd, and cast out. Never must our chief joy be abated for
these: nor our chief affections unsettled of that fullness of joy at Gods right
hand for evermore.

2. Remember we have a spiritual 2.
course and race to run, and beware we clogge not, nor oppress our selves
with pleasures Luke 21. 34
that instead of speeding us in our way they become the Devils birdlime to
entangle us; in which while we flutter, we are not able to mount aloft in
heavenly meditations, but having escaped we are as long in unlyming and setting
our hearts, as would have done the duty.

3. What ever we win 3 What may not be l^st in play. 1.
or lose, we must watch heedfully.

First, that we lose not our patience, meekness, and love to our companions;
as they that scorn, and quarrel, and storm, and rage like heathens, against
luck, and chance, and fortune; yea, swear and curse, if never so little
crossed, as they that never heard of Religion.

Secondly, we may not lose 2
our goods, nor waste our substance, nor play away more then without any doubt
or scruple of conscience we may bestow on honest delights; the necessary
maintenance of other things, and contributions to the Church and poor, first
liberally provided for.

Thirdly, we may not lose our 3
good name, which is a precious thing; nor run into the infamy, to be
accounted dicers, gamesters, idle persons, or companions with them; nor by
rude, scurvilous, or obscene words or actions get a brand of a rude and
disordered mate. This they justly win, that lose their mastery, and are at
the command of play.

Now certainly in this Use alone must all recreations become good and
comfortable, though corrupt nature cannot brook to be so confined. But to
those that are ready to object the use and custom of the world, the Apostle
answers, Romans 12. 2. Fashion not your selves according to this world, but
prove what is the good and acceptable will of God. And if any say, Oh but
others are of another practice, that know more then you; I say, if they know
not the truth of Doctrine, now backed by the authority of Scripture, they know
not so much as I, and whosoever walk not by Gods rules, sin against their
own souls. And sanctified hearts will inure themselves to heavenly joys, and
prefer them above carnal; and little affect those, which loose persons so
much, and so dangerously deat upon.

THE ABUSE OF CREATVRES, VNLAWFVLL.
1 COR. 15. 32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.


WHich words contain an argument to prove the resurrection, taken from an
absurdity that would follow upon the denial; viz. If therebe no resurrection,
then let us turn absolute Atheists and Epicures, and do as they say, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

Certainly it is not unlawful to eat and drink, to play, to Only the abuse
of creatures is unlawful.
recreate our selves with sport, pastime, and music, or to enjoy the natural
and civil comforts and blessings of God in this life.

For God has ordained, not bread only to strengthen the heart of man, but
wine to make his heart glad, and oil to make his face shine, Psalm. 104. 15.
things as well of pleasure as necessity, things comfortable as well as
profitable; both to make known his own bounty and large grace, and to
encourage his servants in cheerful obedience.

As for matter these outward delights are the good gifts of God, so likewise
are they necessary and wholesome for our selves, to fit us both to the
cheerful service of God, and to the performance of duties in the special
calling, which are painful and would be todious, if we were not cheared and
strengthened with such batts and refreshings in the way. For such is our
frailty here, that both our minds would grow dull and sluggish, and our bodies
be tired out, if they stood always bent. And therefore a man's life without
pleasures and delights is like a long journey without Innes, in which is all
travel, little or no comfort, or refreshing

So that, not the use of these As in Heathens and Epicures.
things is here condemned, but the abuse only, when Christians use them
unchristianly, rather like Heathens, Atheists, and Epicures, then Christians.
As thus:

First, the Heathens and Atheists abused those things, for Four ways, 1
that their persons were unclean: Tit. 1 15. To the impure and unbeleeving is
nothing pure. And if thy person be not in Christ, reconciled, and by faith
justified, thou can have no true pleasure in any thing: all true joy being an
effect of peace with God, Romans 5. 3. Thou that art in thy sins, impenitent,
lie under the curse of God, and guilt of sin, have indeed another business
in hand than to follow thy pleasure: thou art like a condemned prisoner going
on to execution: a man would think he had other business to do, then to stay
by the way to eat and drink and make merry, to play at cards, dice, and the
like. The Psalmist says, Rejoice ye righteous: but thou that Psalm. 32. 11
art a wicked man, a profane, carnal, and careless wretch, have no call nor
right to rejoice, but rather drown thy self (if it were possible) in the
tears of sad and timely repentance. 2


Secondly, the Heathens and Epicures missed in the matter of their pleasures,
in that they understood only that to be pleasure, which was sensual, to be
seen, heard, tasted, touched, or the like. And whatsoever delighted their
senses, that they swallowed as a warrantable pleasure. So the young Atheist is
said to walk in the ways of his heart, and in the sight of his eyes, Eccles.
11. 9. And Solomon, when he would try the life of an Epicure, says (Chap. 2.
10.) Whatsoever mine eyes desired, I with held it not from them, I withdrew
not mine heart from any joy. Even so, when thou carest not (in comparison) for
any higher joys, than those that run into thy senses, what art thou but a
Christian Atheist? And when instead of natural, honest, and civil pleasures,
thou layest hold upon carnal and worldly delights, as surfeiting and
drankennesse, chambering and wantonness, lust and uncleanness; unlawful
sports and recreations, which thou can not warrant by Gods word, and because
they please the sense and carnal mind, though by Gods rules and in themselves
they be hateful and to be abhorred, yet still thou followest them; what art thou
all this while but an heathenish or brutish Christian?

Thirdly, the Heathens and Epicures 3
failed, in that they overprized their pleasures, making their belly their god,
esteeming voluptuousnes the chief good, as men that knew nothing better then
the pleasures of this life. And as they over-valued them in their judgment, so
also they immoderately affected them, and excessively used them.

So suppose thou layest hold only on lawful and warrantable pleasures, but
set them up above their hlace, as judging them more fit to spend time upon,
then upon Christian exercises, as reading, praying, meditating; or more worthy
then the duties of the calling, all which are necessary, and absolutely good,
but these at the best are but indifferently good, good as they are used,
changeably good, and in no high degree of goodness: What difference is there
between thee and an Atheist, or Epicure? but this: thy sin is far greater
then his: he might see his sin if he were taught better: but thou art taught
better, and sinnest against thy knowledge.

Now when did thou cast off thy calling by days or weeks together for
religious exercises, as thou do yearly for pleasures? How unreasonable a
motion were it, to call men to a fast of 12. days together? when could we
persuade men to it? And yet they will tell you, they love religion better then
their pleasure. But believe them who knows not, that the thing a man most
loves, he will employ most time to enjoy.

Fourthly, the Epicures failed, in that all their pleasures were 4.
severed from religion: they chased away thoughts of God: they denied the
resurrection, and believed no judgment to come. They thought this was the
only life, and therefore the best religion was to eat, and drink, and play,
and be merry; to fill the skin with present delights, and power out themselves
upon pleasures, while they could enjoy them: for after death they looked for no
more pleasure, or being, then the brute beasts themselves.

So if thou can then please thy self, when God is set out of sight, and out
of mind: in thy delights, thoughts and speeches of God are unsavory: thou art
so exercised, as thou would not have God to behold thee, or Christ to come to
thee: thou do in thy eating, drinking, and gaming so run inao excesses of
furfetting and drunkenness, of swearing, coveting, wrath and reviling, and so
layest the raynes in thy own neck, as no bridle of humanity, and much less
religion rules thee: Wherein do thou differ from an heathenish Atheist,
whose pleasures are as irreligions, and as unfavoury as his? only more
hateful then his, in that thou know there is another life and reckoning, he
does not.

Quest. How then may a Rules of right using natural comforts. 1. Religiously.
Christian rightly use these good things?

Answ. 1. If he use them religiously. Religion must always bind him to the
good behavior, even when he lets himself loose to pleasures. Now the
religious use of pleasures is in three respects: When we use them lawfully, by
warrant from God, and are sure we taste no forbidden fruit, no unlawful game.
When we use them in the presence of God, as the Israelites Exo. 24. 11
are said to eat and drink before the Lord: still setting God at our right
hand, and our selves in his sight. And when we use them as those that mean to
make account of them to God, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice oh young man, and let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth: but know, that for all these
things thou must come to judgment.

2. If he use them soberly 2. Soberly
and weignedly: and that, both in respect of affection, measure, and time.

For affection: why should reasonable men affect such delights, 1
as the natural brute beasts enjoy more freely then man, and which are cast in
common to good and bad, and the worst men enjoy most? If grace should not carry
a Christians mind to better delights, yet reason at least should lift him
higher, as he is but a man.

Why should Christians affect those delights, which they know not whether they
shall taste of, or no; or whether they will lodge with him all night? as that
Epicure, Luke 12. 20. Thou have enough, soul, for many years, eat, drink,
and take thy pleasure: but that night was his soul required of him.

Why should a Christian affect those things as pleasures, which being ended
leave nothing behind them? Of other exercises beside eating, drinking and
gaming, some fruit remains after them, whether in our general calling, or
special. But of these no fruit remains behind them, but some sighs or pangs
of conscience for wasting that time, that ought to have been better improved
and employed: which has marred all the play.

These are things to be used, but not affected; as it were not used.

As in affection, so in measure, Christians must use them all soberly. 2


1. Because God so orders his children, that in this life they shall rather
taste of these delights, then feed on them: and he commonly scants them in
these, that they may have a larger appetite to, and measure in better delights.

2. The abstemious use is better then free fruition, both for body and soul.

3. They generally never grow in greatness, but they remit so much of their
goodness. See in Solomon himself, when he would addict himself to pleasures
and wine, how his wisdom was abated, and grace ecclipsed; how he grew into
prodigious lusts, to get him 700. wives, and 300. concubines, 1 King. 15. 3.
And therefore of voluptuous persons, that will hold up their hearts with
laughter, and immoderately follow these outward delights, we may say they are
mad men, and out of their minds, as Solomon by woeful experience said of
laughter, Thou art madness, Eccles. 2. 1, 2.

Time also must be considered, 3
if we will use these delights soberly. There is an appointed time for
laughter, and for weeping: Eccles. 3. 4. There are times of fasting, and times
of feasting. The rich Glutton was convicted of intemperance that he went in
purple, and fared deliciously every day. He Luke 16. 19
did not distinguish of times, as holy sobriety would have taught him. And so
it teaches us: Times unseasonable for sports. 1


1. That the time of Gods worship is not time for unnecessary pleasures;
because there is a better delight enjoined.

2. That working-dayes are 2
neither wholly nor principally the days of pleasure and delight: not being
appointed for recreation, but occupation and the calling. You must either prove
your gaming an occupation, or lay it aside and fall to your vocations; or else
go on (as many of you do) to play away your days and lives, in despite of
Gods Words and servants.

3. That days of sorrow and humiliation are on times to addict 3
our selves to natural and civil delights.

For our particular estates. Are we obnoxious to so many miseries, loaded with
so many sins, beset with so many enemies, and yet even now set upon a merry
pin? Certainly now to be given to pleasures, differs Preached at Reding, in
December, 1621.
not much from madness. Is our Town so afflicted, our poor so destitute, and
yet we still feed up our hearts with merriments and pastimes? It were gross
senslesnesse.

For the public estate. Is the Church of God in distress? do the enemies
break down the carved work of the Sanctuary? is the Ark of God and my Lord
Ioab in the fields? good Vriah cannot now go home, and take his lawful
delights, though the King command him so to do. All evils, at home and abroad,
are so many trumpets blown by the Lord for our humiliation. And if now, when
he lowdly calls us to mourning, weeping, baldness and sacke-cloth, yet still
there be joy and gladness, staying of Oxen, killing of sheep, eating of
flesh, and drinking of wine, what follows? Surely this iniquity shall not be
purged from us till we dye, says the Lord of hosts, Esa. 22. 12, 13, 14.

And lastly, whole nights or days together were unseasonable 4
times for delights. It would impair the health of the body. And no man will
do so much for the health of his soul.

Thus of sobriety in the use of outward delights.

3. We must use them wisely 3. Watchfully.
and watchfully: and that in three respects:

First, carefully watching against 1
Satan's subtilties, who most usually lays his nets to catch us with these
baits. He well knows, that in nothing we are more prone to unbridle our
affections, then in these liberties. The Serpent lies in the green grass.
And this Serpent laid his temptation in the fair apple, and Eves appetite. And
if once we moyle our selves in this birdlime of Satan, we are as unable to
mount upward in divine meditations, as a Bird taken by the twigs, which the
more she strives, the surer she is. Satan catches more by lawful liberties,
than by unlawful.

Secondly, we must carefully 2
watch our own corruptions; who can easily oppress our selves by surfeiting
and drunkenness, and that day come on us unawares; and pervert good things to
bad ends. Now the Right ends of our liberberties. 1
right ends in the use of all our lawful liberties, are, 1. To be matter of
Gods praise, for his bounty and mercies toward us: 2. To set us forward in our
Christian race, and sit us to the 2
duties of piety. Take heed of all that eating, drinking, and playing, which
unfits thee for Gods service, etc. 3. To refresh 3
us, and sweeten our labor, when body or mind is likely to be oppressed with
study or labor. But to pursue pastimes too eagerly is utterly unlawful; or
when they that need least, play most, and instead of surfeit of labor, surfeit
of idleness, eating, drinking, and pastime. 4. To put us in mind of those
lasting, eternal, 4.
and unconceiveable pleasures, reserved at the right hand of God for us. For,
if the pleasures of our prison be so sweet, what are those in our palace? and,
if they be superexcellent, wisdom will make us watchful that we hinder not
our selves from those by these.

Lastly, we must watch carefully 3
against evil companies, drunkards, and gamesters, who are principal factors
for the devil. For being overtaken themselves, they never cease to make others
the children of hell like themselves, and rejoice in evil. Take heed of
drinkards, a kind of divellish poysoners, who have skill to poison both soul
and body together. It is Saint Ambrose his Vina praetendis, venena suffaudis:
mayor vis vini quam veneni: ven^^o caro vulneratur, vin^ men's. De Elia* and
jejunio, c. 14.
comparison; Thou pretendest to reach forth wine, but withal thou ming lest
poison: greater is the force of wine, then of poison: with poison the body is
wounded, with wine the soul it self.

Avoid therefore, and abhor them. And choose such companions as may by godly
admonition restrain thee, and lay a bridle on thy corruption, not spur or
provoke thee, be they never so near or dear unto thee.

THE PHYSICIAN Of SOVLES.
LVK. 5. 31. The whole need not the Physician, but those that are sick.


CHrist is bidden to Levies Connection.
house: he is ready to come, where he is kindly invited. The Pharisees carpe at
his person, and his fact: he eats with sinners: like to like, say they; were
he not a sinner, he could not sort and suit with sinners.

See the disposition of an hypocritical Note 1. Christ never is pleasing to
the wicked.
enemy of Christ. Neither the Doctrine of Christ can please him, verse. 21. Who
is this that blasphemeth? can any forgive sins but God? nor his life here.
And both are still quarrelled at, in his servants and Ministers.

Yet dare they not come openly before Christ's face, whom Note 2. Grace and
innocence traduced in secret
they knew able to defend himself; but whisper behind his back, to his
Disciples: either because they suppose them not to be so ready to answer them,
or to bring them into suspicion of Christ, of whom they conceived reverently.
And thus do hypocrites spitefully at this day: they dare not openly assault
Christ and his servants (for they know they can defend themselves:) but shoot
arrows in secret against their Doctrine and practices, to wound them in their
names, estates, or persons. For all wicked men are led by one spirit against
Christ.

But mark: they want no fair pretenses. What? a man Note 3. Pretenses ever
ready against good men,
professing such strictness and holiness, to eat, and drink, and be familiar
with finnes? may not a man by a man's company know who and what he is? A
plausible reason, and true in the general, but maliciously and falsely applied
to this particular. So wicked men have their pretenses plausible enough: Oh
they stand for the Church, for holiness, for Gods service, and piety, for
order, for charity; when all that while they intend mischief against Christ
and his Ordinances.

Mark again: If they cannot accuse him of evil, they can Note 4. Godly
accusedd f^^ well d^ing at least.
for well-doing; as here, for exercising his calling: sometimes for casting out
devils: sometimes for working miracles on the Sabbath day, as a man without
conscience of the Sabbath. And indeed, what are the most accusations of enemies
against Gods servants, but for the performance of their duty, and exercise of
their calling, either general or particular.

Lastly, these men had learning, Note 5. (...) wicked men all good is turned a
against good.
gifts, authority, wealth, the key of knowledge; but all bent against Christ,
and his Gospel, and Religion, and grace. So wicked men: look whatsoever
means, wealth, authority, or place they have, all is bent against Christ and
grace, and religion must-looke for no help there, but hinderance and
resistance.

Now Christ in this verse answers Christ answers still for his.
the challenge. The question was not propounded to him, but to his Disciples:
yet he takes on him to answer for them: where he shows his readiness to take
all our causes on himself: Oh we serve a good Lord, who is able and willing to
stop the mouth of Satan, hell, the law, and all Calumniators, who call in
question our righteousness, and will in the last day much more acquit us of
all accusations, and make our innocence shine as at noonday. Fear not
accusers: it is God Rom 8 33
that justifies. If the Disciples cannot answer for themselves, Christ can and
will.

In this answer,

1. He blames them of hypocrisy, Parts of our Saviors answer.
who thought themselves so just, as that all other were sinners beside
themselves: 1
the whole need not the Physician.

2. He defends himself and 2
his fact by a proverbiall speech, The sick need the Physician: viz. I came
not amongst sinners, to boulster them up in their sins, but to help them out
and heal them. It is my calling, being the Physician of souls, to be among
sinners. Where should the Physician be, but amongst his Patients?

Thus our Lord by his answer, if he can do them no good, yet does good to the
truth, confirms his Disciples, justifies himself, convineeth his enemies:
Which by Gods overruling power is the end of all In the end truth (...)s by
opposition.
opposition of the truth, which in the conclusion must be no loser, but a
gainer and conqueror.

The Text has three parts: Parts of the Text
1 the Patients: 2. the Physician: 3. the Cure.

The Patients are propounded 1 Patients


Negatively: not the whole.

Affirmatively: but the sick.

Quest. Is any man whole?

Answ. 1. No man is whole by nature: in Adam all are Who are whole, and how. 1
deadly sick. No man does good, no not one. God has concluded all dead in
sin. Only some are healed by grace, as Simeon, Joseph, Hanna, Zachary, and
the like.

2. Some are whole in conceit 2
only, and think themselves found, just, and holy enough: as did these
Scribes and Pharisees, who needed no Physician: they no more saw their need of a
Physician, then they saw their sickness. And the there be many whole men in
the world, and almost al men are generally whole in these days. Hos. 7. 9.
Ephraim saw not his gray hairs, nor the consumption of his strength. Revel. 3.
^7 Laodicea says, she is rich, and needs nothing. The Pharisie blesses God he
is not as others: Luke 1^. 11
he sees in himself no hypocrisy, nor pride, nor contempt of others: he is a
whole man.

Many a civil man lives honestly: Civility makes men think themselves ^^^le.
he does no man harm: he is beloved of his neighbors: he keeps the
Commandments as well as God will give him leave. This man's case (in his own
conceit) is sound and good, and he hopes he shall live in his righteousness.

And in thousands, presumption And presump ion.
is as a chain to the neck; who tell us they love God with all their hearts,
have a strong says, never had any doubt they thank God, no not so much as any
grudgings of unbeleefe, and it were pity he should live that doubts of his
salvation. These are sound men and whole: but, as they never believed, so they
never bewailed their infidelity, never groaned under the burden of their
sins, are enemies to God, to his Word, to all righteousness; worldlings,
oppressors, deceivers, swearers, cursors, otherwise abominable; yet still found
and whole men, in their own conceit.

And another cause of conceited And the extenuating of sin
soundness, is, the extenuaation of sin. Some qualmes and grudgings they
have: and all men are sinners, and crazy: but themselves are no great sinners,
or no greater then other men. Thus they mince and lessen their sins. They are
not sick enough to seek out to the Physician: they have ease enough yet, if
it would hold without Christ.

Now see the miserable and Use 1. Whole men, in most danger.
damnable estate of these men.

First, they are eaten up with griping diseases, and deadly pangs, and yet
feel nothing. Pains of sin are like the pains of sickness: the less felt,
the more dangerous and deadly.

Secondly, as they need not the Physician, so certainly the Physician needs
not them: he came not for them: they have as much help from him as they
seek. He came not to call the righteous. He calls and cures only the
sick, and heavy laden with the sense and burden of sin.

Let this therefore serve to Use 2. See thy self not whole.
convince these whole men, and let them see their estate, so as they may seek
to the Physician, and not dye senseless. The marks and spots of a deadly
disease are these:

First, an ill stomach argues Tokens of deadly sickness. 1
bodily disease: so Spiritual: If the Word, (the Manna from heaven) be bitter,
if thy mind rise against it, and the mouth of thy soul be out of taste, if
thy memory keep not the doctrine of God, if by meditation thou digestest it
not, and so sendest it not into all parts of thy life, thou art sick iudeed,
though thou secmost never so whole.

Secondly, when the body 2
consumes, the parts are weakened, the knees bow under a man, and with much
ado he draggeth his limbs after him, there is certainly a bodily disease,
though there be no complaint. So in the soul: when men are weak to deeds of
piety, have no strength to conquer temptation, to suffer crosses and trials; to
works of charity, mercy, or justice; but all strength of grace seems to be
exhausted: here is a dangerous disease: here may we justly fear a spiritual
hecticke, which is no sooner discernable, then deadly.

Thirdly, when the senses 3
fail, the eyes grow dim, the ears dull, it is an apparent sign of a
bodily, or spiritual disease. A senseless man is the sickest man, because he
is sick though he be not sensible. Even so, when the eye-strings of the soul
are broken, that they see not the light of grace, nor of God, which as the
Sun shines round about them; the ears hear not the voice of God, the
feeling is gone, they have no sense of the great gashes and wounds of the lusts
of uncleanness, drunkenness, covetousness, swearing, lying, malice against
God and his servants; nay, no complaint, but rather rejoicing in these; neither
is there any fellowship in the afflictions Amos 6. 6.
of Joseph: the soul of such a man lies very weak, as a man for whom the Bell
is ready to toll.

Fourthly, difficulty of breathing, 4.
or to be taken speechless, is a sign of a disease and death approaching: So
in the soul, prayer being the breath of the soul, when a man can hardly fetch
this breath, cannot pray, or with much ado can beg mercy, strength, and
supply of grace; or when he is speechless, a man cannot hear him whisper a
good and savoury word, but all is earthly, fruitless or hurtful; here is a
living Corpse, a painted sepulcher, not a man of a better world.

Would men try themselves by these notes, they would soon discorne their
sickness, and run out to the Physician. But oh what an hard task is it, to
bring a man rightly to know his estate? A singer of the body cannot ache, but
men complain and bind it up. But the soul lies gasping, and there is no such
care, etc.

Thus negatively of the Patient, or party fit for cure.

Affirmatively it is the sick Who are sick.
man. And he is the sick man. that feels and groans under the pain and
burden of his sin. The point this,

Sin is the most dangerous s^ickenesse in the whole world, Doctr. Sin a
desperate sickness. Resemblances of corporal and spiritual sickness. 1.
and fitly resembles bodily sickness: For,

First, sickness comes by intemperance: the temperate body is never sick:
while we were in innocence, we were in sound health, but through distemperature
in our natures we were (...) temperatevixit Socrates, ut cum Athenas pestis
sape vastaret solus ipse nunquam agrotaverit Dio. Laer. l. 2.
poisoned at first, and ever since; our sins and lusts conceiving, bring
forth sin and death. And as some sicknesses be hereditary and propagated, so
the sickness of sin is propagated from Adam to all his posterity, and every
man has added to his disease by his own wilful transgression.

Secondly, sickness weakneth the body, and impaireth the vigor 2
of nature: so does sin in the soul: experience shows, that after some
sin we very hardly and weakly attempt any good thing for along time. Sin has
weakened the faculties, darkened the understanding, corrupted the will,
disordered the affections: thence this sickness.

Thirdly, sickness brings 3
pain and torment into the body: so does sin into the soul, first or last:
There is no peace to Esa. 57. ^1
a wicked man, but terrors soul, horrors of conscience, and desperate fears
do ever attend him.

Fourthly, sickness continuing and lingering on the body, 4.
threatens death, and without timely cure brings it: Sin also, not removed
by repentance, menaceth; and brings certain death to body and soul.

Fifthly, sickness is generally 5
incident to al men. So the souls of all men are diseased by nature; even the
souls of the Elect, till they be healed by Christ. And these diseases are
most foul, and incurable: compared in Scripture to a gangrene which suddenly
eats up the body, 2 Timothy 2. 17. and to the Leprosy, the contagion whereof
not only reaches over all the parts of a man, but to others also; and for the
effect, casts a man out of the Congregation.

Conceive then of sin, as of Use 1. Think of sin as a sickness.
a sickness, and beware of it. How careful are wise men of their health, to
prevent sickness? and again, how foolish and negligent are infinite numbers
of people, who are exceeding careful to preserve the health of their bodies,
yet think not at all of their poor souls, which lie languishing of lamentable
deadly diseases? Well: prevent beginnings: break off sin betimes: A disease
suffered long, grows incurable.

Others may learn to groan Use 2. Mourn for it as sickness. Psalm. 31. 17
under the burden of sin. Little is the hope of him, who is deadly sick, and
senseless of it. It is the contrite heart, and broken spirit only, that is
capable of cure: one that feels, and cries out of the pain of sin,
original and actual, that feels the want of Christ, and prizeth him and his
merits above gold silver, and all. He must be sick, that must be well. Christ
can work no cure on a sound man. The Paschall lamb is to be eaten Exodus 12. 8
with bitter herbs: signifying, that Christ can never be sweet, till we have
conceived sorrow and grief of heart for sin. It is observed of the Angels,
that their sin is not mentioned in Genesis, because they were not to be
restored by repentance; but the sin of man is enlarged in all the
circumstances, Note.
that he might be sensible, ashamed, and penitent of his sin. As in bodily
cures, so in spiritual: the more sense of pain, the better it is to be liked;
more then if the wound should be ranckled, and stuffed with dead flesh. A
senseless lethargy is as deadly, as the most tormenting disease. Cry thou out
of thy pride, lying, deceiving, swearing, other sins, as a man in pain,
longing after deliverance: say as Saint Paul, O wretched man that J am, who
shall deliver me from the body of Romans 7. 24.
this death! and, O that I may never feel the like pain again?

Or if Christ have given thee any ease, or freedom from sin Use 3. Upon
recovery glorify Christ the Physician.
and lusts, magnify his grace. How glad are men when they have out-stood a
bodily weakedesse? How glad was David when he had been stopped in his rage
against Nabal? Blessed be the Lord, blessed be thy counsel, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33
and blessed be thou. When Christ had cured a blind man, he followed him, and
praised God, and all the people praised him likewise for what was done, Luke
18. 42. And when Christ had cast out the Devil (chap. 8. 30.) the man would
have followed Christ, but he bade him go to his house, and show what great
things God had done for him: and he went his way, and preached those things
through all the City.

Again, beware of relapses, Use 4. Beware of relapses. Ioh. 5. 14
being far more dangerous then the first disease. Go, and sin no more, lest
a worse thing come unto thee. Beware of occasions of sin, especially wicked
and infectious company: no plaguey house so infectious as that.

Lastly, pity and help others. Use 5: Pity and help out of sin.
We despise not, nor scorn, nor laugh at a sick man: nor will one sick man
scorn another. It is thine own case, and thy brethrens, spiritually. Were it
a Nesas pr^^ terire, etc. Herodot. O^io.
jest to see men dying? no, we pity them, we pray for them, we do them all
offices of charity: And so it should be here.

Hitherto of the Patients. 2. Physician.


We come now to the Physician.

The Physician is our Lord Jesus Doct. Christ is the Physician of souls.
Christ: as in the next words, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. Exodus 5. 26. J am the Lord, that heals thee. God challenges this
as a part of his own glory, by Christ to heal us. Job 5. 18. He makes sore,
and binds up: he wounds, and his hands make whole. Psalm. 103 3. who healed
thee of thine infirmities: and, Mal. 4. 2 of Christ it is said, that healing is
under his wings.

For first, as a skillful Physician he kno weth every man's esta te Reasons. 1
perfe^ly: he knows what is (...) man, John 2. so does no other Physician;
they can gh^sse by inspection and see something, but he sees our secret
corruptions, in as much as he sees our hearts and thoughts, and cannot be
deceived. He saw the woman at the Well to be an harlot. And, (Matthew. 16. 7.)
he saw the reasoning of their hearts, when they thought he spoke because they
had no bread.

Secondly, he knows the cure 2.
as perfectly as he does the disease. No Physician knows all the virtues of
all the simples and drugs he administreth: and besides, he is wholly ignorant
of many. But Christ our Physician knows the infallible work of his remedies:
so that, whereas it may be said of many young Physicians, they need a new
Churchyard, yet never any miscarried under his hands, whom he undertook to
cure. Of all Ioh. 17. 18
whom thou have glven me, J have lost none.

Thirdly, as a skillful Physician 3
he prescribes the fittest remedies. For in his Word he appoints, physic
for every disease of the soul; for pride, envy, covetousness, trouble of
conscience, and other. Yea, he appoints most proper remedies What can be more
proper, to cure the corruption of our nature, then the purity of his? for our
actual disobedience, his actual obedience? for the guilt and curse of our
sins, that himself was made a curse for us? Gal. 3: 13 4


Fourthly, as a Physician prepares his Patient for his physic, so Christ
prepares the party by faith to apply his remedies; by persuading the heart to
believe, and to apply to the fore and wounded conscience, the precious Balmes
which himself has prepared. Else, as phyficke, not in the receipt, or box, or
cupbord, or pocket can profit unless it be applied and received, though it be
never so sovereign; no more can this.

Fifthly, Christ goes beyond 5. Christ's excellency above other Physicians. 1
all Physicians; two ways.

1. In the generality of his cure. Some diseases are desperate, and all the
physic in the world cannot cure them. But Christ can cure all: no disease is
so desperate, as to foil him. The sin against the holy Ghost is not
desperate in it self, nor to him, but only in the wilfulness of the party.
This was sufficiently testified by those powerful and miraculous cures, which
he wrought in the days of his flesh, both upon the souls and bodies of men;
casting out devils by his Word, pardoning of sins, working faith, curing all
sicknesses and diseases, restoring all senses, yea and raising the dead to
life, which all Physicians in the world could not do: And all this, that it
might be fulfilled, which is spoken Esa. 53. 4. He took our infirmities, and
bare all our sicknesses, both bodily and spiritual.

2. In the freedom of his cure. For first, he offers his 2 His freeness in
his cures.
help and physic, even daily in the preaching of his Gospel: Ier. 3. 2^. O
disobedient children return, and I will heal your rebellions. 1.
This Physician seeks to the patient. Secondly, he takes nothing for his
cure: Hos. 2.
14, 4. I will heal your rebyllions freely. He will do it for asking, and for
all that ask it. Psalm. 30. 2. O Lord, J cried, and thou did heal me.
Thirdly, he 3
attends his Patients most diligently: other Physicians visit their Patients
sometimes, in expectance of good reward: but he, only out of his wonderful
care and compassion is ever present, and about his Patient: Psalm. 34. 18. he
only is near to the afflicted in spirit, and will save the contrite heart.

Now if Christ be the Physician, Use 1. Magnify this Physician according to
his worth.
Christ must be magnified for our health. We may say of our sickness by sin,
as himself did of Lazarus his sickness. This sickness is not unto death in
all, but that God may be glorified. For no man can cure himself: Ioh. 11. 4
our own merits, works, or free will cannot cure us: we can poison our selves
daily, but cannot help our selves. O Israel, thy destruction is of thy Hos.
13. 9
self: but in me is thy help. We can surfeit our selves in sin, and breed
sickness, but cannot help our selves.

The Pope by his pardons, masses, pilgrimages, and the like cannot cure us. It
is too great a price to pay. No supererogations or satisfactions can do it.
Who can forgive sins, but God only? Who can remit a debt, but he to whom it
is due?

Nay, the Angels can confer nothing to this cure. The Lord reserves the
honor of this mercy to himself, to whom it is proper to say, I will forgive
sins, and heal rebellions freely. The very name given to Christ by the Angels,
and in his circumcision by his Parents, was Jesus, and there is no other name
to be saved by, Acts 4. 12.

Object. Was not Peter a good Physician when he healed the lame man, Act. 3.
and Philip, Act. 8. and Paul, who cast out devils, Act 16. 18. Are not
Ministers good Physicians, who remit and absolve men from their sins, and
save themselves and others.

Answ. The Apostles in all Others heal by his virtue and commission.
those places did what they did, in the name, and by the power of Christ; as is
sometimes expressed, In the name of Jesus Christ I command thee, come out of
her, etc. but Christ did all by his own divine power. And Ministers are Gods
Physicians for his people, but only ministerially, by power and direction from
him: but he by proper authority.

Again, if Christ be the Physician of souls, let every one Use 2. Ever
repair to this Physician.
seek to this Physician: seek to have the presence and help of Christ. If
the body be sick unto death, there is running and riding to the Physician, and
no man is so welcome as he is. The world is as a common Spittle: every man is
deadly sick: it stands us now in hand, to get Christ to cure us. Israel, stung
with the fiery Serpents, must only look to the brazen Serpent, Numb. 21. 8. We
are all as the man fallen among thieves deadly wounded. It is only this good
Samaritan, that can bind up the wound. Or as the poor man that lay at the
poole of Bethesda 38. years, and could never find cure till Christ came, Ioh.
5. 5. And if we would be cured, we must do as the Inhabitants of Genezareth,
when they heard Christ was there, they ran about all the region, and carried
after him in beds all that were sick, and diseased, and he healed them all.
Go any where else, and it will be fall you as that woman (Mark. 5. 26.) that
spent all she had on Physicians, and was as far from cure as at first, till
Christ came and healed her.

But Christ is in heaven: how Object.
shall I have his presence?

His promise is, to be with his Ans.
Church by his Spirit and grace, to the end of the world.

But where may we have him? Quest. Ans. Where to meet Christ.


Thou shall not miss of him in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes:
thou shall find him in the Temple teaching, as his parents having lost him:
get thee to the steps of the flolkes, Cant. 1. 7. there thou shall find him at
noone. The Word and Sacraments holily received, afford his special presence.
And as the poor Cripple got cure from Peter and John, lying at the beautiful
gate of the Temple, so must we, Act 3.

But I am so weak and sick Object.
I cannot get to Christ.

The poor man who lay Ans.
bound on his bed, sick of the palsy, not able to stir himself, got others
to bring him to Christ, and when they could not come near, they uncovered the
house, and let him down with cords before Christ: so do thou in the great
weakness of thy soul, and of thy faith: commit thy self to some faithful
men, who by their strength may help thee; by their counsels, comforts, and
prayers, as by cords, may let thee down before Christ, and thou shall get
help, Luke 5. 20.

If Christ be the Physician, then being come unto him we Use 3. Make all known
to him and (...)at his help.
should daily lay open our sins, and our very hearts before him, with earnest
entreaty to heal us, and help us. We lay open all our sores and sicknesses
to the Physician, be they never so foul and shameful in themselves, or in
shameful parts; with the causes, occasions, and effects: we hide nothing,
dissemble nothing, but confess all against our selves: we put our selves into
the Physicians hands, with earnest suit and large rewards to help us. And so
ought we here for cure do unto Christ; confess all against our selves,
entertain no secret and close sin: for that may be the cause of our grief:
and never cease importuning him for mercy, till we feel some cure to eternal
life.

If we were in danger to be eaten up with worms, as Herod Acts 12. ^3
was, we would spare no cost, no pains, no prayers, but would have the
counsel of the whole College of Physicians, before we would so wretchedly end
our days. Yet our case spiritually is far worse: sin is a worm in the
conscience, and has a poysonfull sting, which will gnaw in the soul to
eternal death. This worm is in every man, coming of Adam, and none can cure
it but the second Adam: for none but he knows to make the confection, to kill
this worm: And whosoever goes on carelessly in sin, suffers this worm to eat
out the bowels of his soul, and there is no way but death with him.

Suppose a man had the fallingsicknesse: what would he not do or suffer, to be
cured of that desperate disease, rather then be in continual danger of falling
into the fire, or water, or other mischiefs? But the most dangerous falling
sickness, is, to fall into sin: the impenitent sinner knows not when or
where he shall fall: every moment he may fall into the deep waters of Gods
wrath, or into the fire of hell.

Oh then come in time to Jesus Christ: fall down before him in confession of
thy deplored estate: mourn under thy sickness, as Hezekiah in his sickness:
turn thee to thy Physician: confess thy blindness, as the blind men in the
Gospel, and beg as they, Lord that our eyes may be opened. Cry out of the
stone of thy heart, and of the running issues of sin. Get unto Christ, and
touch the hemme of his garment (as the woman having the issue of blood) and get
cure. Hide thy sin with Adam, and there is no cure, no prosperity. While I
held my tongue, my bones consumed in my roaring all the day long, Psalm 32. 3,
4. But the very opening of the sore is a part of the cure; because the core of
sin is let out by confession; and, to confess and forsake Pro 28. 13
sin, is the way to mercy. Confession which brings guiltiness before men,
brings pardon and discharge before God. And besides, thy Physician is of such
skill and experience, as thou can conceal nothing from him if thou would.

Lastly, if Christ be the Physician, Use 4. Comfort by this Physician
here is mavelous comfort for afflicted souls, pained and pined under the
burden of sin.

First, he is a skillful Doctor: he knows all our diseases, and 1
the remedies: thou may safely commit thy self into his hands, as his mother
said to those servants, Ioh. 2. Whatsoever he commonds, that do. Simple
obedience is required, without reasoning or enquiry. All his sayings must we
do.

Secondly, he is able enough 2
to cure us, because he is God Omnipotent, able to work an infinite cure: and
only such a Physician can bestead us: for all created power cannot help us.

Thirdly, he is as willing to help, as able: being a merciful 3
High Priest, compassed with infirmities, to have compassion on them that are
out of the way. How willing would a tender husband be, to help his wife out of
a deadly sickness! no less willing is Christ to help his Spouse.

Fourthly, he is ready to answer 4
all objections.

Object. 1. I am unworthy he should look on me, or that I should speak to
him. No unwor thinesse of ours can hinder the cure. Mat 11* 28


Answ. Oh but be of good comfort, he calls thee, Come to me all that labor and
are heavy laden. Look not for a merit in thy self, but in him whose mercy is
thy merit. The poor woman, having the bloody issue, thought her self unworthy
to speak to him, or look him in the face; yet she could creep behind him,
and touch the him of his garment. So in thy humility, thrust in to touch (by
the hand of thy faith) the hem of his garment: for, Whosoever touched it, was
made whole, Mat. 14. 36.

Object. 2. But oh the greatness and multitude of my sins is such, as how can
I but despair of cured they are deeply grounded in me, and of long coutinuance.

Ans. No disease foiles Christ: Nor multitude of diseases: nor grievousnesse.
not Peter's denial, not David's murder, not Paul's persecution and blasphemy,
not Manassehs sorcery can foil him: not sins of a crimson dye: if thy sins
be as red as searlet, he can make thee white as snow, Esa. 1. Not multitude of
diseases, not complicated diseases, which are most dangerous in the body. It is
all one with him to forgive ten thousand talents, as one: to cure deadly
sicknesses, as well as crazednesse, Hos. 14. 5. Long diseases foil him not,
who stretches out his hand all the day long, if thou come in any time. Say not
then of any sin, My Gen 4. 13 (...) Cai^. Aug.
sin is greater than can be forgiven: this was a lie in Cain, says Saint
Augustine.

Object. 3. But it is appointed for all men once to dye: and I am infinitely
afraid of death.

Answ. Thou have a Physician Death cured by this Physician
that can command death, that has been the death of death, and has raised
himself from death, and much more can and will raise thee, a member, from the
dead: Else should he be imperfect in his glorious body, which he will not
endure.

Object. 4. But after death comes judgment, and how shall I stand before the
Judge?

Answ. Thy Physician shall Judgment not terrible.
be thy Judge: he that cured thee, shall cover thee: he that knows thy debt
is wholly paid by his own hands, must needs acquit thee.

Object. 5. But how shall I be regarded among those infinite millions of men
that shall stand before him?

Answ. Get faith, by which thou art contracted unto Christ, Respect to every
soul particularly.
and that shall be thy marriageday. A loving husband will be careful of his
loving wife above thousands of others.

HAving spoken of the Patients, 3. Cure: where.
and of the Physician, we come now to the Cure, which is the third general:
wherein consider,

1. The confection. 2. The application.
In the confection are, 1. the 1 The Confection.
Author, 2. the Matter, 3. the Virtue.

The Author must be a man, and above a man.

He must be a man, because Whose Author is a man.
man had sinned, and man's nature must satisfy: else Gods justice and menace
had not taken place, In the day thou sinnest, Genesis 2. 17
thou shall dye the death. Beside, the manner of satisfaction requires him to
be a man: because he must subject himself, both to the perfect obedience of
the Law, and to the suffering of death for our disobedience. And finally, he
must be the seed of the woman, that must Genesis 3. 1^
bruise the Serpents head; that is, a man spotless, innocent, pure, one that
needs no medicine for himself. He must be a man of Adam, but not by Adam: even
borne of a Virgin, to stop original sin in the course of it.

But withal, he must be above And yet above a man too. Our Physician must be
God: why.
a man: even our Emanuel, Esa. 7. 14. God with us: yea, that great Ithiel and
Ucal, Pro. 30. 1. a strong and mighty God: first, for the proportion between,
the sin and punishment; the 1
sin being infinite, so also must the punishment be: which none but an
infinite person could sustain. Secondly, he must be God manifested in the
flesh, to 2
remove those infinite evils which attend sin, Gods wrath and Satan's power,
damnation, death, etc. All this must our Physician do, by his lowest
abasement. He must satisfy Gods justice, appease his anger, triumph against
enemies of salvation, subdue sin, foil the devil, overcome death, discharge
all debts, cancel all obligations and hand-writings against us, and after all
be exalted 3
to glory. Thirdly, he must be God, to procure us those infinite good things we
need, viz. To restore us Gods Image lost and with it righteousness and life
eternal. To defend soul and body against the world, the devil, hell, and all
enemies. To recover us to an excellent and firm estate of sons, by adoption,
by means of a lasting and eternal covenant. And to lead us into eternal
happine^^, as our great Joshua, into that good Land, that Paradise of God,
whence the Devil and our sin has cast us.

Thus of the Author.

Next the Matter of the Cure, Matter of the confection.
and that is the Physicians own blood, by which is meant his whole Passion, 1
Pet. 2. 19. By his stripes we are healed: his sickness brings us health.

It must be by blood. All our ransom must be paid by blood: for without
shedding of blood there is no remission of sins, Heb. 9 31.

And it must be by his blood, not the blood of beasts, which only sanctified
outwardly in respect of the Commandment, and signification, Heb. 9. 12. ^0.
but this blood is the laver, which purges away all sin. Not the blood of
Saints, Martyrs, and holiest men can make atonement, but only his blood which
removes the curse of the Law, by satisfying for our sins, which opens heaven
now shut upon us, and obtaines a perfect redemption, Heb. 9. 2^.

Next the Virtue and Preciousnesse of this Cure: Oh it Virtue and preciousnesse
in 5 respects.
was a powerful and precious blood! and that in five respects:

1. In respect of the quality: 1.
it is the blood incorruptible: All other diseases are cured with corruptible
things, but this is opposed to all corruptible things in the world, 1 Pet. 1.
18. Ye are not redeemed with corruptible things, but with the precious blood
of Jesus Christ.

2. In respect of the person: it was the blood of God, Act. 20. 28. 2
and therefore of infinite merit and price to purchase the whole Church.

3. In respect of the subject of it: no other cure or remedy can 3
reach the soul. All others drugs conduce for healthful life, and work upon
the body: but this makes for an holy life, and works upon the soul, the
sickness whereof the most precious thing in the world cannot cure. Minister to
a wounded spirit Aurum potabile, Bezoar, Alchermes, dust of Pearls, all is in
vain; it is only this blood which heales souls and spirits.

4. In respect of the powerful effects of it, above all other 4. Powerful
effects of it
cures in the world: for first, they may frame the body to some soundness of
temperature, but this makes sound souls, according to the conformity of Gods
Law. Secondly, they may preserve natural life for a while, but this brings a
supernatural life for ever. Thirdly, they may restore strength and nature
decayed; but this changes and brings in a new nature, according to the
second Adam. Fourthly, they cannot keep away death approaching, but this makes
immortal. Fifthly, they cannot raise or recover a dead man, but this raises
both dead in sin, dead in soul, and dead in body.

Lastly, in respect of time. All other physic is made of drugs, 5.
created with the world, but this was prepared before the foundation of the
world, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Again, all the work of all other physic is done in
death: but the perfection, and most powerful work of this is after death.

By all this take we notice of Use 1. Extreme misery by sin set forth hereby
our extreme misery by sin: seeing nothing else can cure us, but the blood of
the Son of God. Gold enough can ransom the greatest Potentate on earth: but
here, nothing can do it but the blood of the Kings son. If we had such a
disease as nothing but the heart-blood of our dearest friends alive (suppose
our wife, husband, mother, or child) could cure us, what an hopeless and
desperate case were it? it would amaze and astonish the stoutest heart. But
much more may it smite our hearts, that we have such a disease, as nothing else
but the heart-blood of the Son of God can cure. Look upon the execration of
thy sin in this Hatred of sin hereby wrought. 1
glass. If any thing can work the hatred of sin, this may: 1. To see the
fire of Gods wrath kindled, and nothing but this blood can quench it. 2. To see
2
the deadliness (...) the disease in the price of the physic, and the
dearness of the remedy. 3
3. The danger of sinning against so precious a blood: for if Abels blood being
shed cried from earth for vengeance, much more will this blood trod under foot.

But those never saw their Who sin in this respect. 1.
sin in this glass, who conceive the cure as easy as the turning of an
hand, a light Lord have mercy, or an hour of repentance at death; and have
lived in sin, and loved their sin, as if there were no danger in it; pass
away their days, and live in ignorance, swearing, cursing, Sabbath-breaking,
lying, covetousness, filthiness, and all unrighteousness; whereas, had they
eyes to see, they might out of the price and greatness of the remedy gather
the danger and desperateness of the disease. For all the earth affords not any
herb or simple, nor drug of this virtue: but the Son of God from heaven must
shed his blood. Nay, all the men on earth, and all the Angels of heaven could
not make a confection to cure one sin, or sinner.

Neither any of Salomons fools, who make a mock of 2 Pro. 10. 23
sin, ever saw it in this glass. Is it not extremity of folly, to make a
tush of sin, and to take pleasure and delight in it? O consider in time, that
the sin thou make so light of, cost Christ dear, and the least sin thou
delightest in, must either cost Christ his blood, or thee thine in endless
torments. It is no safe jesting with edged tools, and to east darts and
firebrarnds, and say, Am I not in jest?

In this Cure we may observe Use (...). A world of wonders in this cure 1
a world of wonders:

First, wonder and admire this Physician, who is both the Physician and the
Physic. Was ever the like heard of in all nature?

Secondly, admire the confection: 2.
that the Physician must temper the remedy of his own heart-blood. He must by
passion be pounded in the mortar of Gods wrath: he must be beaten, smitten,
spit upon, wounded, sweat water and blood, be trodden on as a worm, be
forsaken of his Father; the Lamb of God must be slain; the just suffer for
the unjust: Do thou not here stand and wonder? (...) there ever such a
Prece(...) (...) the world, that the woe(...) (...) one man should heal
ano(...) (...) ^ound? or that the woe(...) (...) Captain should heal(...)
soldiers? The (...) suffered darkness, the earth quaked, the rocks rent
asunder, the graves opened, the dead arose, to show the admirable confection of
this Cure: and are we senseless still?

Thirdly, admire the power of weakness, and the Omnipotent 3.
work of this Cure by contraries, as in the great work of Creation; there the
Son of God made all things, not out of something, but out of nothing: so in
this great work of our Cure by Redemption, he works our life, not by his life,
but by his own death: he makes us infinitely happy, but by his own infinite
misery: he, opens the grave for us, by his own lying in the grave: he sends us
to heaven by his own descending from heaven; and shuts the gates of hell by
suffering hellish torments. He honors us by his own shame: he breaks away
our temptations, and Satan's molestations, by being himself tempted. Here is a
skillful Physician, tempering poison to a remedy, bringing light out of
darkness, life out of death, heaven out of hell. In the whole order of nature
one contrary refisteth another, but it is beyond nature that one contrary
should produce another. Wonder.

Fourthly, admire the care of the Physician, who provided us 4.
a remedy before our disease, before the world was, or we in it: together with
his bounty, who bestowed on us so precious a balm when there was none in
Gilead; when neither all the gold in India, nor all the metals or minerals in
the bowels of the earth could save one soul, nor all the wealth in the world
our one sinner, but only this blood of an infinite price, power, and merit.
Here was a rich and free mercy, to part with his own life, and dearest pledge
of his love, and voluntarily submit himself to death, which was of more
strength then all the lives of men and Angels. Wonder.

Fifthly, admire his matchless love, who to save our souls 5.
made his soul an offering for sin, and heals our wounds by his own
stripes. A Phyfician shows great love, if he take a little care above
ordinary, though he be well rewarded, and made a great gainer by it. But this
Physician must be a loser by his love: he must lose his glory, his life: he
must lose heaven, and happiness, and all, and beyond all this be unmatchable
in abasement, and torment, in so much that he calls all us who are ready to
pass by all, to consider if ever any sorrow were like to his sorrow. Here was
a sound love to us, who endured to be so afflicted, and abased by God, men, and
devils for our sakes, when he could have prevented and refused it, if it had
pleased him; but this love was stronger than death, and undervalued his own
life to save ours. Wonder, and wonder for ever.

And let it stir us up to love this Physician dearly: for great ^se 3. Love
this Physician the more.
love is a great loadstone, and attractive of love. What love owe we to God the
Father, for giving his Son to the death for us? as it a King should deliver
the Prince apparent, to death, to save a condemned r^bell. What great love made
him not account his life dear for us? Oh the deadness of our hearts, that can
hear this with so little sense, and provocation to love him again:

Quest. How may we testify our love to Christ?

Answ. We must not love him And how this love must be testified.
in tongue and word only, but in deed and truth; framing our love in some
proportion unto his, which was both in word, work, and suffering.

First, in profession and word we must magnify his great work of Redemption,
and advance it in the perfection and virtue of it, as able of it self to
purchase the whole Church; a blood able of it self to save from the destroying
Angel, and make a perfect peace between God and us.

Secondly, as Gods love was 2 Ioh. 14. 15
actual, so we must settle our selves to his service. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. He was a servant to do our work: his love only made him so.
And shall we refuse his work? Ours was a painful task that he undertook:
and he left us an easy yoke, to show Mat. 11. 30
our obedience, and gives us also strength to bear it. He has given himself
for us, and will give himself to us: and shall not we give our selves to him?
Certainly we serve a good Lord, and want no encouragement.

Thirdly, according to his example, let us not love our lives 3.
to the death for his sake: Rev. 12. 11. He that hates not his life, in
comparison of Christ, cannot be his Disciple, Luk 14. 26. The direct end of
Christ's life was our glory: the direct end of ours must be his glory. He
maintained our cause to the death: by his death he now pleads our cause in
heaven. It is therefore not only honorable, but equal and just, that we
should stick to him and his causes, in life and death; and that love which is
sound, is like his, even stronger then death, Cant. 8. 6.


So of the Cure in respect of the Confection.

Now we are to consider it in The Application.
the Application. For, what would it avail, to have the most skillful and
careful Physician, and the most rare, proper, and powerful medicine under the
Sun prescribed by him, if either it be not for me, or not applied to the
disease or sore? And so our heavenly Physician has taken care, not only for
direction and confection, but also, for application. Medicines must be
received: for we must not look to be cured by miracle, but by means. Where
consider,

1. The persons to whom the cure is applied. 2. The means whereby. 3. The time
when.
For the persons, the Text says, all that be sick: that is, sensible, Who are
cured.
and languishing under theirsicknesse. And Psalm. 147. 3. He heales those that
are broken in heart, and binds up their sores.

For the means whereby the How application of the medicine is made.
cure is applied: it is faith: we must bring faith to be healed. Christ
required men's faith, in healing of their bodies; much more must we bring it to
the cure of our souls. By faith I mean special faith, which is not Faith,
what.
(...)w Christ hystorically: for so did many (Ioh 2.) to whom Christ would not
trust himself: viz. that he is the Son of God, who shed his blood, and died
for sinners: for this, the devils believe, and tremble. Neither is it Iam.
(...). 19
only to believe him: the Jews heard him, saw him, believed many things to be
true, but received him not. But,

To believe in him, stands in And where in it stands 1.
two things. First, to receive and apply him: for, to receive Christ, and
believe in him, are all one, Ioh. 1. 12. so many as received him: But who were
they? so many as believed in his Name. Secondly, to trust and rely on him for
cure, and salvation: Can. 2
8. the Spouse leanes on her welbeloved. And that we may not be deceived in it,
this faith has two qualities: 1. It must be proper: 2. Impropriate Christ.

First, it must be thine own proper special faith: Hab. 2. 4. And what be its
propertie^. 1.
the just man lives by hi(...)* faith. The Physician makes his whole confection
without thee, but calls thee in to the application: and none can apply this
medicine, but thine own faith. It is no implicit faith of thine own, nor the
faith of the Church, without thine own, that thou can live by. The Ministers
may leave it with thee, and declare it, but thine own faith must apply it.
Foolish Virgins they are, that think to be received with the oil in the wife
Virgins lamps, when their own is spent: the answer is, We have not enough for
us and you: and every man's garment is short enough for himself: the righteous
L^oserm (...). de possio^e, 2.
receive Crowns (said Leo) but give not Crows.

Secondly, as this faith must be thine own, so it must impropriate Christ, and
make him thine own. This is that faith in the blood of Christ, Romans 3. 25.
applying the blood specially to himself for life When the faith of the soul
brings home Christ to his own heart, and says with Thomas, My Lord and my
God; and with Paul, who loved me, and gave himself for me: and with that
Father, Totus Christus meus est, totus Christus n meos usus impensus est, Whole
Christ is mine, and bestowed for my utmost benefit. This special and
spiritual application was always resembled in Scriptures of the old
Testament, by the sacrifices of the sinne-offering; when the beast was slain,
the Party must lay his hand on the Levit. 1. 4
head of it, and confess, that not the beast, but the Owner deserved death:
and, the blood that was shed, must be sprinckeled; 5
which sprinkling notes the very applying of Christ's blood to the soul of a
sinner.

But when is this medicine applied? Quest.


For time, there is no application, Ans. Application ^o be made in this life.
but in this ^^fe: no curing after this life: no procuring of oil after the
Bridegroomes coming. And consequently, there is no purgatory, no
satisfactions, no help from men or Angels hereafter. Detestable is that wicked
heresy of Bellarmine, that the sufferings of the (...) indulg cap. 14.
living help the dead three ways: 1. By way of merit, of congruity. 2. By way
of entreaty. 3 By way of satisfaction. Contrary to that of Augustine, Ibi erit
paenitentiae dolorem habens, sed medieinam non habens: Repent they do after
death, but without any cure. That is the time of justice, only this is the
acceptable time. In vain 2 Cor. 6. 1
should you minister physic to a dead man. And, faith then cease, with all
the works of it.

Seeing only believers have the benefit of Cure, above all Use 1. Labor for
faith.
things labor for faith. Want faith, thou perishest, art deadly sick without
recovery. Christ could do no great work in his own Country, because of
their unbeleefe. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him, Ioh 3.
uls. Have thou faith? be of good comfort, according to thy faith it shall be
unto thee, not according to thy money, wealth, friends; but thy faith makes
thee whole. If God has not given thee so much wealth, so fine clothes, so
liberal fare as to others, yet if he has given thee so much faith he is
liberal enough.

Oh that I had never so little Object.
a grain of faith! but I have none: so this blood can do me no good: it is
impossible for me to be cured.

But first, have thou none? labor Ans.
for it: thou may have it. If thou beleevest, all things are possible.

Secondly, distinguish between want and weakness of faith, between the want
of the grace (...)
and the want of sense. If thou have any faith, never so weak, as these groans
and desires prove, then remember that excellent place, Romans 14. 3 God chooses
the weak in faith. He makes choice of thee: then do not thou refuse him. And
remember, that the Cure was not ordained for Angels in heaven, nor for Saints
triumphant, but militant, that fight with unbeleefe, corruptions, and lusts. If
thou went perfect, thou should not need it. If thou be not perfect, thou
have no cause to renounce, but embrace it. Come sick as thou art, come weary,
come bruised, come despairing in thy self: it is a medicine for the sick, a
refreshing of the weary, a builder up of the broken spirit, nay, and a
quickener of the dead. Here is that tree of Revel. 22 2
life, the leaves whereof do heal the nations: Let not thine own unbeleefe
be as a shaken sword in thine own hand, to keep thee from it: Remember the
Text, The whole need not the Physician, but they that are ^^^ke.

Again, seeing there is a time Use 2.
to heal, come in season: Eccle^. 3. 3 neglect not the opportunity: get into
the water, so soon as the Angel moves: make benefit of advantages, work
with God and the means, accept the offers and invitations for thine own
welfare. Thou may seek oil too late, blessing too late, the Word and faith
too late, and repentance too late.

Again, content not thy self, only to hear of this remedy, but seek to
know that it is applied Use 3.
to thee in particular, and to feel the virtue of it in thy self: as Paul
desired to know nothing but the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection, Phil.
3. 9, 10.

Quest. How may I know it?

Answ. As Physic taken into How to know (...) sound ^pplication of this
Physic. (...)
the body works often so painefully, that men are even at the gate of death,
in their present sense, and no other but dead men: so this Physic works
kindly, when it works pain in the Party, through the sense and sight of
sin, and apprehension of Gods anger, fear of damnation, and utter despair
in themselves. For this is the work of the spirit of bendage; Romans 8. 15
namely, general faith in the Believers, applying the Law and threatenings to
their own deep humiliation. No man can sail to heaven but by the gates of
hell.

2. As Physic kindly working delivers the party, not only 2
from death, but such humors as were the cause of his sickness, at least that
they be, not predominant: Even so must this Physic rid us of our sin, and
these peccant humors which were the matter of our sickness: and that, both
from the condemnation, and corruption of them: 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus
Christ, his Son, purges us from all sin.

First, from the condemnation Condemnation of sin purged away.
of sin: this blood is shed for the remission of sins: Galat. 3. 13 Christ
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. Otherwise it
must be with us, as with him who in a desperate disease without Physic must
dye.

Secondly, from the corruption And corruption.
of sin: both the disease of natural and original sin, and the leprosy
of actual sins. Now look into thy self, examine whether this blood be a
corrosive in thy soul, to eat out the corruption of nature; whether it purge
the conscience from dead works, Hebr. 9. 14. whether it has quitted thee, as
well from the dominion of sin, as from the damnation of it; whether it has
brought thee to leave sin, etc. Reason with the Apostle: has Christ dyed to
kill sin in me, and shall I live to quicken it? nay rather, as 1 Peter 4. 1.
forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, we must arm our selves
with the same mind: for that he which has suffered in the flesh, has ceased
from sin.

Thirdly, as physic is profitably applied, when it brings 3
ease and rest, having carried away the matter of the pain: So is this
physic well applied, when faith quiets the heart, by assuring it that Christ
and his benefits are his, and has set him above the Law, sin, hell, death,
even in this life, as a Conqueror; and all this, because he believes the
Gospel. Now come in peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. Believing,
ye rejoice with joy unspeakeable and full of glory, Romans 14. 17
1 Pet. 1. 8. When these take place instead of former gripes, and stings of
conscience, this blood is soundly applied. For as nothing could cure the stung
Israelites, but the beholding of the brazen Serpent; so nothing can pacify the
stung conscience but the blood of Christ lifted on the Cross.

4. As after application of proper physic we find a great change in our
bodies, as if we had new bodies given us: so after the kindly work of this
physic we may find our selves cast into a new mould; this blood applied,
makes us new Creatures, new 2 Cor. 5. 17
men, having new minds, new wills, new words, new affections, new actions, new
conversations. Our strength is renewed to Christian actions, and passion. We
are strong for our journey, for our combat, and strong to carry burdens, with
a strong appetite, and digestion of the Word: every way more hearty and
cheerful.

Thus having received our health, by means of this Cure, Use 4. Preserve
health of soul, once obtained.
wisdom commands us to be as careful to preserve our health, as to attain
it. Every wise man will be as careful to keep himself well, as to get
himself well. And to this purpose, we must remember the counsel of our
Physician, for maintaining our health attained.

Amongst many directions prescribed, Means so to do.
I mention four.

First, not to be tampering with our own medicines, nor 1.
the medicines of Egypt, merits, pilgrimages, penance, or the like; nor any
quintessence or mineral from the hand of any libertine Teacher: but only such
as we find prescribed in the word of God, by our great Doctor.

Secondly, to keep our health, 2.
we must keep good diet, both for soul and body. The best diet for the soul,
is, to keep Gods hours for our daily repast by the Word, in reading, and
meditating on it: which David regarded above his ordinary food. A liberal diet
is best for the soul: but the best diet for the body is a spare diet, a sober
and moderate use of meat, drink, and pleasure, for beating down and
mortifying corrupt affections and lusts.

Thirdly, to preserve our health, we must strive to live in 3
a good and wholesome air. If thou live in a corrupt air, change it for a
better. The worst air that can be, is, where worst men and worst company are.
The air of an hot plaguey house is not so infectious, as the contagious air of
wicked company. The former brings not so many to death of the body, as this to
death of the soul. Live amongst Gods people, and where Gods word is purely
preached; for there is the purest air: Psalm. 16. 3. All my delight is in the
Saints, excelling in virtue.

Fourthly, to preserve health, Physicians prescribe the use of 4.
good exercises. The be^ ^^ercises to use for the health of the soul, (...)
are hearing and reading of Gods Word; pray also; and meditate when thou art
alone: with conference of good things in company. These are notable helps to
bring thee through weaknesses, and keep thy soul in good plight, health, and
cheerfulness.

FJNJS.

