A BRIEF DECLARATION OF THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE CHVRCH of CHRIST, and the
Unity of the Catholic Faith professed therein: DELIVERED IN A SERMON before
His Majesty the 20th. of June 1624. at WANSTED. By JAMES VSSHER, Bishop of
Mead.

The third Impression.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for Ephraim Dawson, and are to be sold at the
Rainbow near the Inner Temple Gate in Fleet Street. 1629.

EPHESIANS. 4.13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.


WHen the Lord's Ark was to set forward, the form of prayer used by Moses,
was; Number. 10.35.
Rise up, LORD, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate
thee, flee before thee. The sweet Psalmist of Israel, framing his descant to
this ground, begins the Psalm which he prepared to be sung at the removing
of the Arc, after the same manner. Psalm. 68.1.
Let God arise: let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him, flee
before him: and then goes on, till at length he has raised his note unto his
full height: Thou have ascended up on high: thou have led captivity captive:
thou have received gifts for men (Psalm. 68.18). Which being by our Apostle in
Ephesians. 4* 8.20.
this Chapter interpreted of the Ascension of our Savior Christ into heaven,
and made the very spring from whence the matter of my present Text is derived,
leads us to the just application of the type to the truth, and puts us in
mind, that the removing of the Arc, which gave occasion to the penning of his
Psalm, was an adumbration of our Saviors removeall from the Earth to Heaven;
and that by this absence of his, we are no losers, but gainers* seeing he is
ascended (...) on high, both to triumph over his and our foes, [ he led
captivity captiue] and to confer benefits upon his friends. [ he gave gifts
unto men.]

The Heb. 9.4.
Arc of the Covenant (we know) was appointed to be a figure of Heb. 12.24.
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant: the great King, Prophet and Priest of
his Church. Therefore was it ordered, that the Arc should have a crown of
gold about it: (Exodus 37.2.) than which, what could be more fit to set forth
the state of our King? for thus we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor.
(Heb. 2.9.) Upon the Ark stood the Propitiatory or Mercie-seate, whence God
did use to deliver his Oracles from betwixt the Cherubins: than which, what more
lively representation could there be of the Prophetical office of our Savior?
of whom it is written: God has in these last days spoken unto us by his
Son. (Heb. 1.2.) The Arc had both the Rod and the Tables of the Law, by Gods
appointment placed within it: than which, what could be more apt to express
the satisfaction, which our high Priest was to make unto his Fathers justice,
as well by his Passive as by his Active obedience? for as he felt the stroke of
the Rod for us, that Esa. 53.5.
the chastisement of our peace being laid upon him, with his stripes we might
be healed: so Math. 3.15. and 5.17.
it behooved him also to fulfill the Law and all righteousness; that so he
might be Romans 10.4.
the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes. The letter
of the Law being not more certainly to be found within the Arc, than the
accomplishment thereof within him: according to that which he spoke by his holy
Prophet. Psalm. 40.7.8. Heb. 10.7.
In the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy will, O
God: yea, thy Law is within my heart.

The Arc had many removes from place to place, whiles it sojourned in the
Tabernacle: but was brought up at last into the Temple, there to dwell upon
God's holy Hill; the place of which he himself had said. Psalm. 132.14.
This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.
Where, at the first entry, King Solomon stood ready to entertain him with this
welcome, Ibid. verse. 8.9.16. 2 Chronicles. 6.41
Arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou, and the Arc of thy strength:
Let thy Priests, O Lord God, be clothed with salvation; and let thy Saints
rejoice in goodness. Our blessed Savior, in the days of his flesh, had no
resting place, but continually Act. 10.38.
went about doing good: until at length Mar. 16.
he was received up into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of GOD. For when he
had ended his progress upon Earth, and Ioh. 17.4.
finished there that work which his Father had given him to do; he Ioh.
16.28. and 19.30.
left the world, and went to the Father; making his last remove unto the high
Court of Heaven, Act. 3.21.
where he is to reside until the time of the restitution of all things. Rev.
11.19.
The Temple of GOD was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the
Arc of his Testament, says S. John in the Apocalypse. If we look to the
corporal presence of our Savior; in the Temple of Heaven must this Arc be
sought for, in no oother place is it to be found: but if we look to the virtue
coming from him, by the operation of his Word and Spirit; so we shall find
him in his Temple upon earth, Mat. 28.20.
present with us always, even unto the end of the world: for, these were the
gifts that, when he ascended into Heaven, he did bestow upon men.

This the Prophet lays down thus: Psalm. 68 18.
Thou have ascended up on high: thou have received gifts for men. The Apostle
cites it thus: Ephesians. 4.8.
When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men. The reconciliation is
easy: He received those gifts, not to retain them with himself, but to
distribute them for the behoof of his Church. So for the Spirit, S. Peter
teaches us, Acts 2.33. Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted,
[there is his ascending up on high] and having received of the Father the
promise of the holy Ghost, [there is his receiving] he has shed forth this
which ye now see and hear. [there is his giving of this gift unto men.] And
for the Ministry of the Word, he himself intimates as much in his
Commission, given to the Apostles, Mat. 28.18.19. All power is given unto me
in heaven and in earth: [there he receiveth] Go ye therefore, and teach all
nations: [there he gives this gift unto men.] Ephesians. 4.11.12.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints: says our Apostle here.
That herein also that might be fulfilled, which we heard to have been uttered,
when the Arc was brought to his resting place 2 Chronicles. 6.41. Psalm. 132.9.16
: Let thy Priests, O Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy Saints
rejoice in goodness.

The work of the Ministry, how meanly soever it be esteemed in the World;
yet in the estimation of our Savior Christ, was one of the choysest gifts,
that in this solemnity of his triumphant Ephesians. 4.10.
ascending up far above all heavens, he thought fit to bestow upon his Church
here upon earth: as that which tended both to the Ib. ver. 12.
perfecting of the Saints, and to the edifying of his own body. For as Col.
1.19.
it has pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell: so the Son
is also pleased, not to hold it any disparagement, that Ephesians. 1.23.
his Body, the Church, should be accounted the fullness of him that fills all
in all. That howsoever in himself he be most absolutely and perfectly
complete; yet is his Church so nearly conjoined unto him, that he holds not
himself full without it: but as long as any one member remains yet
ungathered and unknit unto this mystical body of his, he accounts, in the
mean time, somewhat to be deficient in himself. And therefore our Apostle
having, in the words immediately going before this Text, declared, that the
Ministry was instituted for the edifying of the body of Christ; adds
presently, Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of GOD, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.

In which words we may observe as well the Matter of this Building [ We all] as
the Structure of it; and further also consider in the Structure, first, the
laying of the foundation [ In the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God] secondly, the bringing of the work to perfection, and the
raising of it to his just height [ unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ].

The Matter then of this spiritual edifice (that we may begin with that) are
We our selves. 1 Pet. 2.5.
Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house: says Saint Peter.
To this Saint Paul does here add a note of Universality [WE ALL:] as suting
best with the nature of the Catholic or Universal Church, which is that body
of Christ, of the edifying whereof he here treats: of which therefore he
tells us more plainly in another place; that 1 Cor. 12.13.
by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free. For the Catholic Church is not to be
sought for in any one angle or quarter of the world: but among all that in
every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.
(1 Corinthians 1.2.) Therefore to their Lord and ours was it said; Psalm. 2.8.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession; and to his mystical body, the
Catholic Church accordingly. Esa. 43.5.6.7.
I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from the West: I will say
to the North, give up; and to the South, Keep not back: bring my sons from
far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth; even every one that is
called by my name.

Thus must we conceive of the Catholic Church, as of one entire body; made up
by the collection and aggregation of all the Faithful unto the unity thereof:
from which union there arises unto every one of them such a relation to, and a
dependence upon the Church Catholic, as parts use to have in respect of their
whole. Whereupon it follows, that neither particular persons, nor particular
Churches, are to work as several divided bodies by themselves (which is the
ground of all Schism), but are to teach, and to be taught, and to do all
other Christian duties, as parts conjoined unto the whole, and members of the
same Commonwealth or corporation; and therefore the Bishops of the ancient
Church, though they had the government of particular Congregations only
committed unto them, yet in regard of this communion which they held with the
Universal, did usually take to themselves the title of Bishops of the
Catholic Church. Which makes strongly as well against the new Separatists, as
the old Donatists: who either hold it a thing Augustine. ep. 48. Quam multi
nihil interesse credentes in qua quisque part Christianus sit; ideo
permanebant in part Donati, quia ibi nati erant, and eos inde discedere, atque
ad Catholicam nemo transire cogebat. Et paulo post Putabamus quidem nihil
interesse ubi fide^ Christi teneremus: sed gratias Domino, qui nos a divisione
collegit, and hoc uni Deo congruere, ut in unitate colatur, ostendit.
not much material, so they profess the faith of Christ, whether they do it
in the Catholic Communion, or out of it; or else (which is worse) dote so much
upon the perfection of their own part, that they refuse to join in fellowship
with the rest of the body of Christians; as if they themselves were the only
people of God, and all wisdom must live and die with them and their
generation.

And herein, of all others, do our Romanists most fearfully offend; as being
the authors of the most cruel schism, that ever has been seen in the Church
of God. Those infamous schisms of the Novatians and Donatists were but petty
rents, in comparison of this huge rupture, which has pulled asunder East and
West, North and South; and grown to such a head at home, that in our Western
parts (where this faction was so prevalent) it has for diverse ages past been
esteemed Catholic. In the 17th of the Revelation we have a Woman described
unto us, sitting upon seven mountains, and upon many waters. The Woman is
there expounded to be Rev. 17.18.
that great City which reigns over the Kings of the earth. The seven
mountains upon which that City sat, needed not to be expounded; every child
knew what was meant thereby. The waters are interpreted Ibid. ver. 15.
peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. Which is that very
Universality and Catholicisme that the Romanists are wont so much to brag of.
For, this Woman is the particular Church of Rome, the City-Church; which they
call the Mother Church, the holy Ghost styles Ibid. verse. 5.
the Mother of harlots and abominations of the earth. Those peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues, are such as this proud City reigns
over: the Catholick-Roman Church they are commonly called by themselves; but by
the holy Ghost, Ib. v. 3. and 7.
the Beast upon which the Woman sits.

This Woman is the Head of the faction, and the very Mother of this schism: the
Beast, that is to say, they that suffer themselves to be thus ridden by her,
are her abbettors and supporters in it. For the particular Church of Rome (not
being content to be a fellow-member with the rest of the Churches of Christ,
and to have a joint dependence with them upon the whole body of the Church
Catholic, Gal. 4.26.
which is the Mother of us all) will needs go out of her rank; and, scorning
any longer to be accounted one of the branches of the Catholic Church, would
feign be acknowledged to be the root of it: so that now all other Churches must
hold their dependence upon it, or otherwise be cast forth as withered branches,
which are fit only to be thrown into the fire, and burned. The wisdom of
God foresaw this insolency long beforehand: and therefore caused a Caveat to be
entered against it, even in that Epistle which was specially directed to the
Church of Rome it self. The words are plain enough, Romans 11.18. If thou
boast, thou bear not the root, but the root thee. The Church of Rome
therefore must know that she is no more a root to bear up other Churches,
than other Churches are to bear up her: she may not go beyond her line, and
boast her self to be the root of the Catholic Church, but be contented to be
born her self by the root, as well as other particular Churches are. For a
stream to sever it self from the common Fountain, that it may be counted a
Fountain it self, without dependence upon any other; is the next way to make
an end of it, and dry it up. The Church of Rome may do well to think of this,
and leave off her vain boasting. Rev. 18.7.
I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow. Other Churches may
fail, and the gates of hell may prevail against them: but it cannot fall out
so with me. Whereas she might remember, that they were Romans, unto whom the
Apostle so long since gave this admonition. Rom 11.20, 21.22.
Be not high minded, but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches,
take heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and
severity of God: on them which fell, severitie, but toward thee, goodness, if
thou continue in his goodness: otherwise THOU ALSO SHALL BE CUT OFF.

The Romans therefore by their pride may get a fall, as well as others; and
the Church of Rome by infidelity may be cut off, as well as any other
congregation: and yet the Catholic Church subsist for all that, as having for
her foundation neither Rome, nor Rom's Bishop, but Jesus Christ, the Son of
the living God. And yet this proud Dame and her daughters, the particular
Church of Rome I mean, and that which they call the Catholic Roman (or the
faction rather that prevails in them both) have in these latter ages confined
the whole Church of Christ within themselves, and excluded all others that were
not under the Roman obedience, as aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the covenants of promise. The Donatists were cried out against
by our forefathers, for shutting up the Church within the parts of the South;
and rejecting all others that held not correspondency with that patch of
theirs: And could they think well then of them, that should conclude the
Church within the Western parts of the world, and exclude all other Christians
from the body of Christ, that held not by the same root there that they did? It
is a strange thing to me, that wise men should make such large discourses of
the Catholic Church, and bring so many testimonies to prove the Universality
of it: and not discern, that while by this means they think they have gotten a
great victory over us, they have in very truth overthrown themselves; for when
it comes to the point, in stead of the Catholic Church which consists of
the communion of all nations, they obtrude their own piece unto us:
circumscribing the Church of Christ within the precincts of the Romish
jurisdiction, and leaving all the world beside to the power of Satan; for with
them it is a resolved case; that Subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae
creaturae declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and pronuntiamus omnino esse de
necessitate salutis Bonifac. VIII. in Extravag De majoritate and obedi^ntia,
cap Vn^m sanctam.
to every creature it is altogether of necessity to salvation, to be subject
to the Roman Bishop.

What must then become of the poor Moscovites and Grecians (to say nothing of
the reformed Churches) in Europe? What of the Egyptian and Ethiopian Churches
in Africa? what of the great companies of Christians scattered over all Asia,
even from Constantinople unto the East Indies, which have and still do endure
more afflictions and pressures for the Name of Christ, than they have ever
done, that would be accounted the only friends of Christ? Must these, because
they are not the Popes subjects, be therefore denied to be Christ's subjects?
Because they are not under the obedience of the Roman Church, do they
thereupon forfait the estate which they claim in the Catholic Church, out of
which there is no salvation? Must we give all these for gone, and conclude,
that they are certainly damned? They who talk so much of the Catholic Church,
but indeed stand for their own particular, must of force sink as low in
uncharitableness, as they have thrust themselves deep in schism: we who
talk less of the Universality of the Church, but hold the truth of it,
cannot find in our hearts to pass such a bloody sentence upon so many poor
souls, that have given their Names to Christ. He whose pleasure it was to
spread the Churches seed so far, said to East, West, North, and South; Give:
it is not for us then to say; Keep back. He has given to his Son the
heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession: we for our parts dare not abridge this grant, and limit this
great Lordship, as we conceive it may best fit our own turns; but leave it to
his own latitude, and seek for the Catholic Church neither in this part nor
in that piece, but (as it has been before said in the words of the Apostle)
among 1 Cor. 1.2.
all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours.

Yea, but how can this be, will some say, seeing the Catholic Church is but
one: and the principal reason for which it is accounted one, is Ecclesia ex
pluribus personis congregatur: and tamen una dicitur, propter unitatem fidei.
Hieron. (si modo is ho^u^ Commentartorum author est) in Psalm. 23.
the unity of the faith professed therein? How then can this unity of faith
be preserved in all places, if one special Church be not set as a Mistress
over all the rest, and one chief Bishop appointed for a Master over all
others, by whom in matters of faith every one must be ruled? And out of such
different professions, as are to be found among the divided Christians in
those several parts of the world, how can there be fit matter drawn for the
making up of one Universal Church? To this I answer (and so pass from the
Matter of the Building, to the Structure) that it is most true indeed, that in
the Church there is Ephesians. 4.5.
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: for so we are taught by the Apostle in this
chapter. But yet, in the first place, it is to be considered, that this unity
of the faith must be compassed by such means as God has ordained for the
procuring of it, and not by any politic tricks of man's devising. Now for the
bringing of us all to this unity of the faith, the Apostle here tells us,
that Christ Ibid v. 11.
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers. If he had thought that the maintenance of this unity did depend
upon the singularity of any one Apostle, or Pastor, or Teacher: is it to be
imagined, that he would have overslipped such a singular person (even in that
very place where, of all others, his presence was most requisite) and run
altogether, as he does, upon the plural number?

That the multitude of Teachers dispersed over the world, without any such
dependancie or correspondencie, should agree together in laying the foundations
of the same faith, is a special work of Gods Spirit. And it is Ibid. ver ^^.
the unity of the Spirit which the Apostle here speaks of, and exhorts us
to keep in the bond of peace. Whereas the unity of which our Adversaries boast
so much (which is nothing else but a wilful suffering of themselves to be led
blindfold by one man, who commonly is more blind than many of themselves) is
no fruit of the spirit, but of mere carnal policy: and may serve
peradventure for a bond of peace betwixt themselves and their own party (such
as Pace ^^a, d est, impie^^^s suae u^^t te se jact^^^; ^gentes ^e non ut
Christi episcopos, sed ut Antichrist^acerdotes. Hilar. contr. Auxentium.
the Priests of Antichrist were to have, and as many as would be content to
yield themselves to the conduct of such a Commander) but has proved the
greatest block that ever stood in the way, for giving impediment to the peace
and unity of the universal Church, which here we look after. And therefore
Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica, entering into the consideration of the
original ground of that long continued schism, whereby the West stands as
yet divided from the East, and the Latin Churches from the Greek, wrote a
whole book purposely of this argument, wherein he shows, (...).
that there is no other cause to be assigned of this distraction, but that the
Pope will not permit the cognizance of the controversy unto a general
Council, but will needs sit himself as the alone Teacher of the point in
question, and have others hearken unto him as if they were his Scholars: and
that this is contrary both to the ordinances, and the practice of the Apostles
and the Fathers. Neither indeed is there any hope, that ever we shall see a
general peace, for matters of Religion, settled in the Christian world, as long
as this supercilious Master shall be suffered to keep this rule in Gods house:
how much soever he be magnified by his own Disciples, and made the only
foundation upon which the unity of the Catholic Church depends.

Now in the next place, for the further opening of the unity of the faith, we
are to call unto mind the distinction which the Apostle makes betwixt 1 Cor
3.10.11.12.
the foundation, and that which is builded thereupon: betwixt Heb. 6.1.
the principles of the doctrine of Christ, and that which he calls
perfection. The unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God
here spoken of, has reference (as we heard) to the foundation: as that which
follows of a perfect man; and the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, to the superstruction and perfection. In the former there is a general
unity among all true believers: in the latter, a great deal of variety,
there being several degrees of perfection to be found in several persons,
Ephesians. 4.7.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. So we see in a material
Building, that still there is but one foundation, though great disparitie be
observed in sundry parts of the superstruction: some rooms are high, some low,
some dark, some lightsome, some more substantially, some more slightly
builded, and in tract of time some prove more ruinous than others; yet all of
them belong to one building, as long as they hold together, and stand upon the
same foundation. And even thus is it in the spiritual Building also; whether
we respect the practical part of Christianity, or the intellectual.

In the practical we see wonderful great difference betwixt Christian and
Christian: some by Gods mercy attain to a higher measure of perfection, and
keep themselves unspotted from the common corruptions of the world; others
watch not so carefully over their ways, and lead not such strict lives, but
are oftentimes overtaken and fall fowly: that he who looks upon the one and
the other, would hardly think that one Heaven should receive them both. But
although the one does so far outstrip the other in the practice of new
Obedience (which is the Christian man's race) yet are there certain
fundamental principles, in which they both concur; as Neh. 1.11.
a desire to fear Gods name, Luke 13.3.5 Heb. 6.1.
repentance for sins past, and a sincere Act. 11.23.
purpose of heart for the time to come to cleave unto the LORD. Which whosoever
has, is under mercy, and may not be excluded from the Communion of Saints. In
like manner for the intellectual part: the Heb. 5.12.
first principles of the Oracles of God (as the Apostle calls them) hold the
place of the common foundation, in which all Christians must be grounded:
although Ib. ver. 13.^4
some be babes, and for further knowledge are unskilful in the word of
righteousness; other some are of perfect age, who by reason of use have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil.

The Oracles of God contain abundance of matter in them, and whatsoever is
found in them is a fit object for faith to apprehend: but that all Christians
should uniformely agree in the profession of all those truths that are
revealed there, is a thing that rather may be wished, than ever hoped for. Yet
the variety of men's judgments in those many points, that belong to
Theological faith; does not dissolve the unity which they hold together in
the fundamental principles of the Catholic faith. The unity of the faith
commended here, is a Catholic unity, and such as every true Christian
attaineth unto. Till we ALL come in the unity of the faith: says the
Apostle. As there is a Jude, ver. 3.
common salvation, so is there a Tit. 1.4.
common faith; which is 2 Pet. 1.1.
alike precious in the highest Apostle and the meanest believer. For we may not
think that Heaven was prepared for deep Clerks only: and therefore beside
that larger measure of knowledge, whereof all are not capable, there must be
Regula fidei, pusillis magnisque communis. Aug. ep. 57.
a Rule of faith common to small and great; which as it must consist but of few
propositions, (for simple men cannot bear away many) so is it also requisite,
that those articles should be of such weight and moment, that they may be
sufficient to make a man wise unto salvation: that howsoever in other points
learned men may go beyond common Christians, and exceed one another likewise
by many degrees: yet in respect of these radical truths, which is the
necessary and common food of all the children of the Church, there (...)*
^renaus, lib. 1. cap. 3.
is not an unity only, but such a kind of equality also brought in among
all sorts of Christians, as was heretofore among the Congregation of the
Israelites in the collection of their Manna; where Exodus 16.18. 2 Cor 8.15.
he that gathered much, had nothing over; and he that gathered little, had no
lack.

If then salvation by believing these common principles may be had, and to
salvation none can come that is not first a member of the Catholic Church of
Christ: it follows thereupon, that the unity of the faith, generally
requisite for the incorporating of Christians into that blessed society, is
not to be extended beyond those common principles. Which may further be made
manifest unto us by the continual practice of the Catholic Church her self,
in the matriculation of her children, and the first admittance of them into her
communion. For when she prepared her Catechumeni for Baptism, and by that
door received them into the congregation of Christ's flock; we may not think her
judgment to have been so weak, that she would omit any thing herein that
was essentially necessary for the making of one a member of the Church. Now the
profession which she required of all that were to receive Baptism, was, for
the Agenda or practical part, an abrenuntiation of the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, with all their sinful works and lusts; and for the Credenda, the
things to be believed, an acknowledgement of the articles of the Creed: which
being solemnly done, she then baptized them in this faith; intimating thereby
sufficiently, that this was that one Faith commended unto her by the Apostles,
as the other that one Baptism which was appointed to be the Sacramentum fidei.
Aug. epist. 23.
Sacrament of it.

This Creed, though for substance it was the same every where, yet for form
was somewhat different; and in some places received more enlargements than in
others. The Western Churches herein applied themselves to the capacity of the
meaner sort, more than the Eastern did: using in their Baptism that shorter
Form of Confession, commonly called The Apostles Creed, which in the more
ancient times was briefer also than now it is. As we may easily perceive, by
comparing the Symbol recited by Marcellus Ancyranus (in the Habetur apud
Epiphaniu^ in haeres. 7^.
Profession of the faith which he delivered to Pope Julius) with the
expositions of the Apostles Creed, written by the Latin Doctors: See my Answer
to the Jesuits challenge, page 284 285.
wherein the mention of the Fathers being Maker of heaven and earth, the Sons
Death and Descending into Hell, and the Communion of Saints, is wholly omitted.
All which, though they were of undoubted verity, yet for brevities sake seem
at first to have been omitted in this short Sum: because some of them
perhaps were not thought to be altogether so necessary for all men (which is
Fr. Suarez, tom. 2. in 3* par. Thom. disp. 43. sect. 2.
Suarez his judgment touching the point of the descent into Hell); and some
that were most necessary, either thought to be sufficiently implied in other
Articles (as that of Christ's death in those of his crucifixion and burial),
or thought to be sufficiently manifested by the light of reason; as that of the
creation of heaven and earth. For howsoever this, as it is a truth revealed by
God's Word, becomes an object for faith to apprehend ( Heb. 11.3.): yet it is
otherwise also clearly to be understood by the discourse of reason ( Romans
1.20.), even as the unity, and all the other attributes of the Godhead
likewise are. Which therefore may be well referred unto those Praecognita, or
common principles which nature may possess the mind withal, before that
grace enlightneth it; and need not necessarily to be inserted into that Symbol,
which is the badge and cognizance whereby the Believer is to be differenced and
distinguished from the Unbeliever.

The Creed which the Eastern Churches used in Baptism, was larger then this:
being either the same, or very little different from that which we commonly
call the Nicene Creed; because the greatest part of it was repeated and
confirmed in the first general Council held at Nice: where the first draught
thereof was presented to the Synod by Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, with this
Preamble. (...). Eusebius. ep. apud Socratem, lib. 1. hist. cap. 8. ( al. ^.) et
Theodoret. li. 1. cap 12.
As we have received from the Bishops that were before us, both at our first
catechizing, and when we received Baptism: and as we have learned from the
holy Scriptures; and as we have both believed and taught, when we entered into
the Ministry, and in our Bishopric it self: so believing at this present
also, we declare this our faith unto you. To this the Nicene Fathers added a
more clear explication of the Deity of the Son (against the Arrian heresy,
wherewith the Church was then troubled), professing him to be begotten, not
made, and to be of one substance with the Father. The second general Council,
which was assembled fiftie-six years after at Constantinople, approving this
confession of the faith, as (...). Conc. Constant. epis. apud Theod. l. 5. cap.
9.
most ancient and agreeable to Baptism, enlarged it somewhat; in the Article
that concerned the Holy Ghost especially, which at that time was most oppugned
by the Macedonian Heretics. And whereas the Nicene confession proceeded no
further, than to the belief which we have in the holy Trinity; the Fathers of
Constantinople made it up, by adding that which was commonly professed touching
the Catholic Church and the privileges belonging thereunto. Epiphanius
repeating this Creed at large, Epiphan. in' (...). p. 518. edit. Grac.
affirms it to have been delivered unto the Church by the Apostles. Io. Cass.
lib. 5. de Incarnat. Verbi.
Cassianus avoucheth as much, where he urges this against Nestorius, as the
Creed anciently received in the Church of Antioch; from whence he came. The
Roman Church, after the days of Charles the great, added the article of the
procession of the H^ly Ghost from the Son, unto this Symboll: and the Council.
Tridentin. ( S^^ 3) Symbolum fid^i, quo sancta Romana Ecclesi^ utitur, tanquam
princip^um tilud, in quo omnes, qui fidem Christi profitentur necessario
convenient, ac fundamentum firmu^ and unicum, contra quod portae inferi nunquam
praevalebunt, totidem verbis, quibus in omnibus ecclesiis legitur, exprimendum
esse censuit.
Council of Trent has now recommended it unto us, as that principle in which
all that profess the faith of Christ do necessarily agree; and the firm and
ONLY FOUNDATION, against which the Gates of Hell shall never prevail.

It is a matter confessed therefore by the Fathers of Trent themselves, that in
the Constantinopolitane Creed, or in the Roman Creed at the farthest (which
differs nothing from the other, but that it has added Filioque to the
procession of the Holy Ghost, and out of the Nicene Creed, Deum de Deo, to the
articles that concern the Son) that only foundation, and principle of faith
is to be found, in the unity whereof all Christians must necessarily agree.
Which is otherwise cleared sufficiently, by the constant practice of the
Apostles and their successors, in the first receiving of men into the Society
of the Church. For in one of the Apostles ordinary Sermons, we see, there was
so much matter delivered, as was sufficient to convert men unto the faith, and
to make them capable of Baptism: and those Sermons treated only of the first
principles of the doctrine of Christ; upon the receiving whereof, the Church
(following the example of the Apostles) never did deny Baptism unto her
Catechumeni. In these first principles therefore must the foundation be
contained, and that common unity of faith which is required in all the members
of the Church.

The foundation then being thus cleared: concerning the superstruction, we
learn from the Apostle, that some 1 Cor. 3.12.
build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble.
Some proceed from one degree of wholesome knowledge unto another; increasing
their maine stock, by the addition of those other sacred truths that are
revealed in the word of God: and these build upon the foundation, gold, and
silver, and precious stones. Others retain the precious foundation, but lay
base matter upon it; wood, hay, stubble, and such other either unprofitable or
more dangerous stuff: and others go so far, that they overthrow the very
foundation it self. The first of these be wise, the second foolish, the third
mad builders. When the day of trial comes: the first man's Ibid. v. 14.
work shall abide; and he himself shall receive a reward; the second shall
lose his work, but not himself; ( Ibid. v. 15.
he shall suffer loss, says the Apostle, but he himself shall be saved:) the
third shall lose both himself and his work together. And as in this
spiritual structure very different kinds of materials may be laid upon the
same foundation, some sound and some unsound: so in either of them, there is a
great difference to be made betwixt such as are more contiguous to the
foundation, and such as be remoter off. The fuller explication of the first
principles of faith, and the conclusions deduced from thence, are in the rank
of those verities that be more nearly conjoined to the foundation: to which
those falsities are answerable on the other side, that grate upon the
foundation, and any way endanger it.

For that there be diverse degrees both of truths and errors in Religion,
which necessarily must be distinguished; is a thing acknowledged, not by us
alone, but by the learnedest also of our Adversaries. Quaedam sunt catholicae
veritates, quae ita ad fidem pertinent, ut his sublatis, fides quoque ipsa
tollatur. Quas nos, usu frequenti non solum catholicas, sed fidei veritates
appellavimus. Aliae veritates sunt etiamipsae catholicae and universales, nempe
quas universa Ecclesia tenet, quibus licet eversis, fides quatitur, sed non
evertitur tamen* Atque in hujusmodi veritatu^ contrariis er^ oribus, dixi fidem
obscurari, non extingui; infirmari, non perire. Has ergo nunquam fidei
veritates censui vocandas, quamvis doctrinae Christianae veritates sint. Melch
Canu^, loc. Theolog. lib. 12 cap 11.
There be some Catholic verities (say they) which do so pertain to faith,
that these being taken away, the faith it self must be taken away also. And
these by common use we call not only Catholic, but verities of Faith also.
There are other verities which be Catholic also and universal, namely, such
as the whole Church holds, which yet being overthrown, the faith is shaken
indeed, but not overturned. And in the errors that are contrary to such truths
as these, the faith is obscured, not extinguished; weakened, not perished.
Nevertheless, Neces^ar^o oportet distinguere alios gradus propositionum, per
quas etiamsi fides non destruatur omnino, tamen male habet, and quatitur, and
quasi disponitur ad corruptionem. Sicut sunt quaedam corporum laesiones quae
non auferunt vitam, sed male habet homo per eas, and disponitur ad corruptionem
aut in toto aut in part; aliae vero sunt laesiones mortales, quae vitam
eripiunt: ita sunt quidam gradus propositionum, continentes doctrinam non
sanam, etiamsi non habeant haeresim manifestam. Dominic Bannes, in 2 am 2 ae.
quaest 11. artic 2.
though the faith be not altogether destroyed by them, yet is it evil at
ease, and shaken, and as it were disposed to corruption. For as there be
certain hurts of the body which do not take away the life, but yet a man is
the worse for them, and disposed to corruption either in whole or in part; as
there be other mortal hurts, which take away the life: so likewise are there
certain degrees of propositions, which contain unsound doctrine, although
they have not manifest heresy. In a word, the general rule concerning all
these superstructions, is: that the more near they are to the foundation, of
so much greater importance be the truths, and so much more perilous be the
errors, as again, the farther they are removed off, the less necessary does
the knowledge of such verities prove to be, and the swarving from the truth
less dangerous.

Now from all that has been said, two great Questions may be resolved, which
trouble many. The first is; What we may judge of our Forefathers* who lived
in the communion of the Church of Rome? Whereunto I answer, that we have no
reason to think otherwise, but that they lived and dyed under the mercy of
God. For we must distinguish the Papacy from the Church wherein it is, as the
Apostle does 2 These. 2*4.
Antichrist from the Temple of God, wherein he sits. The foundation upon
which the Church stands, is that common faith, (as we have heard) in the
unity whereof all Christians do generally accord. Upon this old foundation
Antichrist raises up his new buildings; and lays upon it, not hay and
stubble only, but far more vile and pernicious matter, which wrencheth and
disturbeth the very foundation it self. For example. It is a ground of the
Catholic faith, that Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary: which in the
Scripture is thus explained. Gal. 4.4.
God sent forth his Son, Made of a Woman. This the Papacy admits for a
certain truth: but insinuates withal, that upon the Altar God sends forth
his Son made of Bread. For the Transsubstantiation which these man would have
us believe, is not an annihilation of the Bread, and a substitution of the
Body of Christ in the stead thereof, but a real conversion of the one into
the other: such as they themselves would have esteemed to be a bringing forth
of Christ, and a kind of Generation of him. For, to omit the wild conceits of
Postellus in his book De Nativitate Mediatoris ultima: this is the doctrine of
their graver Divines (as Cornelius a Lapide the Jesuit does acknowledge in his
Roman Lectures) that Per verba consecrationis vere and realiter uti
transsubstantiatur panis, ita producitur and quasi generatur Christus in
altari, adeo potenter and effi caciter, ut si Christus nec dum esset
incarnatus* per haec verba Hoc est corpus meum, incarnaretur, corpusque humanum
assumeret: ut graves Theologi docent. Cornelius Cornelij a Lapide, Commentar.
in Esai. 7.14.
by the words of consecration truly and really as the bread is
transsubstantiated, so Christ is produced and as it were generated upon the
Altar, in such a powerful and effectual manner; that, if Christ as yet had
not been incarnate, by these words [Hoc est corpus meum] he should be
incarnated, and assume an humane body. And does not this new Divinity, think
you, shrewdly threaten the ancient foundation of the Catholic belief of the
Incarnation?

Yet such as in the days of our forefathers opposed the Popish doctrine of
Transsubstantiation, could allege for themselves, Confitentur alii, quod fides
sua, qua astruunt quod panis and vinum remanent post consecratione^ in naturis
suis, adhuc servatur laicis, and antiquitus servabatur. Io. Tissington, in
Confessione cont. Io. Wicliff. quam MS. habeo.
that the faith which they maintained, was then preserved among the laity, and
so had anciently been preserved. And of mine own knowledge I can testify,
that when I have dealt with some of the common people that would be counted
members of the Roman Church, and demanded of them what they thought of that
which I knew to be the common Tenet of their Doctors in this point: they not
only rejected it with indignation, but wondered also that I should imagine any
of their side to be so foolish, as to give credit to such a senseless thing.
Neither may we account it to have been a small blessing of God unto our
ancestors, who lived in that kingdom of darkness, that the Ignorance wherein
they were bred, freed them from the understanding of those things, which being
known might prove so prejudicial to their souls health. Sunt enim quaedam,
quae nescire, quam scire, sit melius. Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 17.
For there be some things, which it is better for a man to be ignorant of, than
to know: and the Rev. 2.24.
not knowing of those profundities, which are indeed the depths of Satan, is to
those that have not the skill to dive into the bottom of such mysteries of
iniquity, a good and an happy Ignorance.

The ignorance of those principles of the Catholic faith, that are absolutely
necessary to salvation, is as dangerous a gulf on the other side: but the
light of those common truths of Christianity was so great, and so firmly
fixed in the minds of those that professed the name of Christ, that it was not
possible for the power of darkness to extinguish it, nor the gates of Hell to
prevail against it. Nay, the very solemn days, which by the ancient
institution of the Church were celebrated for the commemoration of the Blessed
Trinity, the Nativitie, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior
Christ, did so preserve the memory of these things among the common people;
that by the in Sylvest. in Summa, verb. Fides.. 6. ex Thom. in 2 a 2 ae,
quaest. 2. art. 7.
Popish Doctors themselves, it is made an argument of gross and supine
Ignorance, that any should not have explicit knowledge of those mysteries of
Christ, which were thus publicly solemnized in the Church. And (which is the
principal point of all) the ordinary instruction appointed to be given unto
men upon their deathbeds, was: See my Treatise De Christianarum Ecclesiarum
successione and statu, cap. 7. 21.22. and the Answer to the Jesuit, page
514.515.
that they should look to come to glory, not by their own merits, but by the
virtue and merit of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ; that they should
place their whole confidence in his death only, and in no other thing; and
that they should interpose his death betwixt God and their sins, betwixt them
and Gods anger.

So that where these things did thus concur in any (as we doubt not but they
did in many thousands), the knowledge of the common principles of the faith,
the ignorance of such maine errors as did endanger the foundation, a godly
life, and a faithful death: there we have no cause to make any question, but
that God had fitted a subject for his mercy to work upon. And yet in saying
thus, we do nothing less than say that such as these were Papists, either in
their life or in their death: members of the Roman Church perhaps they were,
but such as by God's goodness were preserved from the mortality of Popery that
reigned there. For Popery it self is nothing else but the botch or the plague
of that Church: which hazardeth the souls of those it seizes upon, as much as
any infection can do the body. And therefore if any one will needs be so
foole-hardy as to take up his lodging in such a Pesthouse, after warning given
of the present danger; we in our charity may well say, Lord have mercy upon
him: but he, in the mean time, has great cause to fear, that God in his
justice will inflict that judgment upon him, which 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
in this case he has threatened against such as will not believe the truth, but
take pleasure in unrighteousness. And so much may suffice for that question.

The second question, so rise in the mouths of our Adversaries, is: Where was
your Church before Luther? Whereunto an answer may be returned from the
grounds of the solution of the former question: that our Church was even there
where now it is. In all places of the world, where the ancient foundations were
retained, and those common principles of faith, upon the profession whereof men
have ever been wont to be admitted, by Baptism, into the Church of Christ:
there we doubt not but our Lord had his subjects, and we our fellow servants.
For we bring-in no new Faith, nor no new Church. That which in the time of the
ancient Fathers In ipsa Catholica Ecclesia magnopere curandum est, utid
teneamus quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est: hoc est etenim
vere proprieque Catholicum* Vincent. Lirin cont. haeres. cap. 3.
was accounted to be truly and properly Catholic, namely, that which was
believed every where, always, and by all: that in the succeeding ages has
evermore been preserved, and is at this day entirely professed in our Church.
And it is well observed by a learned man, who has written a full discourse of
this argument; that Quicquid vel molitus sit vel moliturus sit mendacii Pater,
non tamen vel effecisse hactenus vel effecturum posthac, ut haec doctrina
catholica, omniu^ Christianoru^ consensu, semper and ubique rata, aboleatur:
quin potius, illam in densissima maxim involutarum perturbationum caligme
victricem extitisse, and in animis and in aperta confessione Christianorum
omnium, in suis fundamentis nullo modo labefactatam. In illa quoque veritate
unam illam Ecclesiam fuisse conservatam in mediis saevissimae hyemis
tempestatibus, vel densissimis tenebris suorum interluniorum. Ioh. Serranus, in
Apparat ad fidem Cathol. edit Paris. an. 1607. page 172.
whatsoever the Father of lies either has attempted or shall attempt, yet
neither has he hitherto effected, nor shall ever bring it to pass hereafter,
that this Catholic doctrine, ratified by the common consent of Christians
always and every where, should be abolished; but that in the thickest mist
rather of the most perplexed troubles, it still obtained victory, both in the
minds and in the open confession of all Christians, no ways overturned in the
foundation thereof: and that in this verity that one Church of Christ was
preserved in the midst of the tempests of the most cruel winter, or in the
thickest darkness of her waynings.

Thus if at this day we should take a survay of the several professions of
Christianity, that have any large spread in any part of the world (as of the
Religion of the Roman and the Reformed Churches in our Quarters, of the
Egyptians and Aethiopians in the South, of the Grecians and other Christians
in the Eastern parts), and should put-by the points wherein they did differ
one from another, and gather into one body the rest of the Articles wherein
they all did generally agree: we should find, that in those propositions
which without all controversy are universally received in the whole Christian
world, so much truth is contained, as, being joined with holy obedience, may be
sufficient to bring a man unto everlasting salvation. Neither have we cause to
doubt, but that Gal. 6.16.
as many as do walk according to this rule (neither overthrowing that which
they have builded by superinducing any damnable heresies thereupon, nor
otherwise vitiating their holy faith with a lewd and wicked conversation)
peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of GOD.

Now these common principles of the Christian faith, which we call (...), or
things generally believed of all, as they have Vniversitatem, antiquitatem,
co^sensionem. Vincent. Lirin* (...) hae^es. (...)
Universality, and Antiquity, and Consent concurring with them (which by
Vincentius his rule, are the special characters of that which is truly and
properly Catholic: so for their Duration we are sure that they have still
held out, and been kept as the Seminary of the Catholic Church in the
darkest and difficultest times that ever have been: where if the Lord of
Hosts had not in his mercy reserved this seed unto us, we should long since
Esaias. 1.9.
have been as Sodom, and should have been like unto Gomorrah. It cannot be
denied indeed, that Satan and his instruments have used their utmost
endeavor, either to hide this light from men's eyes, by keeping them in gross
ignorance, or to deprave it by bringing-in pernicious heresies; and that in
these latter ages they have much prevailed both ways, as well in the West and
North, as in the East and South. Yet far be it, for all this, from any man to
think, that Romans 11.2.5.
God should so cast away his people, that in those times there should not be
left a remnant according to the election of grace.

The Christian Church was never brought unto a lower ebb, than was the Jewish
Synagogue in the days of our Savior Christ; when Luke 11.52.
the Interpreters of the Law had taken away the key of knowledge: and that
little knowledge that remained, was miserably corrupted, not only with the
leaven of the Pharisees, but also with the damnable heresy of the Sadduces.
And yet a man at that time might have seen the true servants of GOD standing
together with these men in the selfsame Temple: which might well be
accounted, as the House of the Saints in regard of the one, so a Den of
thieves in respect of the other. When the pestilent heresy of the Arrians had
polluted the whole world; the people of Christ were not to be found among them
only who made an open secession from that wicked company, but among those also
who held external communion with them, and lived under their Ministry. Where
they so learned the other truths of GOD from them, that they were yet ignorant
of their maine error; God in his providence so ordering matters, that (as it
is noted by S. Et hujus q^^dem usque adhuc impietatis occasio per fraudem
perficitur; ut jam sub Antichristi Sacerdotibus Christi populus non occidat.
Hilar contr. Auxentium.
Hilary) the people of Christ should not perish under the Priests of Antichrist.

If you demand then, Where was Gods Temple all this while? the answer is at
hand: There where Antichrist sat. Where was Christ's people? Even under
Antichrists Priests: and yet this is no justification at all, either of
Antichrist, or of his Priests; but a manifestation of God's great power, who is
able to uphold his Church even there Revel. 2.13.
where Satan's throne is. Babylon was an infectious place, and the infection
thereof was mortal: and yet God had his people there, whom he preserved from
the mortality of that infection. Else, how should he have said; Rev. 18.4.
Come out of her my people; that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues. If the place had not been infectious, he should
not have needed to forwarne them of the danger wherein they stood of partaking
in her sins; and if the infection had not been mortal, he would not have
put them in mind of the plagues that were to follow: and if in the place thus
mortally infected, God had not preserved a people alive unto himself, he could
not have said; Come out of her my people.

The enemy indeed had there sown his tares: but Mat. 13.24, 25.
sown them in the LORDS field, and among the LORDS wheat. And a field, we
know, may so be Infelix lolium, and steriles dominantur avenae.
overgrowne with such evil weeds as these; that at the first sight a man
would hardly think, that any corn were there at all: even as in the barn it
self, the Grana cum coeperint triturari interpaleam, se non jam tangunt, and
quasi non se noverunt, quia intercedit medio palea. Et quicunque longius
attendit aream, paleam solumn* odo putat: nisi diligentius intueatur, nisi
manum porrigat, nisi spiritu oris, id est, flatu purgante di^^ernat; difficile
pervenit ad discretione^ granorum. Sermon. 228. de Tempore, tomo. 10. Oper.
Augustini.
mixture of the chafe with the wheat is sometime such, as a-farre off a man
would imagine that he did see but a heap of chafe, and nothing else. Those
worthy husbandmen that in these last 600. years have taken pains in plucking
up those pernicious weeds out of the LORDS field, and severing the chafe from
his grain; cannot be rightly said in doing this, either to have brought in
another field, or to have changed the ancient grain. The field is the same,
but weeded now, unweeded then: the grain the same, but winnowed now,
unwinnowed then. We preach no new faith, but the same Catholic faith that
ever has been preached: neither was it any part of our meaning to begin a new
Church in these latter days of the world, but to reform the old. A tree that
has the luxurious branches lopped off, and the noxious things that cleave unto
it taken away; is not by this pruning and purging of it made another tree than
it was before: neither is the Church reformed in our days, another Church than
that which was deformed in the days of our forefathers; though it has no
agreement, for all that, with Popery, which is the Pestilence that walked in
those times of darkness, and the destruction that now wastes at noone day.

And thus have I finished that which I had to speak, concerning the unity of
the faith: for the further explication whereof, the Apostle adds. [ and of
the knowledge of the Son of God.] Wherein we may observe both the Nature of
this Grace, and the Object of it. For the former, we see that Faith is here
described unto us by Knowledge: to show unto us, that Knowledge is a thing that
is necessarily required in true believing; Whereof this may be an argument
sufficient: that in matters of faith the Scripture does use indifferently the
terms of knowing and believing. So Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives.
Ioh. 17.3. This is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Esai. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many. As therefore in the fundamental truths of
Christian Religion unity of faith is required among all those that belong to
the Catholic Church: so in those maine grounds likewise there is unity of
knowledge generally required among all that profess the name of Christ.

For some things there be, the knowledge whereof is absolutely necessary,
Necessarium necessitate medii appella^t Theologi illud, quod ex lege ordinaria
Dei, sic ad salutem necessarium est, ut quicunque etiam ob ignorantiam
invincibilem, vel quacunque alia de caussa id non fuerit assecutus, is nequeat
etiam consequi salutem Greg. de Valentia, tom. 3. commentar. Theolog. quaest.
2. punct. 2. col. 299. Illa quae sunt necessaria necessitate finis, si desint,
nobis etiam sine culpa nostra, non excusabunt nos ab aeterna morte; quamvis non
fuerit in nostra potestate illa assequi. Quemadmodum etiamsi non sit nisi
unicum remedium, ut aliquis fugiat mortem corporalem, and tale remedium
ignoretur and ab infirmo and medico; sine dnbio peribit homo ille. Dom. Bannes,
in 2 am 2 ae, quaest. 2. art. 8. col. 348.
necessitate medij vel finis (as the Schoolmen speak:) without which no man
may expect, by Gods ordinary law, to attain unto the end of his faith, the
salvation of his soul. And in these a man may lose himself, not by Heresy
only, which is a flat denying; but by Ignorance also, which is a bare not
knowing of them: these things being acknowledged to be so necessary, that
although it lay not in our power to attain thereunto, yet this invincible
Ignorance should not excuse us from everlasting death. Even as if there were
one only remedy, whereby a sick man could be recovered, and freed from
corporal death: suppose the patient and the Physician both were ignorant of
it, the man must perish, as well not knowing it, as if being brought unto him,
he had refused it. And therefore in this case it is resolved, that Sicut ad
legis Christi habitualem fidem omnis vitiator obligatur sine ulla exceptione;
sic ab ejus actuali fide nullus excusatur nisi sola incapacitate, etc. Parvulos
autem and furiosos, caeterisque passionibus mente captos, seu alia naturali
impossibilitate prohibitos, incapaces voco: etsi non simpliciter, tame^
secundum quid; sc. dum his defectibus laborant. Petr. de Alliaco. in quaestione
Vesperiarum.
from the explicit faith, and actual knowledge of these things, nothing can
excuse but only such an incapacitie as is found in infants, naturals, and
distracted persons: and that in all others which have the use of reason,
although they want the means of instruction, this Ignorance is not only
perilous, but also damnable.

The danger then of this Ignorance being, by the confession of the most
judicious Divines of both sides, acknowledged to be so great: the woeful estate
of the poor Country wherein I live, is much to be lamented, where the people
generally are suffered to perish for want of knowledge: the vulgar
superstitions of Popery not doing them half that hurt, that the ignorance of
those common principles of the faith does, which all true Christians are bound
to learn. The consideration whereof, has sometime drawn me to treat with
those of the opposite party, and to move them: that howsoever in other things
we did differ one from another, yet we should join together in teaching those
maine points, the knowledge whereof was so necessary unto salvation, and of the
truth whereof there was no controversy betwixt us. But what for the
jealousies, which these distractions in matters of Religion have bred among us,
and what for other respects, the motion took small effect: and so betwixt us
both, the poor people are kept still in miserable ignorance, neither knowing
the grounds of the one religion nor of the other.

Here the case (God be thanked) is far otherwise: where your Majesty's care
can never be sufficiently commended, in taking order, that the chief heads of
the Catechism should, in the ordinary ministry, be diligently propounded
and explained unto the people throughout the land. Which I wish were as duly
executed every where, as it was piously by You intended. Great Scholars
possibly may think, that it stands not so well with their credit, to stoop
thus low, and to spend so much of their time in teaching these rudiments and
first principles of the doctrine of Christ. But they should consider, that the
laying of the foundation skilfully, as it is the matter of greatest importance
in the whole building, so is it the very masterpiece of the wisest builder 1
Cor. 3.10.
According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
master builder, I have laid the foundation: says the great Apostle. And let
the learnedest of us all try it whenever we please; we shall find, that to
lay this groundwork rightly, (that is, to apply our selves unto the capacity
of the common Auditorie, and to make an Ignorant man to understand these
mysteries in some good measure) will put us to the trial of our skill, and
trouble us a great deal more, than if we were to discuss a controversy, or
handle a subtle point of learning in the Schools. Yet Ephesians. 4.11.
Christ did give as well his Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, as his
ordinary Pastors and Teachers, to bring us all, both learned and unlearned,
unto the unity of this faith and knowledge: and the neglecting of this, is the
frustrating of the whole work of the Ministry* For let us preach never so
many Sermons unto the people, our labor is but lost, as long as the foundation
is unlaid, and the first principles untaught, upon which all other doctrine
must be builded.

He therefore that will 2 Timothy 2.15
study to show himself approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, dividing the word of God aright; must have a special care to plant
this Kingdom both in the minds and in the hearts of them that hear him. I
say, in the hearts as well as in the minds: because we may not content our
selves with a bare Theoricall knowledge, which is an information only of the
Understanding, and goes no further than the brain; but we must labor to
attain unto a further degree both of Experimental and of Practical
Knowledge, in the things that we have learned. A young man may talk much of
the troubles of the world, and a Scholar in the University may show a great
deal of wit in making a large declamation upon that argument: but when the
same men have afterward been beaten in the world, they will confess that they
spoke before they knew not what, and count their former apprehension of these
things to be but mere Ignorance, in respect of that new learning which now
they have bought by dear experience. The tree in Paradise, of which our first
parents were forbidden to eat, was called Gen 2.9.17.
the tree of knowledge of good and evil: because it signified unto them, that
as now while they stood upon terms of obedience with their Creator, they knew
nothing but good; so at what time soever they did transgress his commandment,
they should begin to know evil also, whereof before they had no knowledge, not
but that they had an intellectual knowledge of it before (for he that knows
good, cannot be ignorant of that which is contrary unto it; Rectum being
always index sui and obliqui:) but that till then they never had felt any
evil, they never had any experimental knowledge of it. So our Apostle in this
Epistle boweth his knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
would grant unto these Ephesians, Ephe. 3.19.
to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge: showing, that there is a
further degree of knowledge in this kind, that may be felt by the heart,
though not comprehended by the brain: and in the Epistle to the Philippians,
Phil. 3.8.
he counts all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ
Jesus his Lord. Meaning hereby a knowledge grounded upon deep experience of
the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection, in his own soul: as he
expounds it himself, in the words following. Ibid. verse. 10.
That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of
his sufferings, and be made conformable unto his death.

There is an Experimental knowledge then to be looked after, beside the
Mental: and so is there a Practical knowledge likewise, as well as an
Intellectual. When Christ is said to have known no sin: we cannot
understand this of Intellectual knowledge (for had he not thus known sin,
he could not have reproved it as he did) but of Practical. So that, 2 Cor.
5.21.
He knew no sin, in S. Paul; must be conceived to be the very same with, 1
Pet. 2.22.
He did no sin, in S. Peter. In the first to the Romans, they that Romans 1.21.
knew God, because they glorified him not as God, are therefore said, Ibid.
verse. 18.
not to have God in their knowledge. God made his ways and his laws known to
the children of Israel in the desert; and yet he Psalm. 95.10. Heb. 3.10.
said of them: It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not
known my ways. For there is an error in the heart, as well as in the brain:
and a kind of ignorance arising from the will, as well as from the mind. And
therefore in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb 9.7. compared with Lev. 16.16.17.
all sins are termed (...), ignorances, and Heb. 5.2. Aristot. Ethic. lib. 3.
cap 1. (...).
sinners (...), ignorant and erring persons: because how ever in the general
the understanding may be informed rightly, yet when particular actions come to
be resolved upon, men's perverse wills and inordinate affections cloud their
minds, and lead them out of the way. That therefore is to be accounted sound
Knowledge, which sinketh from the brain into the heart, and from thence
breaks forth into action: (setting head, heart, hand, and all aworke:) and so
much only must thou reckon thy self to know in Christianity, as thou art
able to make use of in practice. For as Saint James says of faith; Iam. 2.18.
Show me thy faith by thy works: so does he in like manner of knowledge. Iam.
3.13.
Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? let him show out of
a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom: and S. John much to
the same purpose. 1 Ioh. 2.3.4.
Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. He that
says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth
is not in him.

He speaks there of Jesus Christ the righteous: the Son of God, who is here
in my text likewise made the Object of this Knowledge. Mat. 16.16.18.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God: is by Christ himself made the
rock upon which the whole Church is builded, And, 1 Cor. 3.11.
Other foundation (says S. Paul) can no man lay, than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ. Vid. Aug. lib. de fide and oper. ^.9.
Not that we should think, that there were no other fundamental doctrine to
be acknowledged but this alone (for the articles of the Holy Ghost,
forgiveness of sins, resurrection of the dead, eternal judgment, and such
like other, have their place also in the Heb. 6.1.2.
foundation) but because this is the most special object of faith, and the
primarie foundation of all the other. For first, as God is made the coaequate
object of the whole body of Divinity, notwithstanding it treats also of men
and Angels, Heaven and Hell, Sin and Obedience, and sundry other
particulars; because all these are brought to God reductiuely, if not as
explications of his Nature, yet of his Works and Kingdom: so likewise may
Christ be made the primarie head of all other fundamental articles, because
they have all reference unto him; being such as concern either his Father, or
his Spirit, or his Incarnation, or his Office of Mediation, or his Church, or
the special Benefits which he has purchased for it.

Secondly, howsoever this faith and knowledge, being taken in their larger
extent, have for their full object whatever is revealed in the Word of God:
yet as they build us upon the foundation, as they incorporate us into the
mystical body, as they are the means of our justification and life, they
look upon the Son of God, and him only. The holy Scriptures (within the
bounds whereof the utmost extent of all our faith and knowledge must be
contained) are able to make us wise unto salvation; but yet through faith which
is in Christ Jesus (2 Timothy 3.15. So, by his knowledge (or the knowledge of
himself) shall my righteous servant justify many: says the Father of the
Son, Esaias 53.11. And the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me: says the
Apostle, Gal. 2.20. The children of Israel in the wilderness, being stung with
fiery Serpents, were directed, for their recovery, to look upon the brazen
Serpent: which was a figure of Ioh. 3.14.15
the Son of man, lifted up upon the Cross; that whosoever did believe in him,
might not perish, but have eternal life. Now as the Israelites with the same
eyes, and with the same visive faculty, wherewith they beheld the sands and
the mountains in the desert, did look upon the brazen Serpent also; but were
cured by fastening their sight upon that alone, and not by looking upon any
other object: so by the same faith and knowledge whereby we are justified, Heb.
11.3.
we understand that the world was framed by the word of God, and believe all
other truths revealed; and yet fides qua iustificans, faith as it does justify
us, does not look upon these, but fixes it self solely upon the Son of God,
not knowing any thing here but Jesus Christ and him crucified And thus has our
Savior a special and peculiar place in that larger foundation: according to
that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, (...).
of which (for so his words in the Original may well bear it) Jesus Christ is
the chief cornerstone.

It follows now, that we should proceed from the foundation to the
structure: and so Heb. 6.1.
leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, go on unto perfection [unto
a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ]:
There is a time wherein Christ is but begun, and as it were a-breeding in us.
Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travel in birth again until Christ
be formed in you. After that he has been formed in our hearts, he is at first
but as a babe there; yet rests not at that stay: but as in his natural body
he Luke 2.^2.
increased in stature, so in every part of his mystical body he has set for
himself a certain measure of stature, and a fullness of growth; which being
attained unto, a Christian is thereby made a perfect man. And for this end also
does the Apostle here show that the Ministry was instituted, Ephesians. 4.14, 15.
that we henceforth should be no more children (as it is in the words
immediately following my Text), but that we might grow up into him in all
things, which is the head, even Christ. For the perfection which the Apostle
here speaks of, is not to be taken absolutely, (as if any absolute perfection
could be found among m^n in this life) but in comparison with childhood; As the
opposition is more clearly made by him, in 1. Corinthians. 14.20. Brethren, be not
children, in understanding, howbeit in malice be you children, but in
understanding be perfect, that is to say, of man's estate. And, Heb. 5.13.14.
Every one that uses milk, is unskilful in the word of righteousness; for he
is a babe: but strong meat belongs to them that are perfect, that is, that
are of full age; as our Interpreters have rightly rendered it.

Now as there is great difference among men in their natural growth, so is
there no less variety among them also in respect of their spiritual stature:
there being several degrees of this imperfect kind of perfection here spoken
of; which, according to the diversity of times, places, and persons, may admit
a greater or a lesser measure. For we may not think that the same measure of
knowledge (for example) is sufficient for a learned man and an unlearned; for a
Pastor, and for an ordinary Christian; for those that lived in the time of
darkness, and them that enjoy the light of the Gospel; for them that have the
means, and them that want it. But, according to the measure of the gift of
God, we must know notwithstanding that it is required generally of all men;
that they grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. (2. Pet. 2.18.) not in knowledge only, but in grace: even Ephesians. 4.15.
grow up into him in ALL things, which is the head; as our Apostle here
admonishes us. We must proceed from faith to faith, (Romans 1.17.) that is,
from one measure and degree of it unto another: and this being the root, and
other graces as it were the branches, if it grow apace, other graces also must
hasten, and ripen, and grow proportionably with it: else thou may justly
suspect, that thy growth is not sound, and answerable to that which the Apostle
shows to be in the mystical body of Christ; which Ephesians. 4.16
according to the effectual working in the measure of EVERY part, makes
increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love. The time will not
permit me to proceed any further: and therefore here I end. Heb. 13.20.21.
Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of his everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his will; working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

