St. Paul's Threefold Cord: Wherewith are severally combined, the mutual
OEconomicall Duties, Betwixt Husband. Wife.
Parent. Child.
Master. Servant.


By DANIEL TOVTEVILLE Pr. to the Charterhouse.

Si post fata venit gloria, non propero. LONDON, Printed by Anne Griffin for
Henry Seile, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Tygers-Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1635.

DEO OPT. MAX. ET Vniversis Anglorum Laribus.

The Ground of the first Book.
Wives, submit your selves t^ your own Husbands, as i^ is fit, in the Lord.
Col. 3.18 TOM. 1. LIB. 1.
The duty of the Wife toward her Husband.
PRivate Families are the Seminaries, and Nurseries both of Church and
Commonweal, for out of these must spring a seed for the propagation of the
one; and again it must be so formed by godly education, that it may prove a
holy seed for the amplification of the other. Now because in every family,
there is as the Philosopher has very well observed, a threefold combination.
Pol. i. c. 3,
One betwixt the Husband and the Wife; a second betwixt the Parent, and the
Child; a third, and last, betwixt the Master, and the Servant; that nothing may
happen to be disjoynted, and out of frame in any, following the method of St.
Paul. Col. 3.18. We will prescribe directions here for all; and first begin
with the nuptial Bond, as being the first. For Adam was a husband before he
was a father. Secondly, because from these the rest receive impression. And as
in a Watch, if the spring be out of frame, the wheels can never go, or if
they move not one an other, the hammer cannot strike, so where there is not a
fit correspondency betwixt man and wife, the rest of the family cannot but
miscarry in their Motions. Again it is a thing worthy to be observed, that
howsoever in this yoke, the husband be the more honorable of the twain, the
Apostle yet requires the duty of the wife; and for this we may render a
twofold reason.

1. Because the tender of subjection comes from us with more difficulty, than
that of our affections. To love is thought a pleasant and delightful thing;
but to be subject to an others will is usually counted hateful, and detrected
as a burden.

2. Because the love of the husband depends for the most part upon the due
subjection of the wife. For if she vouchsafe him the one, he shall be barbarous
and brutish, if he shall not return her the other: the wife is the person
then, with whom we must begin. The duty whereunto she is exhorted, is
subjection; The persons to whom this duty is to be tendered, are their own
husbands. The motive that should induce them willingly to tender it, It is
comely. The manner or limitation of the render, it must be only (...), in the
Lord. As touching the first.

Wives.
If women will but consider the manner and end of their creation, they may be
the more easily brought to what is here required: For as concerning the
manner; The woman was not made of earth, as Adam was; And why? Nunquid deerat
lutum figulo, ut necesse erat pulsare latus Adami? Did the Potter, says St.
Gregory, want Clay, that he was driven to knock at Adams side.

Surely no; but he would take woman out of man, and not out of earth, that the
priority and dignity of man might thereby be established. And this is the
Apostles reason. 1 Timothy 1.13. Adam was first formed, and then Eve: and in 1
Cor. 11.8. The man is not of the Woman, but the Woman of the Man.

Again in respect of the end. She was created for man's sake. For though God
had made him Lord of the whole earth, and given him all the creatures for his
use, he found not yet amongst them all a help meet for himself, and
therefore desired a supply; He found helpers among^t them, but they were mute,
without conference; brutish, without reason; all looking downwards: But man
was in honor. Psalm. 49.20. The horse served him to ride, the Ass to carry his
burden: These were yet no meet helpers. Fuit in Adamo appetitus socii, et
similitudinis: There was in Adam a desire of his like, he would have had a
companion, with whom he might have discoursed of the love and praises of his
Maker; but such a one found he not. Some of the Beasts drew near to hm in
reason, as the Fox; but none in this. Cicero lib. 1. de Legib. et 1.
Tu^ouquaest.
Totum hominis scientia Dei! Man alone is capable of Religion. So that a fit
help for comfort, conference, cohabitation, procreation, equality, he had
none. Every Bird had his mate. Esaias 34.16. There was Equus, and Equa: All had,
what man wanted. God therefore out of man for man made a fit help.

Wives. The word is indefinite and exempteth none. The younger women, and the
elder; the rich, and poor; the noble, and base: are alike made liable to the
performance of this duty. It Is not only Ruth, that must be serviceable to her
Booz; but even Vashti, though a mighty Empress must know her Lord. Yea though
there were never so great a disproportion betwixt them in state and in
condition; as say the wife were a Princess, the husband but a pesant, she must
be yet in conjugall respects as a hand-mayd unto him; he must not be as a
servant unto her. The dutiful respect, which the glorious Virgin exhibited to
Joseph, is observed in Luke 2.48. by the couching of her words, in that she
says, Thy Father and I, not I and my father. Ego et Rex meus; I and my King;
is unsupportable in the Politic, and no less is, I and my husband in the
Oeconomickes. It was Assuerus his edict, and it is likewise Gods decree, that
all women, great and small, shall give their husbands honor. For the husband
is the wives head, Ephesians. 5.24.
even as Christ is the head of the Church. As the Church therefore is subject
unto Christ; so every wife must be to her husband.

1. The subjection of one Creature to an other in general, is nothing else, if
we consider it with relation unto God, but a divine disposing and subordinating
of things less perfect, to such as are more perfect; that by this subjection
they may receive what they want, and be forever guided, and preserved in their
course. Or if we take it with respect to the creature, which is made subject.
It is inwardly a cheerful inclination; outwardly a ready application of the
same, to that whereunto the wisdom of God himself has ordained, and
appointed it. And this subjection is so necessary, that without it the world
could not long subsist; yea nature herself would suddenly be dissolved.

Things sublunary and terrestrial are all subject to the power, and influence
of celesticall bodies, and being in their own nature defective and ignoble,
they must from them receive their due perfection. It is the earths subjecting
of her self unto the Sun, which first begets her fruits, and brings them
afterward to full maturity. It is the Oceans yielding to the Moon, which
occasioneth her daily ebbes, and flows, without which motion, the waters
thereof would quickly putrify, and with their stench poison the creatures. In
a word there is no maintayning of any politic society without this virtue.

Rule and subjection, says the Philosopher, are things not only profitable,
but likewise absolutely necessary. When the people will not obey the Prince;
when the Mariner will not listen to the master; when the Soldier will not
follow the directions of his Leader, what can follow but confusion? In the
beginning GOD established a superiority among all the works of his Hands,
after their several kinds. He made two great Lights; the one to rule the
day, the lesser to rule the night: and afterward when he had created man; he
did invest him presently into imperial authority, To subdue the earth, and to
r^le over the Fishes of the Sea, Genesis 1.
and over the Fowls --

Bees have their Sovereign; and little Ants are not without their Discipline.
In a word, we read of an Host in heaven, and why is it so called, but
because there are orders and degrees therein, which being withdrawn from an
Army, it can have no settled composition? There must be then a Masterie, and
dominion specially designed, to say, Ho^ puto non iustum est, illud male,
rectius istud. This is not right, that is evil, and the other is better. This
is the Soder, by which the several parts and Members of a Commonweal are all
united, and combined together. It Is the very life-breath of every Creature,
which if the Spirit and Soul of government were taken from them, were like to
prove nothing but a burden to themselves, a booty to their enemies. Maximilian
the Emperor, comparing the Kings of France and Spain together with himself,
said wittily and merrily, that the King of Spain was Rex hominum, a King of
Men, because he used them ingenuously and liberally: The King of France, Rex
Asinorum, a King of Asses, by reason of the many burdens and taxations which he
laid upon his people; Himself, Rex Regum, a King of Kings, because all that
were under him, would do but what they pleased themselves: The best is, Rex
Subditorum, a King of Subjects: And whosoever shall shake from off their necks
this yoke, they provide but ill for their own good.

(...); Obedience is the mother of all happiness, says the ancient adage; and
surely he that follows her shall show a noble, and a generous mind. Facile
imperium in bonos pessimus quisque asperrime rectorem patitur; Good men are
easily governed, only the base and refractary spirit will admit no reins. Let
the lawless Anabaptist therefore together with the ambitious Romanist cry out
in Church, and Commonweal, against the Gods and Christ's of the Earth, as
sometimes did those cursed Vipers among the Heathen, against the anointed Son
of GOD; Let us break their bonds in sunder, Psalm. 2.
and cast their cords from us. We must know yet that there is no Power but of
God; and he that resists the Powers that be, he resists the ordinance of
God. The Lord is King, be the earth never so impatient. Promotion comes not
either from the East, or from the West, or from the South, but wholly from the
Lord. By him Kingdoms are disposed; Princes inaugurated; Scepters and States
established. By Him were Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their Confederates sent
down alive into the darker bowels of the earth; by him was Zimri burnt in his
Palace, Achitophel hanged in a halter, and Absalom by his own hair; all for
denying their duteous fealty to those whom he had constituted and appointed
over them, as his Vicegerents; And thus much concerning subjection in general.
The particular follows.

Wives be subject.
This subjection of the Wife unto her Husband consists principally in three
things. The first is an internal Act of the heart; as when the Wife,
notwithstanding she come of a nobler house, and have brought with her a a
greater portion, than she found, and know herself to be of a more able
understanding than her husband, she does yet in her mind acknowledge him to be
her head, counting herself every way inferior unto him, in that she is his
wife. This humbling of the heart is the fountain of all external subjection;
And when it flows not from hence, it is either constrained, or counterfeit.
For the avoiding of this, St. Paul would have the wife to fear her husband.
Ephesians. 5.33.
Now this may be expressed diverse kinds of ways.

1. By giving him reverend and respective titles: So Sarah obeyed Abraham, and
called him Lord: Non blandiendi con uetudine, sed hujus subjectio is
testificandae voluntate; Not out of any soothing custom, but out of a
serviceable conscience; And her daughters ye are, 1 Pet. 3.6.
says the Apostle, while ye do well, not being compelled thereto by any
terror.

2. It may be expressed, by living without suspicion, and making ever the best
interpretation of his doubtful actions. Michol fayld in this, when so
presumptuously she taunted David for dancing before the Ark of God in presence
of the mayds of Israel.

3. A woman may show a fear toward her husband by striving to walk
continually under the lee of his anger, making her eye, rather a Bucket to
quench the fire, than her breath a Bellows to kindle it.

2. This subjection of a wife toward her husband consists in a desire to
conform her will, her words, her works, as near as she can, in things
lawful and indifferent to those of her husband. For likeness in manners
argues a likeness in mind; and there is no affectation of similitude, but
where there is some similitude of Affection. This I confess is a hard task;
but the more painful, the more praisefull. It is hard, because all are
addicted to love their own ways, to like of their own humors, and distaste
the contrary.

Oderunt hilares tristem, Hor. Epist. 18. lib. 1.
tristemque jocosi, says the Poet: Mirth will not willingly come into the
house of mourning, nor mourning into the house of mirth. Lamenting Niobe will
sit alone; and Rahel weeping for her children will not be comforted. It Is a
laborious thing therefore for any to strip themselves of their own
disposition, and put on an others. It Is requisite yet for a wife to do it:
that which above all must be commended in her. For as a looking-glass, though
it be curiously wrought, and richly garnished with sundry sorts of gemmes, is
nothing esteemed as it is a glass, unless it reflect the true resemblance of
them, that look therein: So let a woman be never so rich, never so fair,
never so comely, never so qualifyed, she is not to be valued as a wife, if she
be not conformable to the inclination of her husband. She that is married,
says the Apostle, cares how she may please her husband. The word in the
original is (...)..i. She makes it the serious object of all her thoughts, and
endeavors; she does as it were pine her self by continual musing how it may
be done. Now there is not a more compendious way, than to accommodate herself
unto him, and so to compose her own affections, that they may answer to the
level of his.

3. The last thing where^n this subjection does consist, is the daily and due
performance of all such offices, and taskes as she is liable unto, Now the
first of these is, to love him faithfully, Tit. 2.4. Not as Dalilah did
Sampson, to betray him to his enemies. For the heart of her husband must trust
in her. Not as Iezabel did Ahab, to abuse his power for the effecting of her
base designs. Nor as Hieroboams wife did him; to do that for his sake, which
may provoke God to forsake her; but as Abigail did Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.18
to cast about for his good, all the days of her life, She must love him, for
she is his Ribb; yea the Ribb next to his heart, which is the seat of Love;
and she must love him faithfully.

The sex of women-kinde is compared by the Fathers to a dish of meat, which
before the master of the Feast have carved up, every man at the table may say
his part is in it, but being once cut up, look what piece is laid upon the
Trencher, is his alone, to whom it is delivered. Prove. 12.4.
A virtuous woman, says Solomon is a crown to her husband; but she that
makes him ashamed is as rottenness in his Bones. Marriage is a Loveknot of
Gods own tying; she that breaks it, forgets the Covenant of her maker. The
Wife therefore must have a care, Pro. 2.16.
Vt Thalamus sit pro Templo, and Thorus pro Altari; that her chamber be
continually sanctified by prayer as the Temple, and her bed kept undefiled as
the Altar.

2. As she must love him faithfully; soshe must adhere unto him constantly,
what chances, and occurrences so ever happen. We read of no dissension
betwixt Job and his Wife, so long as he lived in plenty, and was the greatest
of all the inhabitants in the East, but as soon as he fell into disasters, she
was willing to be ridd of him; Blaspheme the name of God, said she, that thou
may dye. The ancient Germans, though then a barbarous generation, did
principle their wives at the very time of their marriage to a better practice.
Lib. demori^. Germ^.
For as Tacitus relates it, they presented them then with two Oxen ready yoakt,
a horse ready trapt, and weapons fit for use, to let them understand, that from
thenceforth they were to share with them both at home, and abroad; in the
pains of Peace, and in the perils of War.

So was Texene the wife of Agathocles affected, and so was Isabella likewise,
sister to Charles the Emperor, and wife to Cristhierne King of Denmark: For
when his subjects had banished him for his tyranny, and would have conferred
the Sovereignty only upon her, she refused it, and chose rather to pine and
perish with her husband in his exile, than to live as Queen, and have an
absolute command without him. Aelian reports of Dionysius, L. 13. c. 10
that he married two wives upon one and the same day. Doris the Locrian, and
Aristaeneta the daughter of Hipparinus, and sister unto Dion; the one followed
him in his wars; the other accompanied him only at his return. Christian
Wives are not to expect this division of attendance; one alone must undergo
the burden of both. She takes her husband for richer, for poorer, and with a
willing foot m^st pace it after him in either fortune.

Sulpitia, Patric. S^n li^. 4 de Rep. Tit. 5.
notwithstanding the many strong persuasions, which her mother daily used unto
her, and the watchful eye she kept continually upon her, made an escape, and
followed her husband Lentulus, whom the Triumviri had proscribed into Sicilie,
choosing rather to abandon parents; kindred, Country, with all the pleasures
and delights which many other ways she did enjoy; than to loose the sweet
content she took in the society of him.

The strange woman thinks her self most happy when her husband is from home;
Pro. 7.16.
for then she perfumes her bed, and decks her chamber with Egyptian Carpets,
resembling in this the Moon, which always puts on a revelling countenance,
when the Sun is farthest from her; but Rebecca will not be seen out of her
Isaac's company; like the Marigold, if the Sun be away, she lives retired,
and keeps her beauty canopied from the view of all things else. Lots wife was
safe as she walked toward Segor, so long as her eye was fixed upon him, but as
soon as she had turned her head aside to look upon the walls of Sodom, she
became a pillar of Salt. The daughters of Sparta, while they were maids, did
go continually barefaced, but after marriage a Veil did cover all; and
having no longer any need to seek for husbands, but to keep themselves to
those, which they had.

3. She must labor for him car^fully, in the guiding and governing of her
Family, that he may have no need of spoil. Pro. 31.11.
She must rise while it is yet night, and give the portion to her household,
and the ordinary to her maids. She must over-see their ways, and not eat
the bread of idleness. The Apostle will have her to love her children, and to
keep at home. Tit. 2.4.
Phidias, that excellent painter, being desired to draw the picture of a woman,
drew her sitting under a Snails shel; to show, that like the Snaile, she should
ever have her house upon her head. De praecept. conjugal.
Plutarch reports, that it was the manner of the Egyptian women, after
marriage, never to use any shoes, to signify that their business lay within,
and there was no need they should outpasse those limits. Herodotus likewise
writes, that among the Persians, when the nuptials were once solemnized, the
Ladies were carried home in charriots, which as soon as they were lighted out
of them, and entered the house, were set on fire; intimating that after
marriage, they were to joy in their own home, and to look wholly to their
Family. And this as it is a happiness to their husbands, so it is an honor to
themselves.

Propert.
Foelix Admeti conjux, and lectus Vlyssis,
Et quaecunque viri foemina limen amat.
It is a Proverb amongst the French; Bonne femme and bon marriage se dit, non
de qui l'est, mais duquel on se taist; The best women, and the best marriages
are those, which are so silently carried at home, that the world has no
occasion to talk of them abroad. To hearten them up therefore a little the
better to this subjection, we will propound some certain motives by which they
may be stirred and incited hereunto; and afterward show them the inbred
letts, and impediments; which may withhold them from it. The Motives are of
diverse kinds.

The first is taken from the Institution of GOD, himself, which is not any way
to be controlled: And surely religious Obedience will never stand to discuss
the Commandments of God, but do them. He said to Eve, and it must be as an
ordinance to all her daughters for ever, Genesis 3.16.
Thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall ruleover thee. So
that to deny this subjection, is to resist the Counsel of the Highest.

The second from the natural imperfection of the woman, not only in her
corporal parts; but in those likewise, which are intellectual; She is weake^
and less able to govern, and defend herself, than man. Now according to S.
Anselme, Haec in dominationibus and servitutibus clara iustitia est, In locum.
ut qui excellunt ratione, excellant et dominatione. Law, and equity require,
that they, which excel in reason, should exceed in rule. 2 Ep. 3.7.
But St. Peter calls women, the weaker vessels; and the Philosopher says, that
the virtue and ability wherewith they stand endowed is (...), Pol. 1.^.8,
such as speaks them to be subjects, and not sovereigns.

A third is taken from her transgression. It was she that violated the
Commandment and afterward allured her husband to partake with her in the
fault: it is but justice therefore, that from thenceforth the wife should obey the
husband, considering the husband did miscarry by obeying the wife, and this is
a reason which the Apostle alleges; I permit not, says he, a woman to
teach, but to keep silence with all subjection. For Adam was not deceived, but
the woman was deceived, and was in the transgression. 1 Timothy 2.14.

A fourth is deduced from the inconveniencie, which may follow upon the
resistance of Gods ordinance, by the denial of this subjection. For as in
nature upon the interruption of her due and ordinary course, thunders,
inundations, earthquakes, and other such like fearful and disastrous
accidents do happen; So in a family upon the stoppage of this duty, there
aryseth nothing but brawles, and contentions, which like impetuous thunder
shake the very rafters, and threaten the whole house with final dissolution.
Fear and jealousy like an earthquake split their bosoms, and disunite their
hearts, and their affections. To conclude, the many miseries which proceed from
hence occasion many tears, by which as by a general deluge, the sweet content,
which might be taken in one another love, is utterly washed away. But this may
suffice; I will therefore pass from the motives, which should allure them, and
come to speak of the lets and Impediments, which may keep them from the
performance of this duty.

The first is a proud conceit of her own nobility, beauty, riches, wisdom,
and the like; in regard whereof she vilifies her husband, and thinks him every
way unworthy to have any rule or authority over her, Of such the heathen
Satyrist.

-- malo, Juvenal. Sat. 6.

Malo Venusinam, quam te Cornelia matter
Graccorum, si cum magnis virtutibus affers
Grande supercilium, et numeras in dote triumphos.
I had rather have a low borne country Less;
Than thee, that brought the valiant Gracchi forth,
If thou Cornelia with thy noble worth,
Bring'st a big look, and do thy Triumphs tell,
That so thy dowry may the more excel.
It Is better to match into a poor stock, than into a proud. Assuerus will
avouch, that the lowly Esther is to be preferred before the lofty Vashti.
Marcus Aurelius was taught by woeful experience, that he who marries only for
wealth, according to that of Menander, (...), takes not her into his protection
but sels himself into her subjection.

-- Vidua est locuples quae nupsit avaro. She, who being rich a needy husband
takes.
Is still a widow, and her own bargains makes.
Alexander the great chose rather to marry the wise Barsyne without a dowry,
than the daughter of Darius with part of his Kingdom. Licurgus made a law that
no portion should be given, or taken in the wa^ of matrimony ut viri virtutem
Conjugis, no^ opes quaererent, that men might marry for worth rather than
wealth, and women study the more to furnish themselves with all good virtues
and abilities. But no such laws are now in being. That this impediment
therefore may be removed; let them call to mind, that the superiority which
man has over the woman is founded upon Gods ordinance, Psalm. 2.
and is not to be weakened or infringed by any such accessory causes. Again
let them know, that there is no greater argument of folly, than to wax proud
either of outward trappings, or of inward truths. We judge the emptiness of a
vessel by the lowdnesse of the sound. Brass tinckleth more then Gold; And a
Bladder is soon blown up; but when it is most swollen, there is nothing in it,
but a little air. Last of all let them understand, that such conceits proceed
from the devil, who as he stirred up Eve by the infusion of this venom to
eat of the forbidden fruit; so would he stir up the daughters of Eve, by an
instillation of the same poison, to shake from off their necks that yoke of
subjection, which is imposed upon them even by God himself.

The second is a defect of love. For where this is in a wife, she will be
quickly tutour'd to obedience. Affection, like a painted glass makes every
thing seem of the same color which is seen through it. No blemish but will
appear a beauty being looked upon with these spectacles. But where this is
wanting the woman neither knows, nor cares to please her husband. -- maritum

Convomit -- as the Poet speaks. The sight of him makes her sick; and as it
follows, Morte viri cupit haec animam servare catellae. Were it put to her
choice; she had rather he should die, than that her puppy should miscarry. Now
this happens, when either the parents will enforce their daughters out of
temporal respects to marry where they do not like, not asking, as Bethuel did
Rebeccah, Genesis 24, 57
their consent unto the business: O ^hen themselves ma^e their choice not in
the Lord, nor for the love of virtue, but only to satisfy either their
ambition, or their covetousness, or their curiosity, by matching either for
honor, riches or comeliness. Marriage is a building, the mortar of it must
not be untempered; but such it is, when virtue, and the fear of God is not
regarded either in the contraction or consummation of the same. For if it be
beauty, a shower of sickness shall wash it away; if honor, the breath of envy
like a burning wind shall blast it; if riches, poverty shall quite dissolve
it. Let who so marries therefore, marry in the Lord. Let it be Virtus, and not
Venture; Deus, and not Dos; faith, and not favor: God, and not goods, that
brings them both together. The end of lustful conjunction was the deluge, and
where money must tie the knot, it will quickly break. For non amatur, quod
propter se non amatur. True love is far from any side-respects. And where
there is no love, there will be no subjection.

The third, and last, is a fond and foolish affectation of all sorts of
vanities, by which this conjugall subjection is not only hindered, but the
administration of the family is likewise altogether neglected. For such a one
will first of all be continually gadding: Her feet, like the strange woman's in
Prove. 7. can not abide in the house; with Dinah she must out to see the
daughters of the country, though the loss of her chastity be the recompense
of her curiosity. It were barbarous uncivility she thinks, to miss a new
play at the Blackefryers, or any other spectacles of pleasure, and delight.
Secondly, being a gadder, she can not but prove a waster, Spectatum veniunt,
veniunt spectentur ut ipsae. The end of such, is as well to be seen
themselves, as to have the sight of others. And hence it is, that some like the
Tortois carry their whole house upon their back. Singulis auribus bina aut
terna patrimonia dependent, says Se^. Benes. l. 7. c. 9.
Ye may see whole Lordships hanging at either ear. And as Tertullian speaks,
De habitumul. cap. 9.
Saltus et insulas tenera cervix fert. Though their neck, like Ephraeims be
soft and tender, so many Acres yet of wood pasture, and arable are about it, as
would pinch the shoulders of Atlas to support them.

Some again, to appear more pleasing, taxing God as it were of defect in his
workmanship, spend their revenues in Oils, and Druggs to set an adulterate
gloss upon their natural complexion. The whole course of their life is but
Pompa quaedam histrionica; Patri^. sen. lib. 4. tit. 5.
a kind of Stage-pompe, so pargeted, and so disguised on every side, that
their Maker at the day of judgment will disclaim them to be the work of his
hands. But according to Tertul. had women only so much faith on earth, as they
do hope for benefit from heaven, they would not affect any outward glory, but
rather humble themselves in sackecloth, and in ashes, and go mourning all the
days of their life, as desiring any kind of way to expiate that great
transgression of their grandmother.

In sorrow shall thou bring forth children, Genesis 3.16.
and thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee;
Et Evam te esse nescis? It Was Gods decree, and is not yet repealed, for the
guilt which procured it, is not as yet removed. Thou O woman, art the gate by
which death entered into the world, thou art she that did first break the
covenant of thy Maker. The devil could not have prevailed against man, but
thorough thy persuasions. 'Twas thy ambition, which defaced this glorious Image
of thy Creator. In a word, 'twas thy desert which brought the Lord of life to
suffer death upon an ignominious Cross, and can thou mind the painting of
thy Fig-leafe coat? Suppose the Needle-worke of Tire, and the Embroydery of
Babylon, with other such like Ornaments had been from the beginning; would
Eve, think ye, have ever desired them at her expulsion out of Paradise? Nor
ought she now in thee, if she be willing to revive, either covet, or know the
things, which while she lived, she neither had nor knew.

A wise woman, says Solomon, Prove. 14.1. helps to build up the house; She
is a fool then, that will pull it down with her own hands. Consuming her
husbands substance either in clothes or colors for the embellishing of her
earthly Tabernacle. Such accessory complements are rather beams in his eyes,
than any way baits to his affections. -- Moechis foliata parantur, Iuv. S^t. 6.
says the Satyrist. They are only lures to bring the Adulterer to fist.
Chaste thoughts will never stoop to such enticements. Poppea, the wife of
Nero, drew upon herself a perpetual brand of ignominy, and reproach, quod
cuti nimium indulserit: in that all her care, and cost was for the daily
reparation of a borrowed beauty. And when all is done, that may be done in this
kind: Haec, quae mutatis inducitur, atque fovetur
Tot medicaminibus, coctaeque siliginis offas
Accipit et madidae facies dicetur, an, ulcus?
This, which their brain with care so much embroiles,
In searching out new drugs, new salves, new Oils.
To set upon it an adulterate grace,
What shall we cal't? an ulcer; not a face.
She therefore that desires truly to pranke, and paint her self as she
ought, let her borrow the white that must embellish her cheeks from simplicity,
the red from chastity: Let her pendants be the word, and the chain about her
neck, the Cross of Christ. Let sanctity be the silk that clotheth her, and
this subjection will be the only Jewel of her glory. For to conclude, Tal
ter pigmentata, Deum hab^bit an atorem; being thus set out, the God of Heaven
shall court her beauty. And thus from the duty, we will pass to the persons to
whom it is to be tendered. Wives be subject.

(...), To your own Husbands.
The word is without any restriction, and shows that every husband is to
expect this duty from his wife; the poor as well as the rich; the foolish as
well as the wife, the froward as well as the kind; and she let her be what
she will, must freely tender it. First, by subscribing to his admomonitions.
Secondly, by suffering her self in all things to be guided by his advise. As
touching the first.

The husband is Gods mouth, and in harkning to him, she harkneth to God in him;
as on the other side, in contemning him, she contemns God, and the ordinance
of God in him, Though the husband therefore should chance as many times it
happens, to find fault, where there is no cause, she must remember yet, that
the property of an ingenious disposition is, Ibi culpam agnoscere, ubi culpa
non est: sometimes for the avoiding of farther tumult, to acknowledge a fault
where none is, and be ready to alter what is done, as if it had been otherwise
done, than it ought. For according to that of St. Peter, 1 Ep. 2.20.
If when we do well, we suffer wrong, and take it patiently, this is
acceptable to God. Now as touching the other.

The husband is called the Wives guide. Pro. 2 17.
And therefore nothing must be done but by his direction. Sarah would not so
much as turn her servant Hagar out of doors without Abraham's consent: neither
would Rebeccah send away her son Jacob without Isaacs advise. Iezabel signed
her purposes with Ahabs seal; and Esther wrote her letters in Assu^rus his
name. The voice of a Trumpeter is nothing so sweet, so shrill, or so strong as
when it sounds from out the Trumpet. Man's mouth must be the Organ, by which
the woman speaks, Maritus, Sermo; Vxor, Auricula. Aug.
if she desire that her words should carry with them any weight, credit, or
authority. His hand, and seal must be to all her actions. A river, so long as
the course thereof is guided by the banks, runs pleasantly, and with
delight; but when once it disdaines those bounds, and out of a swelling pride
will have a larger liberty, it hurts others and defi^es it self. Rosewater
in a glass is clear, and sweet; but being let out it gathers filth, and
loses both the color, and the sent. Man's experience is woman's best eyesight,
and she that rejects it, is like a seeled Dove, soars hie for a while, but
at length comes tumbling down, and lights in a puddle. Wives therefore be
subject (...), to your own husbands.

In that he says to hubands, he excludes fornicators; and in that he says,
to your own husbands, he bars adulterers. Some count no yoke heavy, but that
which in duty they are bound to bear; Si iubeat coniux, durum est conscendere
navem,
Tunc sentina grauis, tunc summus vertitur aer:
Quae moechum sequitur, stom acho valet --
It Is a hard task for her by shipp to go,
When her good man commands it should be so:
The Pumpe smells ill, the air is overcast:
But she that does to her Adulterer have,
Is sound of stomach --


Like the Lamprie, they hasten to the hissing of the Viper, they make what
speed they can to the call of their Lovers; let these impose what task they
will, it shall be readily undergone; but if their husbands command, it shall
be done at leisure. Some one occasion or other shall still prorogue the
performance. All their endeavors are to endeere themselves to these. But let
such listen to what the Lord says; Though thou cloth thy self with scarlet,
Es. 4.30.
though thou deck thy self with ornaments of gold though thou paint thy face
with colors, yet shall thou trim thy self in vain, for in the end thy
Lovers shall abhor thee,, and seek thy life. And then shall thou say with
that harlot in Hos. 2.7. I will go and return to my husband, for at that time
was I better, than now. This must be the final Rendez-vous after all her
straglings. That which Martial prophesies of Dento in the Epigramme, will
truly, be accomplished in her.

Lib. 5. ep 45
Quid factum est, rogo, quid repent factum,
Ad coenam mi^i, Dento, quod vocanti,
Quis credat, quater ausus es negare?
Sed nec respicis, and fugis sequentem,
Quem thermis modo quaerere, and theatris,
Et conclavibus omnibus solebas?
Sic est; captus es unctiore coena,
Et mayor rapuit canem culina.
Iam te, sed cito cognitum, and relictum,
Cum fastidierit propina dives,
Antiquae venies ad ossa coenae.
Good Dento tell me, what has happened late?
What has befalne thy person, or thy State?
That when Ibid thee home to supp with me,
My suite, wh'ould think it, should rejected be
Four several times: and which is yet more strange,
Thou do not deigne one word with me to change;
Nay, when I follow thee, thou runn'st away,
And flyest from me, whom but the other day
Thy custom was with diligence to seek
At Baths, at Plays, in every nooke, and creek.
Surely the reason's this. Some daintier fare
Does hinder thy accustomed repair.
A larger Kitchen does the Curre detain,
And makes my invitations all in vain.
But lo! thy richer Ordinary shall,
Quickly find out thy manners, and withal
Leave thee; and then thou shall entreat with groans
To gnaw a fresh on thy forsaken Bones.
To prevent which, and all other the like inconveniences, Let Wives be subject
(...), to their own husbands. And thus having spoken of the persons to whom
this duty must be tendered, we will now touch at the Manner how it must be
tendered.

(...). The word in the Original is diversely translated.

1. As ye ought. V^oportet.
And so it is a Reason drawn from Gods institution. Ye must do it.

Vt convenit
2. As is meet. What avails it the body to have all the Members, if the head
be gone? The Spokes of a Wheel must be all united into one Nave, or it will
never serve for motion. Who would not look to have the world confounded, when
he should see the Moon in a higher Orb, than the Sun? GOD has disposed all
things to the best; this being therefore his ordinance, it is meet that Wives
should be subject to their own husbands.

3. Vt decet, Vt decet.
as it is comely. There are 3. things, says Solomon, Pro. 30.29.
that order well their going; yea four are comely in their going; A Lion,
which is st^ong among beasts, and turns not at the sight of any; a lusty
Greyhound, and a Goat, and a King, against whom there is no ri^ing up. To
these I may add for a fifth, a woman that is subject to her husband. For beauty
is vanity, and favor is deceitful, but a woman that fears the Lord, she
shall be praised. And thus much concerning the Manner how this Duty must be
tendered; the limitation follows.

(...): In the Lord.
In the Lord,.i. not absolutely, or promiscuously, but so far forth as
faithful, and Christian women may lawfully do it. Sic placeat uxor voluntati
Coniugis. says S. Greg. Vt non displiceat voluntati Conditoris: She must not
so please her Mate, as to displease her Maker. If the husband will have the
wife at any time to do that which is ill; S. Peter does furnish her with an
answer: Act. 5.29.
We ought to obey God rather than Men. And thus having treated of the wives
duty toward her husband; we will now speak of the Husbands toward the wife.
in which though I shall not peradventure enlarge my self so far as in the
former, that shall be no occasion yet of exception. For what it wants in the
Bulk shall be found peradventure in the Balance.

The Ground of the second Book.
Husbands love your Wives, and be not bitter against them.

LIB. II.
The Husbands duty toward the Wife.
THE Apostle sets it out. 1. By way of Affirmation, Husbands love. 2. By way of
Negation, Be not bitter. As touching the former.

The word love has relation there, not only to the inward Affect, but
likewise to the outward Effect, as may be easily collected out of Ephesians
5.25. Where the love of Christ toward his Church is propounded as a pattern
for imitation unto Husbands; Husbands love your wives, even as Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it; (...) denotes the one; (...) the other. So
that the first thing here required in the Husband, is an Affect of love. The
Fathers observe out of Deu. 33.9. That Levi regarded not his Father, nor his
mother; he knew not his Duty either upwards or downwards, to Children or to
parents, it was not said yet, nescivit uxorem; that he did not respect his
wife. So that the wife is to be preferred before all. The Hebrews allege for
it a fourfold reason.

1. She is nearer to him, than a child to his Father. For she is actually
Bone of his Bones, and flesh of his flesh, whereas the child is properly
neither, but in possibility.

2. Children are but the fruit of the Loins, and the womb; she is the Rib
next the Heart.

3. The liker any thing is, the more it is loved. Man loves his Child, tanquam
aliquid sui, his wife, tanquam se. And indeed Man and Wife are like those two
Branches in the hand of the Prophet, so closed together into one Bark, Ez.
37.17.
that they grow to be one tree, and bear both but one fruit. So therefore
ought men to love their Wives, says the Apostle; Ephesians. 5.28.
as their own bodies. He that loves his wife, loves himself.

4. Adam, say the Jews, was a husband before he was a father; and for these
Reasons the Wife is more to be loved than the Child. But they speak best, who
say this Bond is supernatural, and like a miracle. For it is a hard matter to
part from our parents. Ruth. 1.16. Rebecca yet leaves all to go with Isaac,
and Zipporah though a Midianite, did the like for Moses.

There is a threefold Glue, by which Man and Wife are joined and combined
together; The one is natural, the other civil, but the third divine. By the
first, man cleaves to his wife, as a living creature; By the second, as a man;
By the third as a Christian man. The natural marriage is for issue only; the
civil, as that of the Heathen, for strength and help in household affairs;
but the Glue, which conjoyneth Christians, is Virtue, and the Fear of God. Men
by nature, like Beasts couple to have children: Civil marriages are true but
not perfect.

-- Veniunt a dote sagittae. It Is the great Dowry proves the golden dart; or if
not so, -- facias, non uxor amatur. Only the Feature, and not the Creature is
beloved.

Tres rug^e subeant, and se cutis arida laxet,
Fiant obscuri dentes, oculique minores;
Collige sarcinulas dicet --
Let him but spy one wrinckle in her brow,
And he all love shall straightway disavow;
Let her skin writhle; let her eyesight fail;
Her Teeth wax yellow, or her cheeks look pale,
Pack huswife hence, this honest man shall say,
Trusse up thy fardle, and use no delay.
All affection is presently unglued; but the marriage of Christians is every
way complete. For first, It is pleasantly good in regard of issue. Secondly,
profitably good, in respect of supply: But last of all, and which is best of
all. 3. It is honestly good, because it aims at a holy seed. Reason has no
hand in it, farther than it is sanctified by religion; and where this Soder is,
no fire can dissolve it.

It is an Axiom among the French, Que la femme faict, ou des faict la maison;
That the woman usually is either the marrer or maker of the house: A man had
need therefore to be very wary, that the settling of his affections may never
prove a disparagement to his judgment; which cannot but happen, when he shall
look upon the Object with other Spectacles, than God allows of.

Charles VI. of France, being desirous when he was but sixteen years of age,
to entertain a Consort into his royal Bed, advised with his Uncle the D. of
Anion, who led with politic respects married him to Isabella, daughter of the
D. of Bavaria, that he might be the better able to make head against the
Emperor Wenceslius, who notwithstanding outward shows did look upon his
estate with no friendly eye. And it was a match which in the judgment of men,
promised a great deal of good both to the king and kingdom; But mark how the
Divine Justice crosses the designs of those, that rely more upon their own
wisdom, than upon his Will; This hopeful Lady in a little time expressed
such an imperious, and tumultuous disposition, that she became a burden unto
both, having exposed them to so many foreign broils, and homebred
partialities, that if her self had not dyed in a happy time for the Kingdom
it must of necessity have expired as did the King.

He therefore, that would love his wife, must be careful in his choice; and
not either Ar^thmetick or Geometry; Portion or Proportion; or any other the
like syde-respects to be Agents in the business. He must look more to her
Manners, than her means; and wish her Faithful rather than Fair. Men marry
not in love, but when they marry in the Lord. Beauty is a good outside, and
Virtue is more to be esteemed, when it is so set out, than when we see it in
an ill-favored creature, like a pearl in a dunghill. Rachel was preferred
even for this, by holy Jacob, before the bleare-ey'd Leah. Tertullian calls it,
Foelicitatem corporis, The happiness of the body; Divinae plasticae
accessionem, A flourish set upon Gods own work; and Animae vestem urbanam, A
comely garment for the Soul. But without Grace it cannot be counted graceful.
She that has only this ornament, is at the best but a painted Sepulcher;
Sepulchrum quasi Semipulchrum; fair without, but full of rottenness within.

Woman was made when Adam was a sleep, to show that in matter of wiving we
should be consopitis sensibus, content to have our senses Charmed, and not be
led herein by any outward Attractives. Pro. 19.14.
A good wife comes from the Lord; and therefore all sinister affections being
lulled a sleep, he should beg her at the hands of GOD only. But say a man
have erred in his choice, his Folly must not free him from this duty.

Every Adam must love his Eve.

1. In regard of her effici^nt cause, which was the Lord himself, who made her
with a great deal of solemnity, for the honor and dignity of man; and were it
not for her society, what would he be, but a companion for the Hedgehogge,
and the Owl? The glory and the grace, which d^rived upon him from her, is most
elegantly expressed by divine Du Bartas, in the sixth day of the week; where he
says, that without her -- l'homme ca bas n'est homme qu' a demi.
Ce n'est qu'un Loup-garou, du soleil enemi.
Qu'un animal sauvage, ombrageux solitaire;
Bigarre, frenetique, a qui rien ne pent plaire,
Que le seul desplaisir; ne pour soy seulement,
Prive de coeur, d'esprit, d'amour, de sentiment.


I will not prejudice our worthy Silvester so much, as to translate them my
self, but will give you his.

2. He must love her in respect of the Matter, whereof she is composed; She
was made of a Bone, which is a most inward part of the Body; and shows that
the love betwixt man and wife must not be superficial, but entire, and inward.
When the Hebrews would say, I my self; they express it by a word, which does
signify, I my self in my Bones.

3. In regard of the form, and manner of her making. God built her, and in
this he showed a precedent of his double power; The power of his Creation in
making the Heavens of nothing, and his power of Workmanship and Art in making
Eve of something. Man can turn Clay into stone, mould into Metal, Fern roots
into Glass; he can build a fair house, but no living house: This is a
prerogative belonging only to the Highest. He turned a Ribb into Flesh, a Bone
into a Body; that man might have an Ivory Palace wherein to recreate his best
Affections. Husbands therefore must love their wives

4. And lastly, the Wife is to be loved in regard of the End, for which she
was made; and this was to be a meet help. Without her man is lame, and will
he slight the staff that should support him? But come we from the Affect to
the Effect.

Probatio dilectionis exhibitio operis, says S. Gregory, we cannot search
into the Reins, and must therefore collect by outward Characters, what the
heart does inwardly conceive. Now these are principally three. The first is,
peaceably to cohabitate with his wife. Solomon requires it by way of Precept;
Pro. 5.19.
Rejoice with the wife of thy youth, let her be unto thee as the loving Hind,
and pleasant Roe; let her Breasts satisfy thee at all times, and delight in her
love continually.

Again, Christ exacts it by way of Precedent: For such is his love toward the
Church our mother; He does at no time withdraw from her his sweet society; I
am with you always until the end of the world. Mat. c. ^ult. ^^ult.
Yea, the very heathen Philosopher condemns that man of base injustice, that
shall count stolen waters sweet, and abandon his wife for company of the
strange woman. That opinion therefore, or indeed impiety of Aelius Verus the
Emperor, is utterly to be exploded, who when his Empress complained unto him
for looser rangings, would always tell her, that Wife was a name of dignity,
not of delight. For according to Aristotle in his Oeconomicks; Lib. 1. c. 7.
(...): What can be more injurious ^o a woman, han to deprive her of her
nuptial Rites?

Some yet upon every trivial and imaginary discontent will seek a
separation, but this as it savours of indiscretion, so is it not free from
danger. For first Divorce in the Hebrew is called, (...), which signifies a
Sawing. Now no man saweth off his Arm or Leg, but upon great necessity. If a
man have the dead palsy in some part of his Body, he will not presently cut it
off, unless it putrify some other part. The wife may be put away for
Adultery, because she is then rotten flesh. But where this occasion does not
happen; art thou married? Seek not to be loosed, but abide in the Calling,
whereunto GOD has called thee. Conjunctio a Deo est; divortium a Diabolo;
says St. Aug. God delights in union; the devil alone is the author of
division. The wife was made of a bone, and it was not a bone out of the leg,
or a bone out of the arm, which a man may lose, and yet live; but a ribbe,
which cannot be taken away without death; to show that his love should
continue, till death them depart.

Again, Vnum corpus in duobus locis simul esse non potest: The head, and the
body cannot be severed but with destruction to them both. It Is true that
needful occasions may often times procure long absence; but when want of love
does not cause it, it is no other than that of the Sun from the Marigold: She
mournes, as being deprived of his presence, but he maintains her being by his
influence. And thus much of the first effect, by which the love of a husband
toward his wife is outwardly to be expressed.

The second is to teach, and instruct her according to his ability in all such
things as may conduce to the well-leading of this life, or the obtaining of a
better. For therefore is he called in holy writ, the head of the wife: And to
him the Apostle sends her, as to her household tutor. If they desire says he,
to learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home. The husband must
therefore labor after knowledge, that he may prove unto her, not a head of
Brass; a head, which has a tongue, but cannot spe^ke.

Ischiomar in Xenophon was wont to desire the Gods first to enable him to teach
that which is good, and then to give his wife the grace to learn it. A
practice, which may well beseem the greatest Christian. For so, as they have
but one Table, they shall likewise have but one Temple; as they fleepe in one
bed, they shall serve but one Altar.

The third is to provide for all her necessary uses, allowing her that, which
the Apostle does exact victum, et vestitum honestum; honest means and
maintenance. The wife is the vine, and the husband must show himself an elm
in her support. Like the Moon she must receive from him as from the Sun,
that brightness which is fit. He is worse than an infidel, that provideth not
for his family; can he be less then, that provideth not for his wife, the
chief in the family next himself?

What shall we say then of such, as in a riotous and desbauched course consume
the dowry, which their wives have brought, and then turn them out like Hagar;
to shift for themselves? Are they not like those, that take great pains for
the getting of Nuts, but having eaten the kernel, they cast away the shell?
Again, what shall we say of those, that live upon their wives labor, and
carelessly waste, what they industriously do gather? The Moon sure borrowes
not her light from the Sun, but the Sun from the Moon. The husband is
clothed with the spoils of his wife; an order as prodigious, as preposterous.
In a word, what shall we think of those, who notwithstanding, they have a
sufficient estate, are very sparing of it toward their wives, not considering,
that they are equally to share with them in either fortune. The Roman Lawgiver
ordained that the married couple should at no time give any thing one unto the
other; intimating, that whatsoever either had, was to be held in common. And
indeed according to St. Chrysostom; Quomodo dicis meum, et tuum, cum et ipse
ejus es? When thou thy self art hers, all must be lik^wise so, that thou
accountest thine.

The fourth effect is to conceal her weaknesses, and imperfections: He must
not tell them in Gath, nor yet divulge them in the streets of Ascalon, whereby
to make the daughters of the Philistines rejoice. Noevus etiam in vultu Veneris.
The fairest face is not without some mole: But love endures all things. A man
had he some ulcer about his own body, he would not willingly disclose it,
unless it were to some special friend for advise; or to a Surgeon for
recovery. And surely as unwilling would he be to discover his wives defects,
did he but consider, that she is his own flesh, and whatsoever dirt he
casts in her face, it does defile his own. And thus having past the
affirmative part of this duty, Husbands love your wives; we will now come to
the negative; Be not bitter unto them.

(...). The word is metaphorical, and taken from unsavory meats, which vex
the palate, and oppress the stomach; the Apostle uses it, to show that a
husbands conversation toward his wife should be full of sweetness, and far
from all austerity and severenesse. St. Ambrose writes of the Viper, Hexam. l.
5. cap. 7.
that as soon as he spies the Lamprie, after whose kind embraces he is
infinitely fyred, approaching toward him, he does immediately disgorge
himself of all his venom, that nothing may impeach the pleasure, and delight,
which each of them expect by their encounter: And would have husbands the like
affected toward their wives. Does she provoke thee unto love, says he?
answer her kind endeavors, and though thy nature be harshe and stubborn,
let the contemplation yet of that honorable state, in which thou art linkt
unto her, uncurbe thy angry countenance, and set a mild aspect upon thy brow.
Vipera venenum suum fundit, and tu non poteris duritiam mentis deponere? Shall
the serpent lay by his poison, and wilt not thou unburden thy self of thy
perverseness?

God made her for a meet help. Auxiliator in opportunitatibus est Deus. The
Lord is a refuge in due time. The Jews say there is a help a Capite; Psalm.
9.9.
Dan. 10.13
and so the Angels help us from above; an other a Pede; so every Beast of the
field; and every Fish in the sea, and every Foul in the air are at our
command, and help, one to defend us, an other to clothe us; a third to carry
us; But this help is a Iatere. No Angel, his place was too high: No beast;
theirs was too low; but a help from the side of man, neither higher, nor lower
than himself; A meet help.

Meet in regard of sex. The Heavens send down their influence, and the earth
receives it. The Sun by his heat cherishes the Plants, and the Moon like
a Mother suckleth them with her moisture. Man might have helped man in labor
and conference, but the woman has a womb, and breasts, and is a meet help
for the conceiving, and conserving of children: By this help he may be
furnished with such as shall be able to help him both in peace and war; and
underprop him in his weaker age, like pillars of Brass, against all pains and
perils whatsoever.

Again, she is a meet help in respect of oeconomicall employments. Man
goes abroad about his affairs, the woman stays at home, and orders the
household: She overlookes it with a careful eye, and will not eat the bread of
idleness; her children rise up, and call her blessed; and her husband shall
also have occasion to praise her. For as a quiet port is to a weather-beaten
ship, even such is she to him, when he returns being tired with his toil.
Like a kind Rebeccah she provides him pleasant meat, such as he loves. Genesis
27.9.
The odoriferous Mandrakes grow within her garden, together with all sweet
things, and with the Spouse she reserveth them only for his refreshment. Cant
7. ult
Whatsoever therefore his natural condition be, it behooveth him so to temper
it, that as the Sun does by the Moon, he may never approach her, but with an
intent to make her still more lightsome in her countenance.

De praeceptis conjugal.
The very heathen, according to Plutarchs relation, were wont in all their
sacrifices unto nuptial Juno to take the gall from out the creature, and to
cast it behind the Altar; intimaring that in wedlock there should be no
bitterness. The sharpness of a husband should be like that of wine,
profitable and pleasing, not like that of Aloes, loathsome and unsavory to the
stomach.

'Twas Platoes counsel to Xenocrates, a man of a severe and sour composition,
but otherwise endowed with many virtues, that he should sacrifice unto the
graces: And it is my advise to all such husbands, as are of the like nature, to
do the like. Rain, when it descends from Heaven, like a gentle dew, does
sweeten all things, that it falls upon; but when it comes with stormy
violence, it causes inundatitions, which bear down all, that stands in
their way. The clouds of discontent, which happen betwixt man and wife, like
those of April, should no sooner grow, but presently dissolve into fruitful
shewrs, which should produce in eythers bosom far sweeter Roses, and more
fragrant Violets than ever grew in them before. But this can never be, where
bitterness does raise the vapor. It is a fiery exhalation, which finding it
self on every side environed with a coldness of affection, breaks forth at
length into lightning, and thunder, to the final dissolution of the whole
house. Let husbands therefore love their wives, and not be bitter unto them.
But for our better proceeding in this point, we will consider, First, what
this bitterness is. Secondly, How it must be avoided. Thirdly, and lastly, the
reasons, why. As concerning the first.

1. It is either inward, or outward. Inward bitterness consists in the
affections, and shows it self, when the husband upon every trivial error,
and slight offense committed by his wife, is presently so exasperated against
her, that thereupon he begins either absolutely to hate her; or at least to
love her in a remiss, and careless manner: And being thus affected, though
he neither do, or say unto her any thing that is ill; he takes away yet by
his lowering looks the sweetness of the nuptial life, and wounds with grief
and discontent the heart of her, that should be unto him as the loving Hind,
and as the pleasant Roe.

The second is outward, and consists either in bitter words, or bitter deeds.
As touching the former. The tongue, says St. James, is a world of wickedness.
The rider commands his horse as he pleases with a little bit. The Pilot turns
his ship with a small rudder; The Lion, and the Tiger may be tamed, but the
tongue can no man check. It Is an unruly evil, and full of deadly poison: It
fyreth the whole course of nature, and is it self set on fire of hell. Facile
volat, says one, et ideo facile violat; It Is swift of wing, and therefore swift
to wound. Eliphaz calls it a scourge. Job 5.21. Psalm. 57.4.
David a sharp sword. It Was with this, that satan gave such a blow to Adam,
even in the state of innocence, that both himself and his posterity were quite
confounded with the wound. It Was with this, that he made, in a manner the whole
Host of Israel to fall as they marched through the wilderness. In a word, 'twas
with this, that he did more worry the Son of God, and Savior of the world,
than with all the fatal engines that spiteful, and malicious cruelty could
possibly produce besides. For neither the crown of Thorns, wherewith his
cursed enemies empaled his tender brows, nor the boystrous fists, wherewith
they buffeted his lovely cheeks; nor yet the whips, wherewith they ploughed
his flesh from up the bones, and made deep furrows in his back, no nor the
spear, wherewith they lanched his heart, could extort from out his mouth the
least complaint. The Lamb endured with patience these assaults, and did not
shrink a whit in undergoing them. But when he heard his Deity traduced, and
reviled by their opprobrious, and malignant tongues, he was forced to cry out,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He that was Armor of proof,
against all other invasions, found himself gored to the inmost soul with
this. The Kingly Prophet therefore not without just cause, made his Prayer unto
the Lord: that he would protect him ab aspero verbo, Psalm. 91.
from the cruel word. And indeed a soft and tender disposition is sooner
wounded, and more sorely with a cruel word; than the body can be with a cruel
weapon. Let the husband therefore take heed, that he wound not the wife of his
bosom with these words.

The later kind of external bitterness is expressed in deeds. As when the
husband not understanding what belongs to conjugall society, does in every
thing so curb, and restrain the desires of his wife, as if she were his
vassal, a thing not suitable to the institution of marriage. For when God
brought Eve unto Adam, he did not present her as a servant or a slave, but as a
companion, and a helper. Non es Dominus, says St. Ambrose, sed maritus. Thou
art to be her love, Hexam. l. 5. cap. 7.
and not her Lord: she is to be thy wife, and not thy maid. Gubernatorem te
esse voluit sexus inferioris, non Tyrannum praepotentem. His will and pleasure
was, that thou should be a guide, and not a tyrant to the inferior sex. Now
tyranny may be exercised over the wife diverse kinds of ways.

1. By denying her any rule, or soveraignety in the house, and not suffering
her so much as to command her maids: nay peradventure subjecting her to them;
But this is contrary to the ordinance of God, who has appointed, that the wife
next under the husband, should bear the chiefest sway in the administration of
the family. And therefore in Tit. 2.5. it is required, that she should be
discreet, chaste, and one that delights to keep at home, where her imploiments
lie and in Pro. 31.10. to the end, we have a fair description of al such
household businesses, as God in his diviner wisdom thought fit to be imposed
upon the woman: and for a man to put her by them is, to prefer his own
conceit before the Judgment of the highest.

Again, this churlish practice is also repugnant to the light of nature.
Xenophon therefore calls the wife (...): the keeper, and directer of all that
belongs unto the house: and Aristotle, will have it her charge alone, (...), to
look to that, which is within. Though the wife therefore may think it a
pleasant thing to show her self subject to the desires of her husband: It
cannot yet but wring her patience, to see her power, and authority in the
family, that she may not command her maid, but must rather be commanded by
her. And behold, holy Abraham the father of the faithful will give the husband
a precedent to forbear this bitterness. Sarah no sooner complained of Hagars
insolency, but he presently cast her out of doors, as unwilling any way to
foster the occasion of her discontent. Genesis 16.6.


2. This tyranny of the husband over his wife, shows it self, when either he
denies her that, which does conduce to her necessity, or substracteth from her
any thing convenient for her dignity. For by virtue of the matrimonial
covenant, and stipulation, she is to partake in all things with her husband. It
is said of a friend, that he is alter ego: but a man may say of his wife, that
she is, ipse ego: another like himself, nay the same with himself, and when
he grudgeth her that which is fit, and convenient for her use, not caring how
prodigal he be in his own occasions; it is as if he should endeavor to sterve
his left side, and to pamper his right. Every member in the body has a share
in whatsoever nutriment enters into the stomach. Now if man be the head of the
house; the woman is the heart, and when this is feeble, the other must fail.
Let not husbands then deny their wives at any time that which is fit, by
engrossing all to their own occasions. This is deemed a bitter thing in the
Agent and must therefore of necessity be bitter to the patient. (...), Oecon
lib. 1. cap. 7.
says the Philosopher. None but will take it very ill to see themselves
deprived of of what is proper unto them.

3. And lastly, this Tyranny may be expressed in some outrageous violence
toward the wife, which is indeed the height of all Bitterness. And never was
it practiced by any of the Heathen, except drunk or mad. Patric. Sen. l. 4
de Rep. tit. 4.
Cato the Censor was of opinion, that whosoever should lay violent hands upon
his wife, did deserve to be as much abhorred, and detested, as if he had
profaned an Altar, or been injurious to the Commonweal. This is an
overflowing of the Gall, and will require a strong purge. To come then to the
Means, by which both this and the other kinds of Bitterness are to be
avoided.

Exo. 15.25.
We read, that when Moses cried unto the Lord in behalf of the people, who
being come unto Marah, were not able to drink the waters of the place; the
Lord showed him a Tree, which when he had cast into them, they did immediately
wax sweet. By this likewise together with a Cruse of Salt did Elisha recover
the Springs of Hiericho; yea, by this and a handful of Meal did he chase
Death from out the Pottage of the Prophets. Let whososoever therefore finds
himself stern and stubborn in his disposition, make his recourse unto the
means, and behold the Lord will then show him the Tree of Life; he will fill
his Cruse with the true salt of the earth; he will give him a handful of that
purer Meal, whereof the Bread which came down from Heaven was composed, to
remedy thereby his natural corruption: Of a Lion he shall become a Lanbe; and
of a hurtful Dragon, a harmless Dove.

The 2. means, whereby to cure this Bitterness, is to read and meditate up-
the word of GOD. Here shall thou find a salve for every Soar, a medicine for
every Malady. Art thou covetous, or lascivious, ambitious, or furious?

Hor. Epist. 1. Lib. 1.
Sunt verba, and voces, quibus hos lenire dolores
Possis, and magnam morbi deponere partem.
Here shall thou meet with such Receipts, as will not only mortify thy
dolours, but remove thy disease. It is that Roll mentioned by the Prophet;
Ezec. 3.1.
we must cause our Bellies to eat it, and our Bowels must be filled
therewith; and lo! the Effect, which shall follow hereupon; The Heart shall
be rejoiced, and from the mouth shall proceed a savor, as sweet as any Honey.

The 3. way, by which to cure this Bitterness, is to turn the course of it an
other way, he that will needs be froward, and perverse, let him be it to his
sins. Alas! what glory can it be to insult and domineere over the weaker
Vessels? These are sturdie, and robustious, and will deserve the uttermost of
thy Choler. If thou must needs lowre, let it be upon the Devil; if thou must
needs chide, let it be with the world, and worldly vanities: in a word, if you
must needs fight, let it be with the desires and lusts of thine own Flesh:
Buffet thy body with S. Paul, beat it down, and bring it into subjection:
Mortify thy Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness,
inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is
Idolatry. These are worthy thy Conquest, and for thy Bitterness to them here
in this world, thou shall enjoy eternal sweetness in the World to come.

4. And lastly; Whosoever would avoid this Bitterness, he must destroy it in
the bloome. Sin creepes like a Canker, and it is a natural course, even in
evil, faith the Schooleman, Vt ab imperfecto ad perfectum quis moveatur; by
degrees to come unto perfection: the diseases of the Body grow not at once,
they have their accretions long before their eruptions; and it is no otherwise
with the Soars and sicknesses of the Soul. Verecunda sunt omnia initia
peccati; says a Father, Sin is ever bashful in the beginning. Modicum non
nocet, says the carnal Libertine; a little Pride, a little pleasure will not
hurt, and peradventure the fiery nature will not stick to affirm, that a
little choler is an argument of a good spirit; but S. Paul's advise is to the
contrary; 1 Cor. 5.6.
Cavete modicum fermenti, Beware, says he, of a little Leaven, for even a
little sowreth the whole lump. The enemies of the Church enter like little
Foxes; but once in, they take on like roaring Lions. (...). Custom, says the
Philosopher, arises from very small beginnings. Many will think it nothing to
lend the Devil an evil Thought. Yet the Wiseman tells us, Wisd. 13.
that evil Thoughts do separate from God. And indeed, dum ludunt, illudunt;
while they dally with us, they deceive us, and like a bemyred dog, defile even
in fawning. As the streams of Jordan carry the fish with pleasure and delight,
till on a sudden they fall into mare mortuum, The dead Sea, where they are
presently choked. So many while they suffer themselves to be led away by a
froward Affection, are overtaken with froward Actions, which do unexpectedly
plunge them into the bosom of destruction. An unkind Thought will quickly
bring forth unkind Words, and it will not be long ere these be followed by
unkind Deeds. Destroy therefore the Cockatrice in the shell. Husbands love
your wives, and be not bitter unto them. And thus from the Means, whereby to
avoid it, I come now to the Reasons, for which it is to be avoided.

The first is drawn from the very Precept by which the Apostle enjoyneth
Husbands to love their Wives. For it carries with it no exception. The
bleare-eyed Leah must be loved as well as the beauteous Rachel; and Hannah
when she chides, as well as when she cherishes. For when God first imposed
this charge upon the man, he knew full well there was no woman without her
weaknesses. As she therefore is bound to be obedient to her husband,
notwithstanding his many imperfections; so is he to be kind and courteous to
his wife: and whenever he slackes this affection toward her upon any light
occasion he becomes guilty of this Bitterness.

The second is taken from the example of CHRIST, whom the Apostle in sundry
places of his writings propounds as a pattern of imitation unto husbands. For
he never either hates or despises the Church his Spouse, notwithstanding
those infinite blemishes, and defects, which might justly make her distasted
and detested of his purer eyes: but endeavors rather to palliate and disguise
them, still honoring her person, though he be displeased with her Faults.
And thus disposed should the husband always be toward his Wife. No inward
defect, no outward deformity should at any time lessen or abate his conjugall
affection, unless it were such as did dissolve, and break in sunder the
nuptial knot. For so long as this stands firm, the wife is but one flesh with
himself. And according to the Apostle, No man ever hated his own flesh, Ephesians.
5.29.
but nourishes and cherishes it, even as Christ does the Church.

The third is drawn from a free confession of the very Heathen in this case.
Aristotle even by the light of Nature perceived, it was unfit that a husband
upon his wives miscarrying should presently seem estranged and alienated from
her. (...): Oecon. Lib. 1 cap. 7.
Small offenses, says he, though wilfully committed, must be passed over;
and where ignorance may extenuate those of greater moment, it shall suffice by
gentle warnings, and admonitions to make her more cautious for the future.
Husbands therefore love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

Not bitter, inwardly in your Affections, much less outwardly in Words. The
end of a reproachful speech is to rejoice, not for any profit acquitted by it
to our selves, but for a disgrace inflicted upon others. Now as I showed
before; A man cannot scratch his Wives face, but the prints of his Nails will
appear in his own. Some peradventure will break forth into stormy language,
and direful threats, and yet not harbor in their breast the least intent to
do an injury. Yet even this Bitterness must be condemned. For if he that is
angry with his Brother unadvisedly, and shall vent his choler against him in
reviling terms, Mat. 5.2.
shall be Culpable of Hellfire, what judgment must he expect, that shall do
the like unto his wife? That this bitterness therefore may be utterly
banished from the married state; let Salomons rule be still had in
remembrance, Rejoice with the Wife of thy youth, Pro. 5.18.
etc.

Now as touching the last kind of Bitterness, which does usually express it
self in Blows. 1. It is, as I have said before, against the law of Nature,
Vitium uxoris aut tollendum, aut ferendum; The infirmity of the wife, said
Varro, A. Gel. lib. 1 Cap. 17.
is ei her to be toller^ted, or amended. He that corrects it, adds to her
grace; he that bears it, to his own Goodness. Alcibiades demanded Socrates
how he could endure to live with his Xantippe. For night and day did she
molest him with her brawling, and contentious tongue: His answer was, That by
suffering her at home, he became armed against all petulant assaults that
could happen unto him, when he came abroad. Were it not madness then in a man
to beat a women for that Weakness, which if well digested, will set the
fairer Gloss upon his own Worth?

2. It is against the Civil Law. For that permits her, if she can prove that
her husband is injurious to her in this kind, to sue the benefit of a Divorce:
and the reason, which is assigned for it, is this. Quia verbera sunt ab
ingenuis aliena; Because blows are too burdensome for ingenuous natures.
Again, every Superior has not power to correct the errors of his inferior
by stripes. The Prime Consul has no authority so to chastise his companion,
though for many respects he be beneath him in place and dignity. Say a
league of Amity were made and contracted betwixt two, conditionally, that the
younger shall suffer himself in all things to be guided by the wisdom and
discretion of the elder; by virtue of this Covenant he is bound to obey; but
if afterward he refuse it, he may not by stripes be compelled to his duty.
It is the like in Matrimony. For there the husband, and the Wife, agree upon a
kind and sweet Society; so that the Wife must be subject unto him, and
willingly be guided by his advice, yet as a fellow, not as a follower, by
counsel, not compulsion. For he must not, says the Philosopher, (...): work
her to a servile fear, which is the bane of Modesty and Love.

3. Such barbarous dealing is altogether repugnant to the Law of God. For if we
consider but the matter whereof he did compose her, we shall find that she
was not intended, as Litter for his imperious feet to trample on; for she was
made of a Ribbe out of the side, to show that she should be collateralis, his
equal and companion. On the right hand, Psa. 45.
says the Kingly Prophet, stands the Queen. Again, out of the Side, that she
might be Vxor gremii, The Wife of the bosom, as dear and entire unto him as
his own Heart.

4. And lastly, the very condition of Matrimony, utterly disclaimes such base
and currish usage. For by marrying he has taken her from her friends, and
covenanted to tender her for them all. From them she is committed to her
husband, as to a Sanctuary for her safe protection, and shall he dare to
injure her himself? Gen 20.26
Abraham is called Saras Veil, to show that every wise, and faithful Abraham
is to defend and keep his loving Sarai.

And why in the beginning think ye, was the woman made of a Ribbe under the
Arm, but to teach the Man, that he should ever be the woman's safeguard? For
as the Arm is the only member, wherewith by bearing, and putting by of blows,
the other parts of the body are secured: so the husband should be the Shield
by which the wife should live as it were under the Lee of all indignity.

In Pro. 12.4. the woman is said to be the crown of her husband; he that
wounds her, wounds his own honor, and treads under his Feet^, his own
credit, and estimation. A Crystal Glass is not to be handled roughly, as
Pots, that are made either of Earth or Pewter, but charily, and warily, as
being of a finer Mettle, and so more brittle than the other. Saint Peter
therefore advises us to give honor unto the Woman, 1. Ep. 3.7.
not expecting, that wis^dome, that Patience, that Faith, nor that Forbearance
in the weaker Vessel, which is not many times in the stronger.

The very name of Wife, is like that Angel which staid the Hand of Abraham,
when the stroke was falling upon the neck of his beloved Isaac. Therefore as
Ionathan's Arrows were shot not to hurt, but but to give warning; So the words
of a Husband to his wife, should be words to direct her, and not deject her.
He should not utter them with the lest intent, to grieve and discontent her
softer spirit, but only use them as sauce, that is made of purpose to sharpen
the life, and make it more desirable. To be short, when the woman is brought
from all her friends, to be resident only with the man; If he be churlish
to her, and unkind, from whom shall she hope for comfort, or expect relief?
Offenses as well in mariageas in other States will grow; but to reform the
wife by way of violence, I find no warrant. He therefore, that cannot rule
her without beating is worthy to be beaten himself for having made so bad a
choice. The Bride-bush is never to be besprinkled but with sweet water, and
may the Bramble be his portion, that shall otherwise bedew it. Husbands
therefore love your wives, and be not bitter --

That we may not take this word Bitterness here in too large a sense, we
must know, that our Apostle in prohibiting it, does not desire, that the
husband should as it were hood-wink himself, that he may not see the Vices,
and imperfections of his Wife. It was a prodigious dullness in Antoninus to
commend his Faustina for her chastity, when the whole World had taken notice of
her Luxury: the like in Sylla, who very stiffly praised Messalla for her
purity, when in every Tavern throughout Athens, the Fiddlers sang her
prostitutions: He did not know his Bed to be dishonored, till his very enemies
did cast it into his Teeth. The Apostle requires not this stupiditie in any.

Every man as he knows his wife to be the weaker vessel, so he must look
after the Weakness of this Vessel; He must search out the Leaks, that they
may never either blot himself, or blemish his posterity. Mart. lib. 6.
Epigram. 39.

2. It is no Bitterness, to deny her the knowledge of thy Secrets. Mic. 7.5.
Trust not in a friend, says the Prophet, neither put thy confidence in a
Counselor: Nay, Keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
Bosom. The Philistine ploweth with no other Heyfer, and therefore Sampson
conceal thy Riddle.

3. It is no Bitterness, to find fault where there is just cause, nor to
reprove upon good occasion. Qui non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet. He makes
himself an Abettor to her fault, that seeks not to abridge her in her folly.
Only this, his Reprehensions must savor of Mecknesse, not of Madness; they
must be clothed in Gods words, not his own.

4. It is no Bitterness, so far to cross her humor, as still to persevere
in doing those things the forbearance whereof may redound with hurt or
prejudice, either to thy soul, or thy substance, notwithstanding any
importunity of hers to the contrary.

Fifthly, and lastly, it is no bitterness to deny her that liberty, which may
prove dangerous to her, disastrous to thy self. Let not the wife then count
that bitter, which is sweet; Neither let the husband under these pretenses
obtrude upon her that for sweet, which indeed is bitter: But if the wife b^
subject, let the husband love; So shall the balance be equally poysed; and
marriage if it be a bondage, will prove such a one, as is only knit in
loveknots. The yoke of it will be drawn with pleasure, and delight, to Gods
glory, and their own comfort.

The Ground of the first Book of the second TOME.
Children obey your parents in all things; for this is welpleasing unto the
Lord.

TOM. II. LIB. I.
The duty of children to their parents.
FRom the first oeconomicall combination, which was betwixt the husband, and
the wife; we come now to the second, which is betwixt the parent, and the
child; And here as in the former in exacting those mutual duties which are to
be performed by the one to the other; our Apostle begins with the weaker, and
that as I conjecture either for the same reasons alleged there or others not
much unlike. For first of all, children are usually more defective toward
their parents, than parents can be toward them Hoc est amor in ho^inibus, quod
humor in arboribus: Even corrupted nature teaches every one to be carefully
provident for his own. For according to Gerson; Naturaliter ascendit su^cus a
radi^e ad ramos, and non e converso. The sap which is in Trees ascends
naturally from the root to the branches, and not contrarily. Secondly, when
children shall truly tender their obedience, parents can not choose but afford
their love. To come then to a particular consideration of the Apostles words;
we have in them two things, Regulam, et rationem Regulae:

First, a Rule; Children obey your parents in all things.

Secondly a reason of this rule, For this is well pleasing unto the Lord.

In the rule we may observe 4 things,

First, the persons whom it concerns, Children.

Secondly, the duty, which is exacted by it, Obedience.

Thirdly; To whom they are to tender it, Parents.

Fourthly, and lastly, How far, In all things. Children obey your parents in
--

Children.
As touching the first, In the original we read, (...), whereby is signified
unto us a man's whole progeny. So that sons, and daughters are not only to
be understood here, but likewise nephew and neeces. For even these are
comprehended, and that according to Law and Scripture, under the name of
Children; As when the Jews without any distinction are called the Children of
Israel. It is a rule then, which concerns all. The Athenians, according to
Thucydides, idly conceited their original to be from out the earth; but
reason, and religion both teach us, that man is the offspring of man.
Whosoever therefore is (...), the child of any one, he has by virtue of this
title some, to whom he owes all honor, and obedience; And it is neither length
of time, nor difference in state, that can authorize a dispensation for this
duty. For as touching the first.

It is not only during our nonage, and minority, but likewise in our best
maturity, that we must with all due reverence subject our wills to their
commands. And as concerning the later, Though in a civil, and politic
respect, a public Magistrate be more honorable than a private man, yet as
he is a son, he is to count himself inferior unto him, from whom his being
is derived.

Jacob was in great want when he departed out of Canaan; Joseph his son yet
being a Prince in Egypt, and one whom Pharaoh had made his
Lord-high-Constable, as it were, for the government of his whole land; caused
his Chariot to be made ready; and went up with all observance to meet Isaac his
father. Ye may see the like respect in Solomon. 1 Kin. 2.19.
His mother did no sooner approach, but he rose from our the seat of Majesty
and bowed himself unto her. Yea, our Savior Christ, a greater far then
Solomon, neglected not the meandness of his Parents, but notwithstanding he
was King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, he thought it no disadvantage to his
dignity, Luke 5.51
to show himself subject unto them. In a word then, whosoever is a child
stands liable to this rule, and it is neither wealth, nor age, nor honor, or
the like, which can unloose this tie. The word is indefinite, and without all
exemption or limitation. Children obey: And so from the persons whom this rule
concerns, I come to the duty which hereby is required.

Obey.
The word in the original is (...), and according to the native signification,
which it carries, denotes unto us two things.

First, the matter that must be tendered.

Secondly, the manner, how it must be rendered.

For first, it implies an humble promptitude in entertaining the commands of
others.

Secondly, a cheerful application of our best endeavors to a quick, and
full performance of the same.

The several parts then whereof this obedience here required does consist are
these:

First, to do that which our parents shall injoyne us.

Secondly, to learn that which they shall teach us.

Thirdly, to redress and amend what ever they reprove as faulty in us. As
touching the first.

Obedience has ever been magnified both of God, and man. The offspring of the
righteous is obedience and love. The Rechabites shall never want a Panegyricke
to testify their obedience to the world, Hier. 35.2.
no though the book of Hieremy the Prophet happen to be cut again with a
penknife, and burnt upon a hearth, as in the days of Zidkiiah. Ionadab their
father had enjoined them to drink no wine, and it was a Law, which they
observed with such a religious respect, that neither they, nor their wives,
their sons, nor their daughters, did ever violate or infringe. 'Twas Christ's
prophecy of himself, and it will beseem us well to practice it. The Lord
opened my ear, and I was not rebellious, Esaias 50.5.
neither turned I back. It was written of him in the book, that he should do
the will of his father, and he did it. The Law was in the midst of his bowels,
and without any protraction or delay he presents himself, Psalm. 40.8.
Lo I come: He was obedient to the death, yea even to the death of the Cross;
and though he were the son, yet learned he obedience by the things he
suffered, and according to S. Ber. Ne perderet obedientiam, perdidit vitam.
Though his pangs were sharp, sweet was the peace wherewith they were rewarded.

Disobedience on the other side could never avoid the judgments of Almighty
God. It cast the Angels out of heaven; our first parents out of Paradise; Lets
wife out of her life, and nature too; Saul out of his Kingdom; Jonas out of
the ship; the children of Israel out of their native soil, and which is more,
out of the natural root that bare them. For this is the reason which God
himself alleges, I spoke unto them, but they would not hear, Hier. 35.17
I cried unto them, but they would not answer. Samuel tells us, that it is as
the sin of witchcraft. And Ezekiel, cap. 8.16.
that to turn our backs rebelliously upon the Lord is an abomination which
admits no parallel. Yet nothing more natural to man. The breasts of Eve gave
no other Milk than perverseness to her children; neither did Adam bequeath to
his posterity any other patrimony.

But he that has been principled in the school of grace, will never appear
like Othos soldiers, who according to the Historian, Iussa ducum interpretari,
quam exequi malebant, delighted more in commenting upon the directions of their
leaders, than performing them; but like the Centurions: Bid him go, and he
goes; come, and he comes: do this, and he does it. He stands not to
enquire after the nature and scope of that which is enjoined him; nor yet to
search upon what reasons, motives, and inducements, it is grounded, Ambros.
Offic. lib. 1. cap. 17.
but borne as it were Daedaliis remigiis upon the wings of diligence, he cuts
through all encumbrances to do it: He knows it is his fathers will, and here
he finds his rule, Children obey.

Secondly, this obedience consists in learning what their parents teach them.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but fools despise
wisdom, and instruction. My son therefore, says Solomon, Pro. 1.8.
hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother.
For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy
neck. Pro. 31.1.
Lemuel a potent King gloried in the practice of that prophecy which his
mother taught him.

Thirdly, they must amend whatsoever they reprove; And behold the eye that
mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother in this the Ravens of
the valli^s shall ^icke it out, Pro. 30.17.
and the young Eagles shall ea^e it. This for the matter.

For the manner, how this obedience is to be tendered. It must be with all
internal, and external reverence. Internally, they must conceive a holy
estimation of their parents; and externally, be ready with all dutiful
behavior to accept of their commands. The fifth precept in the Decalogue is,
Honor thy father, and thy mother, but the Apostle uses the word Obey.

First, to tax a fault whereof children for the most part are usually guilty.
For many will give all due respect and reverence to their parents, who yet in
the fashioning of their lives will deny them their obedience, and with a
refractary ear put by their counsel and advise.

Secondly, because obedience is the chiefest part of that honor whereunto
children by Gods divine injunction are obliged. For vain is the pretense of
honoring them, where there is not a readiness to obey them; as may be seen
by that parable of the two sons propounded by our Savior Christ himself to
the Priests and Elders of the people. Mat. 21.30.
3. Because such as are not obedient to their parents, cannot be obedient unto
God. He is the supreme father of all; and ab illo omnis paternitas; Ephesians. 3.16.
of him the whole family in heaven and earth is named. Our carnal parents are
but as it were his deputies, and vicegerents. Lactantius therefore styles them
only generandi ministros; Lib. 5. c. 19.
the isntrumental causes of our being: But will the King think himself
honored, when his delegate is disobeyed? Questionless, no. Let children then
obey their parents; for this is well pleasing to the Lord. And so from the
matter which is here required, Obedience; I come to the persons, to whom it
must be tendered, Parents.

Children obey your Parents. He does not say, Obey your Fathers, but your
Parents, (...), under which word both fathers, and mothers are equally
comprehended, and that not without just cause. For the child takes his
original from both: and therefore owes obedience and reverence unto both.
Hearken to thy father that begot thee, says Solomon, Pro. 23 22.
and despise not thy mother, when she is old. Again there is couched in this
word a very forcible argument, or rather many, and all of them sufficient to
stir up children to obedience. For the very name of parents can no sooner
sound in the ear of a child, but it must put him in mind that these are they,
from whom he has received not only life, but for the most part, food also
for the preservation of that life, and good education for the b^tt^ring of the
same. Now as concerning the first.

If from them he have derived his corporal being, then is he bound by the
law of nature to subject his will in all things unto theirs. The little Lamb
runs at the call of the damme; and the younger Elephants are always pliable
to the directions of the old. Secondly, If from them this being has been
preserved by a daily supply of food and nourishment, then lies there a moral
tie upon him; and by the law of gratefulness he is to tender unto them all
observance: and to this the very Storke may instruct them. For when his parents
by reason of their age ly bedridden, as it were upon their nest, and are wholly
stripped of their plumes; he does not only bring them food wherewith to
nourish them, but spreads his pinions forth upon them, and makes his own
Feathers a cover for their nakedness; returning that love to them in their
enfeebled state, which inbred gratitude puts him in mind to have received from
them in his. A retribution so generally admired of all antiquity, that the
requital of a benefit even amongst men was ever entitled Antipelargosis, of
the word Pelargos, which is the usual appellation of this foul. As if nature
could not have produced a more lively precedent of piety than this.

Thirdly, and lastly, If by good discipline, and godly education they have
bettered this his being, he is then obliged out of a consideration of his own
utility and gain to do the like. The greater our debt, the greater m^st be
our duty; Christ had done much for Saint Mary Magdalene, and she loved much.
Every Christian is to be respected though no other Bond should tie us
thereunto, but that of Christianity. But if to this be added others, we must
then grow in our affections.

Let the Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17
says the Apostle, who rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine; and why a double honor,
but because of a double desert, which does require and exact it? Now to whom
can a man be more especially and particularly bound, than to his Parents, by
whom he has received what ere he has, and what ere he is?

I, but will some say, the things which are enjoined me by my Parents, are
base, and such as if I under-went them, would expose me to disgrace, and make
me derided of the world. O consider not what they require, but what thy Lord,
and Maker has ordained, and let his proceedings toward Christ, his one, and
only Son provoke thee to Obedience. He commanded him to bear the Cross,
and he with all alacrity embraced it; he willed him to let his face be
buffeted, his Flesh ploughed up with whips, and his cheeks defaced with
loathsome excrements. Yea, he willed him to suffer every word he spoke, and
every miracle he wrought to be traduced and blasphemed, and he declined it
not, but in all things became obedient to the will of his Heavenly Father.

Others peradventure will object that their Parents are destitute of wisdom,
and discretion, and therefore unfit to be obeyed in any thing they shall
impose; but however, my answer is, they are not to be despised. The Rose smells
not the less, because it springs from out a Briar: Neither does an Almond
abate of his sweetness, because of the hardness of his shell. GOD knows what
is good for thee, and has therefore caused thee to come out of the Loins of
such, that the fair tender of thy obedience, might make thee a worthy
spectacle to God, to Angels, and to men.

A third sort, to blanch this duty from themselves, will peradventure say,
They are not my natural Parents, but my Stepfather, or Stepmother. Be it so,
yet even these must be obeyed. The great respect of Ruth to Naomi, is
sufficient to remove this cavil, as likewise that of Moses to Iethro. The one
would not be persuaded to abandon the society of her Mother in Law, but would
share with her in all occurrences: the other hearkened to the voice of his
Father in law, and did in all things as he directed. Or if these examples be
too weak, look again upon that of Christ to Joseph: He had no greater
relation to him, than that he was betrothed to the blessed Virgin his Mother,
and yet he was content to be governed by him.

A fourth and last rank, to plead exemption from what is here required, will
say, They be not my Parents at all, but only my kindred and allies, as my
Uncle or my Aunt, etc that have had the breeding and bringing of me up. It is
al one, thou owst this duty eve^ unto them. Esther was adva^ced to be a
Queen, she forgot not yet in the height of Majesty to show her obedience to
her Uncle Mordecai. To close up this point then, Children obey your Parents.
The next to be discussed is the extent of this obedience; how far it is to
reach, Children obey your parents in all things.

In all things.
There must be a limitation of this; for universal, and absolute Obedience is
due only to God, and we may find it in Ephesians. 6.1. where the Apostle plainly
expresses what here he leaves to be understood. Children obey your Parents
in the Lord, that is, so far forth as is permitted by the Lord. Or thus, A.
Gell. lib. 2 Cap. 7.
All things may be reduced to a threefold rank. For 1. some are simply good,
and these must be done, notwithstanding any inhibition of our Parents to the
contrary, and that in regard of the things themselves, as likewise in regard of
him that does injoyne them. For he that listneth, says our Savior, to Father
or mother more than me, is not worthy of me.

2. Some things are simply evil; and these must not be done for any strong
entreaties or enforcements that can be used by our Parents, because God forbids
them; and according to that of Saint Peter, We are to obey him rather than
men. Act. 5.29.


3. And lastly, some things are of an indifferent strain; as neither simply
good, nor simply evil, and in these children must show their Obedience without
any reluctation, how unmeet soever they may seem to their own apprehension.
In adiaphoris, says Gerson, superioris judicio maxim credendum, quoniam ille
vice Dei tibi dicit, quid expedit, and quid decet. In matters of an indifferent
nature, a man must ever subscribe to the judgment of his Superior, because
he does supply the place of God, and serves as one deputed from him to tell
thee, what is decent and convenient to be done.

Patris jussa discutere non lic^t, patris monita retractare non convenit, s^ith
Petrus Ravennas. Tristior esse poterit paterni mandati species, res tamen ipsa
salutifera est, and vitalis. Though the commands of our Parents may seem to us
never so harsh, never so unjust, so they be not clearly convicted of impiety,
we are not to reject them, especially if we be such as are still under their
government, and protection. An excellent example we have of this in Isaac, who
without any resistance, either in word or deed, suffered himself to be bound,
and laid upon the Altar, where he was content so far to yield unto the will of
his Father, as to be sacrificed unto the Lord. Jude 11.36
The like did Iephtah's daughter unto him; and the like should be done by every
one. The very placing of the fifth Commandment, in which this duty is required,
may be sufficient to move us hereunto: God has set it before our goods, yea
before our lives; to show that Obedience to Parents should be dearer unto us,
than ^it^^^ Goods or Lives. Aga^^e, there is annexed unto it a ^^omise of Long
life, a thing so beloved of all, that ^here need no other allurement. For Death
is hated, and abhorred of Nature.

But here it may be demanded, whether married Children, or such as are called
to any public place either in Church or Commonweal be still bound to obey
their Parents, and how far. I answer, that this filial obedience is to
receive no intermission, so long as life does last. For 1. as it is 1 Timothy 2.3.
it is not only (...), a good thing, and to God acceptable, but it is likewise,
(...), a just thing, Ephesians. 6.1. We cannot ^orbeare it without injury. Christ's
direction therefore is this, Give unto Caesar, Mat. 22.21
that which is Caesar's; to every one his due; Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom
to whom Custom; Fear to whom fear; Romans 3.7.
Honor to whom Honor belongs. Now this is proper, and peculiar unto
parents, as appears by God himself; If I be a Father, where is my honor? if
I be a Master, where is my fear?

2. It is exacted by way of Precept; Honor thy Father, and thy mother that thy
days may be long in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. So that
concerning the continuance of this duty. It is to last, so long as we do live,
but not in the same measure, nor after the same manner. For such as live in
their Fathers house, and under their Fathers power, are to be employed by their
Parents both at home, and abroad, according as they shall think fit to make
use of their service.

But as touching such as are married or called to the administration either of
Church or commonweal; though they be still tied to reverence, and obey their
Parents Will, as likewise to succor, and relieve their wants, as often as
occasion shall require: they are not bound yet as before, to cohabitate with
them; nor yet to expedite their businesses, as having matters of their own to
look unto, and those of greater moment and importance. And this is most
apparent in the first sort. For it is the Ordinance of God himself, Genesis 2.24.
that a man should forsake Father and Mother, to cleave to his Wife; which is
not to be understood simply but comparatively, and in respect of an individual
society: Again, he must labor for the suste^tation of his own Family. This was
that which Jacob pretended for his departure, Gen 30.
when Laban did solicit him, still to continue the keeping of his Flock,
willing him to appoint his own wages; Thou know, said Jacob, how I have
served thee, and how thy Cattle has been with me; It was little which thou
had before I came, and it is now increased to a multitude; and the Lord has
blessed thee since my ^omming; and now when shall I provide for my own house
also?

Now as touching those, that have betook themselves to any Church-imployments,
the case is clear. There is no authority in Parents to revoke them thence, to
look again to their terrestrial affairs. For if a Father can not withdraw
his Son from the service of an earthly King, much less is he to do it from
the service of the KING of Kings. He that puts his hand to this Plough, and
looks back, Luke 9. ult.
shall be thought unfit for the Kingdom of heaven. The same reason may serve
for those which are advanced in the Commonweal. For it is requisite that
priv^te things should still give way to public. To resolve the doubt then in a
word. A child can never be freed from the duty either of honoring, or
relieving his Parents; but from Cohabitation, as likewise from the
administration of their domestical affairs he may. Here the Pharisees then
meet with this condemnation, while devillishly they would disspence with their
childrens honoring and relieving of their Parents, Mat 15.6.
so they would bestow it upon them. The Church of Rome, likewise has her
blame, while in imitation of their error, she affirms it lawful for children
even against the will and pleasure of their Parents, if once they be come to
ripenes of years, which in a Son they hold to be at 14. in a daughter at
12. to put themselves into a Monastery.

For 1. to do a thing not commanded by God, with an apparent violation of that
which is commanded, is rash and irreligious; but for a child to take upon him
the profession of a Monastical life, is no Commandment of GODS, whereas to
be serviceably obedient unto Parents, is a manifest injunction of his: he must
not therefore abandon them in such a case, without their free consent.

2. It is against Reason, and religion to offer that which is another unto God
without the approbation of him that owes it. Now children so long as they
remain under their Parents tuition, are a part of their peculiar possessions;
and therefore not to be disposed of as they list themselves. We have it in
the old Law, Number 30.3.
That if a woman shall vow a vow unto the Lord, being in her Fathers house, and
in her youth, and her father disallow her in the day that he hears thereof,
not any of her vows, wherewith she has bound her Soul, shall stand.

3. If it be rashness to do a thing without the advice and consent of our
Parents; it must needs be wickedness to do it against their Wills; and when
they use their best endeavors to prevent it; but it is rashness for any
child of 15. or 16. years to determine upon a course of life without his
parents knowledge; and specially upon such a kind of life as causes a
necessary a vocation from those duties, which are to be performed unto
Parents, what must it be then to do thus against their Wills?

4. And lastly; For I omit many reasons, which might easily be alleged for
the conviction of this Error. The Gangrensian Council, celebrated in
Paphlagonia, Anno 324. pronounces for Anathema the child, that under a
pretense of religion shall depart from his Parents; and not give them that
reverence, which they may justly challeng^. How true then this Assertion of the
Romanists is, let every man be Judge.

Here then are condemned Marriages, without consent of Parents. GOD gave Eve
unto Adam, as having most right, because he made her; And this authority he
has communicated to all Parents; Rebeccah asked the consent of her Father
before she would marry; yea Ismael though ungracious, was willing his mother
should appoint him a wife. Hamor entreated Jacob for Dinah; Gn. 21.21.
The Sechemites, though uncircumcised; would not commit a rape, but sought the
good will of those, whose daughters they desired to marry; And in 1 Cor. 7.36.
Every Father, says the Apostle, has power over his Virgin. Now what this
power is, the Law will show us.

If a man had entised a maid, and lain with her, he was to endowe her for
his w^fe, Exo. 22.16.
but if the Father would not consent, he was to pay the money, and yet not
marry the party, yea, let us search the Bible throughout, and we shall find,
that God did always absolutely interest the parents in providing Wives for
their Sons, Deuteronomy. 7.3.
and Husbands for their Daughters. Samson though the beauty of the Timnite had
in a desperate manner fired his affections, Judge 14.2.
durst not yet without the consent of his Father and Mother take herto wife,
because he knew the match would otherwise be unwarrantable.

It was the Plee which Thamar used to her brother Amnon, when with a violent
hand, he did invade her Chastilie, 1 Samuel 13.13.
I pray thee speak unto the King, for he will not withhold me from thee. So
that the law of Nature, the Law of Moses, and the Law of Christ require from
children a particular subjection of their own wills to that of their Parents in
this kind. To these we may add the Laws of Nations, the Constitutions of
Popes, the determinations of Councils, all like so many several lines uniting
themselves in one, and the same Center.

1. The Romans obs^rved it very strictly, allowed no marriage to be lawful,
but what was contracted, and agreed upon by the Parents of either party. Ye
may see the practice of it in the Comedy; Terent. Andr. Act. 1 S^en. 1.
-- Hac fama impulsus Chremes
Vltro ad me venit, unicam gnatam suam
Cum dote summa filio uxorem ut daret;
Placuit; despondi; hic nuptiis dictus est dies.


Act. 1. Scen. 4.
Plautus likewise in his Aulularia presents us Megadorus stipulating with
Euclio for his daughter, in the same manner.

Catullus in a Nuptial Verse of his thus speaking to a young Damzell, who out
of a foolish fancy, when her Parents had provided her a match, against which
lay no exception, utterly refused it, makes this his Plee, whereby to work
the obstinacy of her Will to a more flexible temper.

At tu ne pugnes tali cum conjuge Virgo;
Non aequum est pugnare, pater cui tradidit ipse,
Ipse pater cum matre, quibus parere necesse est;
Virginitas non tota tua est; ex part parentum est,
Tertia pars patri data; pars data tertia matri.
Tertia sola tua est; noli pugnare duobus,
Qui genero sua jura simul cum dote dederunt.
Refuse not, gentle maid to be his Bride,
Whom thy dear Parents did for thee provide;
By nature thou art bound them to obey,
Then let not Humor Duty oversway;
Nor think thy self sole Mistress of that Gemme,
In which thou have no interest but by them.
The thirds of thy virginity belong
Unto thy father, and without great wrong
In other thirds thy mother has her share;
Only the thirds remaining we declare
To be at thy dispose; then humbly do,
As they would have thee; struggle not with two;
But rest content his loving spouse to be,
Whom they would make their son in law by thee.
Secondly among the decrees of Euaristus, Pope, and Martyr, who lived about the
year 110. there is one, in which he plainly pronounces those marriages to
be rather whoredoms, and adulteries, than marriages, which are not concluded
by the parents. Pope Urban was of the same opinion.

Thirdly, the Lateran Council under PP. Innoc. third, Cano. 51. did
peremptorily determine, that wedlock, if the person were under years, which
was otherwise performed. The 4th Toletan did the like. Ad uxorem lib. 2. cap. 9.


Fourthly, Tertullian celebrating the praises of Christian Matrimony, among
other excellencies in it, recounts this as a chief, that they never marry Sine
consensu patrum, without the consent of parents, Non est virginalis pudoris
eligere maritum, Lib. 1. de Patri. Abra. cap. 9.
says St. Ambrose. It becomes not the modesty of a Virgin to be the chuser of
her own husband. Euripides in his Andromacha, makes Hermione, to answer the
importunity of her suitors thus, (...). I leave to my father the care of my
marriage, as a thing not at all belonging to my choice. I could produce a world
of other arguments, but I think this little essay of every several kind
enough to principle ingenious natures, to the performance of their duty in this
kind; And therefore, Children obey -- And so from the rule, I come to the
reason.

For this is well pleasing to the Lord.
The Apostle alleges it as a Motive, to stir up children to this duty; and
sure ^here can not be a more effectual inducement to ^eligious minds. He
does not therefore say, this your obsequiousness shall redound with great
profit, and advantage to your selves; or shall be pleasing to your parents; but
it shall be acceptable unto Christ: and to please him is everlasting
happiness. But how may some object, shall it appear, that, this observance to
our parents is so pleasing and acceptable to God our Father, and to Christ our
Lord? I answer that it appears two manner of ways. First, by the temporal
reward, which is annexed to that Commandment in the Decalogue, which concerns
the honoring of our parents, being the first Commandment with promise, and
therefore urged by the Apostle to this end. Ephesians. 6. 2. Again it is evident by
the temporal punishment, which God himself has appointed to be inflicted
upon such as wilfully break, and violate this his mandate. If a man, says he,
have a stubborn, and rebellious son, Deuteronomy. 21.18
that will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother; and
when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them, he shall be brought
unto the Elders of his City, and unto the gate of the place, and the men of his
City shall stone him with stones that he die. Yea, the very heathen did
acknowledge, life to be prolonged unto such, as did demean themselves piously
toward their parents; and were of opinion that the contempt of these was to he
expiated with no less punishment than that of the Gods. Plato de leg^b. lib.
11 page 932.
Let Children therefore obey their parents in all things, for --

Well pleasing: (...). It is not only pleasing, but wel-pleasing: and from
hence we may collect these observations.

First, that the faithful in every good work ought specially to look unto
the Lord, not caring how it be censured by man, so it be pleasing, and
acceptable unto him Ludam, et vilior fiam: said David unto Michal; I will be
yet more vile: 2 Samuel 6.22
when she derided him, because he danced before the Arc.

Secondly, that there is a way to please God, even by pleasing man, and this
may serve to hearten up the good in the performance of all family duties; as
likewise to reprove the hypocrite, who counts sacrifice more pleasing to the
Lord, than either mercy or obedience. For sure, he will be served with
obedience unto men.

Thirdly, we may note from hence, That even in our childhood, we have a means
to endeare our selves to God. For according to Hugo de S. Victore; Haec
paternitas est nobis Sacramentum, et imago divinae paternitatis, ut discat cor
humanum in eo principio, quod videt, quid debet illi principio a quo est, et
non videt: God has appointed a paternity here below, to serve us as a
Sacrament and fair resemblance of his divine paternity above; that we might
learn by this Original of ours which we see, what we owe to that Original,
from whence we are, and see not.

Fourthly, that even children are bound to make conscience of their ways as
far as they have reason to discern good from ill; and must endeavor to do
that, which may be pleasing unto God. It Is said of Hieroboams diseased child;
That there was found some good thing in him toward the Lord God of Israel. 1
Kin. 14.15.
And sure it is a happy thing, when young men see visions, as well as old men
dream dreams. Parents should begin betimes therefore to inure their children
to the paths of righteousness, and train them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. For the workmanship of grace and obedience in the
hearts and lives of children, is like the graving of a Kings palace, and as
soon may the character of God, as that of Caesar be imprinted in those waxen
years. The children of Bethel might have bin taught as easily to have
welcomm'd the Prophet with an Hosanna; Blessed is he that comes in the name
of the Lord, as in reproach and scorn to call him, Bald-pate, Bald-pate, as he
past along. And thus much concerning the duties of children toward their
parents. Now follow those of parents toward their children.

The Ground of the 2d Book of the second TOME.
Fathers, provoke not your Children to anger, least they be discouraged.

TOM. II. LIB. II.
The duty of parents to their children.
THE Apostle still carries the scales in an even hand, and as in the first
combination belonging to the constitution of a family, having principled the
wife, he came to direct the husband, that neither might be def^ctive in the p
rformance of such offices, as by virtue of the nuptial tie were mutually to
pass from one to the other: So here in the second, which is betwixt the
parent, and the child, he does the like. Fathers, says he, provoke not your
children, least they be discouraged.

In the words we may observe two things.

First, A prohibition, Fathers provoke not your Children.

Secondly, the cause of this prohibition, least they be discouraged.

In the former we may consider.

First, the persons, to whom the prohibition is directed; Fathers.

Secondly, the act prohibited; Provocation.

Thirdly, the persons in whose behalf it is prohibited; Children. Fathers --

As touching the first; It may be demanded, why the Apostle does here make
mention of Fathers only, not retaining the word Parents, which he had used
before in exacting the obedience of children, considering that fath^rs, and
mothers both are comprehended under it. I answer, that children are usually
deficient in the tender of this duty toward their mothers; 'Twas necessary
therefore, in prescribing of the same, that mothers should equally be included:
But very seldom, or never is the tenderness of their affections so far
exasperated against the fruit of their womb, as to look upon it with an
austere, and sour eye. 'Twas sufficient therefore here, that fathers only
should be named, as principally liable to this Interdiction. The offense of a
mother is to be more cockering, than cruel. Moses his wife, Exodus 4.25.
called him a bloody husband, because he put her child to pain, though in a
way, which God had commanded. And therefore, Fathers provoke --

Fathers.
The very name implies an Argument. For when he says, Fathers provoke not;
It Is no other than if he should have said, Forbear the doing of that, which
so ill beseemes the person, and ought to be so far removed from the practice
of a father. It Is a title, which sounds not any thing but mildness. The Poet
therefore speaking of one, in whom this virtue was exceeding eminent, says
thus, (...): He was as mild, and loving, as a father. And do we not see that
the very creatures are instructed by nature to be kind, and courteous toward
their young. Plutarch writes of the male Partridg, that he shares with the
female in hatching of her eggs; and is the first when they come out of the
shell, that brings them meat. The Bear, and the Woolfe, for want of hands,
wherewith with to stroke their whelps, are still licking them with their
tongues. Yea, the Dragons, how pernicious so ever unto others, look smilingly
upon their own; And shall we, that are endued with reason be froward, and
perverse to those of our own loins? Omnes honesti mores in bestiis
congregantur in homine: Man is an universal Pandect, and in him are
congregated what ever virtues are in all the creatures. Ishmael, was a gibing
bratte; Esau a surly child; and Absalom a traiterous son. Abraham was yet
loving to the one; Isaac tender over the other; and David most affectionate
toward the third; witness the care he had to preserve him, while he lived,
and the lamentation, which he made for him being dead. In a word then, having
such a precept together with such p^e^edents, Fathers provoke not your
children. And thus from the persons, to whom this prohibition is directed, I
come to the act prohibited, and that is Provocation.

The word in the original is (...), and signifies to provoke to anger; which
may happen many ways to children from their fathers, by abuse of their
paternall power; as first by words; and secondly, by deeds. By words, three
manner of ways.

First, by burdening them with precepts, either unlawful, or unmeete:
unlawful; 1 Samuel 20.31.
as Saul, when he commanded Ionath^n his son, to fetch David, his innocent,
and harmless friend unto him, that he might deprive him of his life. And
likewise, when Herodias enjoined her daughter to ask of Herod, who had
promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she demanded, the head of John
the Baptist; Math. ^4.8
we read not yet that this dancing daughter was any way displeased with the
bloody mandate of her mother, but had she harbored in her breast so much as a
grain of piety; 'twould have grieved her very soul to hear such an unjust
request.

Again, unmeet; as when the father, no necessity urging him thereunto, shall
bind them to such servile, and base employments as beseem not an ingenuous
nature to undergo. For according to the Philosopher, The rule of a father over
his children, should be like that of a King over his subjects, grounded rather
upon love than fear. He should not out of an insul ing tyranny abuse their
labor, as the Egyptians did that of the Israelites, by tyring out their
strength in works of drudgery; but make that use of it, which may tend to the
good of either.

Secondly, fathers may provoke their children by thundering upon them
undeservedly with railing, and reproachful words: For these have usually with
them so sharp a sting, as will go near to wound the soul, of the most
settled patience: and in this kind also was Saul injurious unto Jonathan, when
in his anger he said unto him, Thou son of the wicked and rebellious woman,
do not I know, that thou have chosen the son of Ishai, to thine own
confusion and to the confusion of that shameful, and ignominious womb which
brought thee forth. For what should more provoke a son than to hear not
only himself reviled and disgraced; but his mother likewise to be
scandalized with base invectives, and made in reputation inferior to a common
Courtisan?

Thirdly, and lastly, parents may provoke their children in words, by traducing
their works, and weakening their desert to others, and that either before their
faces, or behind their backs. And indeed it has often happened, that the father
has suspected virtue even in his child; and has therefore labored to weaken
the reputation of it in the opinion of such as were thought to admire it: or
sought by bloody practices utterly to extinguish it. Solomon the fourth
Emperor of the Turkish Monarchy, commanded his son Bajazet to be strangled
by Hassan Aga, together with his four young sons, one of which lying in the
cradle was there murdered by an Eunuch, the child smiling in the villains
face; And that which moved him to this unnatural cruelty, was only the
nobleness of their sire, which in his ambitious apprehension, was gazed upon
by his subjects with an eye of too much admiration. The like jealousy provoked
him with no less barbarous fury to prosecute the life of Mustapha his son, a
Prince in whom wisdom and valor were so equally poysed, that his attempts
were never frustrated of their determinate end: And so great was the
expectation which the people had of his maturer growth, that after his death,
if ever, either in foreign, or domesticke affairs their designs had
miscarried, their usual exclamation was, Gietti Sultan Mustapha; Sultan
Mustapha the only stay of our hopes is dead and gone. Yea the best, and the
meekest amongst the Ottoman Commanders, have always more or less been sick
of this distemper; and would therefore never suffer their sons to live in
Court, when once they had attained to years of discretion, but sent them to
govern their Provinces a far off, where they lived under the check of their
Lieutenants general, without whose leave they might not depart thence, no not
to visit their Father. And what can be more unnatural? Filii gloria patris
tri^mphus; The very Bryar is esteemed, because it brings forth a Rose; and
therefore Fathers provoke not your children. This for the first kind of
Provocation.

The second expresses it self in Deed, and that five kind of ways.

1. By subtracting from them, that, which of right pertaines unto them; as by
denying the^ necessary food, and raiment, and not giving them that education,
and bringing up, which their estates and means may conveniently afford. And
this is an offense so great, that the Apostle does avouch, and that boldly,
whosoever he be, that is guilty of it, to be a denier of the Faith, and
worse than an Infidel. 1 Timothy 5.8
But while we would avoid Charyhdis, we must beware we light not upon
Scilla. Many to shun failing on the left hand, are still in the same hazard,
by leaning too much upon the right; and thus do they that corrupt their
children with daintier f^re, richer apparel, and costlier education than need
requires. And indeed this age of ours is sick rather of this, than of
severity. That which was said of old, may justly be retorted upon us; Vtinam
liberos nostros non ipsi perderemus; O that we were not our selves the bane
and breake-necke of our childrens happiness. We undermine their very infancy
with pleasures. That soft and wanton education, which we call indulgency,
weakneth the sinews both of mind and body. What will not he desire being
grown to riper years, who has been clad in Scarlet from his very Cradle?
Nondum prima verba exprimit, Quintil. lib. 1.
and coccum intelligit; He can hardly speak, and yet he apprehends the
fairest clothing and the choycest Meats; Ante palatum eorum, quam os
iustituimus: We train them up more to taste, than to talk; and hence it
happens that for the greatest part, they prove like Adonijah, fair it may be,
but wondrous faulty.

2. Parents may provoke their Children in Deed, by using them harshly and
unkindly, when they come to be of riper years. For then they should be
pleased to make them sharers in whatsoever they enjoy. Artobarzanes King of
Cappadocia, Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 7.
as soon as his son had attained to man's estate, that he might see him
equally ranked with himself, took the Diadem from off his own head, and in the
sight of C^: Pompeius, set it upon his. And surely it should be the delight of
parents, to see themselves paralleled, yea, and surpast in any virtuous
abilities and endowm^nts by those of the^r own body.

3. Their rigorous and unjust dealing in matching them; as when they enforce
them contrary to their own liking to marry where they thin^e good; or restrain
them from marrying where they would themselves, no withstanding that God have
called them thereunto; and that the object of their choice is such as cannot
but out of wilful stubbornness be any way rejected, is likewise a provoking
of them, one way to Incontinency, an other to discontent.

4. Parents provoke their children, when being transported with some
headstrong, and immoderate passion, they break forth into violence, and fall
upon them, even for surmised errors with bitterness and excess, not weighing
what Reason might suggest, but yielding wholly to their own unbridled rage:
and in this manner also was Saul injurious unto Jonathan, when he darted at him
with a Spear to hi^ him, and that for no other cause, than taking upon him the
defense of Dav d, his innocent and absent friend. For Jonathan hereupon arose
from the Table in a great anger, says the Text, and did eat no meat the
second day of the month, as being sorry for David, and that his Father had
reviled him. Parents therefore provoke not your Children. Correct them not
either unjustly or immoderately. Unjust correction I call that, which is not
grounded upon a lawful cause. Again, Immoderate, when the greatness of the
punishment transcends the grievousnesse of the crime. A thing prohibited even
by divine authority. If the wicked, Deuteronomy. 25.3.
says the Lord, be worthy to be beaten, the Judge shall cause him to lie
down and be beaten before his face according to his trespass unto a certain
number. They which are under our government, are not to be punished according
to our lust, and pleasure, but proportionably, and as the nature of their
transgression shall require. I pray thee, said Plato to Speusippus do thou
correct my servant, for I am angry. It must be done even to the greatest
malefactors with the spirit of milden^sse, not of madness; of love and lenity,
not of choler and severity. Antiquity feigned that the Chariot of Justice was
always drawn by two aged, and decrepit women, Pierius Hieroglyph. lib. 42.
the one whereof had in her hand a sword whose edge was blunted, and whose
point was broken; the other went crouching upon a staff; intimating hereby to
us, that in punishing such as are under our command, we should never go but a
Criples pace, nor strike, but with such an Instrument as may not pierce too
deep. I cannot therefore but much condemn the tragical asperity of Marcus
Scaurus; Lucius Brutus; Manlius Torquatus, and others, who having emptied their
Bosoms of all fatherly affection, did either with their own hands revenge the
dear inquencies of their children, or at least see it done with their own
eyes. Aulus Fulvius, a noble Senator, had a Son, whose worth even in the
flower of his youth made him the honor of his equals; and gave the most
renowned in the Verge of Rome occasion to expect, one, that should quickly
parallel if not exceed them in their best performances. But alas! no Plant so
hopeful, which may not be blasted in the up-spring. Lewd counsel had at
length seduced him to side with Catiline, against the commonweal; his father
having notice of his revolt, intercepted him on the way, and put him presently
to death. He might have kept him in hold till the rage of that civil tempest
had been over; but he thought it a greater glory to be counted a cruel
Father, than a cautious; and yet I think there are few so iron-hearted, as to
commend the severity of his Act. Esse debet penes patrem dulcis conditio libera
servitus, absoluta custodia, timor laetus, blanda ultio, paupertas dives, Sermon
1.
secura possessio, says Chrysologus. The bondage of a child under his Father
should be no other than a sweet and pleasing kind of liberty; the yoke which
be imposes on him, should be soft, and not any way wring his neck. If an
offense be committed, the correction must be such as may seem to court an
amendment rather, than enforce it, that being no way tainted with servility,
he may rejoice continually in that fear, which is to overawe his
corruptions. I have read of a Father, Vale. Max. lib. ^. cap. 9.
his name is not extant, who having notice that his son did secretly practice
his death, would not be persuaded that so unnatural a thought could be
nestled in the Bosom of one Legitimate; and therefore humbly besought his
wife, that she would tell him truly, whether she had thrust upon him that
young man, or else conceived him by some other: at length being thoroughly
resolved upon her many oaths, and deep asseverations, that he was his own,
he took him aside into a solitary place, put a sword which he had privily
brought along with him, into his hand, and withal presented him his naked
throat, affirming, that there needed not either poison, or the hand of any base
assassinate to commit a parricide; he was now furnished with the means, and
therefore willed him to dispatch it. The son hereupon was so dismayed, that
he flung away the weapon; and with a kind of ecstasy cried out, Tuvero pater
vive; O live my father; Et si tam obseq^ens es, ut hoc precari filio permittas,
me quoque exupera: and if thou be so obsequious, as to allow this prayer of
mine, fall upon me, and take away my life, who would have deprived thee of
thine. Only this I beseech thee, let not the love which I have toward thee,
be the less esteemed, because repentance gives it both a Birth and Being. It
is a memorable example; and sure it will become a loving and Christian Father,
in the chastening of his ch^ldren, to make this rather the pattern of his
imitation, than the former. It is the saying of Menander.

(...). Good Fathers can not harbor in their Breast,
Such furious rage, as may their child molest.
A little punishment with them should be sufficient for the expiation of a
great offense. New Wines are harsh, but commonly the older they grow the more
delightful is their taste: And so it is with youth. I will not say with him in
the Comedy, Non est flagitium Adolescentulum scortari, neque potare n que
fores effringere, etc. But this He say, That where such rio^ous Affections
happen, Parents should not be so transported with any violence of Passion, as
presently to cast them off, and blot them out of the list of their children;
but patiently wait, Donec deferbuerint, Till their heat be spent; and labor
in the mean space by Prayer, and Precepts, and moderate severitie also, to
stay the headstrongness of their condition.

Gods Spirit is able even in a moment to make the spotted Leopard, a Milkewhite
Ermin; the Tawnie Ethiopian, as free from Morphue, as the beauteous Rachel. To
follow therefore any tyrannous and unnatural course, is to affront his sweet
and milder operation; and gives an argument that we despair of his goodness.
Saint Augustine reports of his mother, that she gave great Alms, went twice a
day to the Church, and there upon her Knees powered forth both Prayers and
Tears, not for Gold, or Silver, or any other worldly thing, but for his true
conversion to the faith; and at length she reapt the acco^plishment of her
desires.

Sour Grapes may prove sweet Reasons, and ragged Colts good horses.
Themistocles was so desbauched in his younger years, that his Father did
disinherit him; and his mother overcome with shame, and not able to stand under
the burden of so great a grief, prevented the hand of Nature, Val. Max. lib.
6, cap. 11
and with her own in a most tragical manner abridged the days of her
wearisome life; and by this means was deprived of that sweet content, which not
long after she might have enjoyed, by seeing him quite weaned from all
irregularities, and become a valiant Captain, and a prudent Governor. The
like happened to Alcibiades, to Scipio the African, to Valerius Fla^cus, to
Fabius Maximus, and diverse others, whose unriper age was a blemish to the house
from whence they came; and to the City wherein they lived; but Time made them
the greatest ornaments to both.

It is storied of Polemon the Athenian, that when he was a young man, he was in
all luxurious courses prodigiously exorbitant; but entering on a certain day
into the School of Xenocrates, with no better intent, than to jeere both him
and his profession, he was at length so astonished at the gravitie of the
Philosopher, and so inwardly touched with the weightinesse of his sayings, that
he did immediately lay aside all barbarous behavior; Et ex infami ganeone
maximus Ph^losophus evasit; an by that one lecture, of a notorious Ruffian,
b^c^me himself the greatest Philosopher that those times afforded. We read
likewise of Aristotle that having in his younger years, played away his
Patrimony, he betook himself to the wars; but finding that course of life
not agreeable to his humor, Aelian, lib. 5 c. 9.
he turned Apothecary, frequented the Schools, and proved in the end, the
Prince of all Philosophers. Julius Caesar, the rarest Monarch that ever the
world brought forth, was in his first up-spring of so effeminate a carriage and
behavior, that he minded nothing but the satisfying of his own voluptuous,
and loose desires; but being grown to a maturer State, he so improved his
worth in Martial discipline; that ere Time had run any long race, he was
seen invested with the Roman Empire.

It is an ancient Proverb; They go far which never turn; even Saul at one
time or other, may be found amongst the Prophets. Somewhat must be borne with
in respect of their age; He that names youth, names ignorance, small
experience, Infinite Longings; a sudden quickness in entertaining them, and a
foolish rashness in enjoying them.

Remember not, O Lord, the sins of my Youth, cries David; and again, Lord
take me not away, in dimidio dierum, in the midst of my days, that is, in
my youth. Adam and Eve were young, when to satisfy a fond and foolish
Appetite, they forfeited the royallest jurisdiction, that ever was. Yea there
is not that Vice, says S. Aug. which has not a desire to nestle it self in
the Breast of Youth.

They were young men, which Ezekiel saw with their backs toward the Sanctum
Sanctorum, ap. 8. v. 16.
courting their own wanton Affections with the sent of sweet Flowers; and
which in all haste planted a Vineyard, saying, Vtamur creatura etc. Come let
us enjoy the good things that are present; Sap. 2.6.
let us fill our selves with costly wine and ointments; let us crown our Heads
with the Buds of Roses before they be withered, etc.

Young men lost Rehoboam his kingdom; Phaeton was young, when through his rash
and unadvised managing of the Suns bright Chariot, he set this whole frame
of Nature on a fire. He was of the same hair, whom that married wife in the
Proverbs, allured to her house, Cap. 7. v. 13
there to take their fill of love, during the absence of her husband.

This considered, Parents should not, when they see their children any way
extravagant, slack their endeavors to reform them for want of Hope; nor yet
forgo their Hope, because they fail in their endeavors; Peregrinari poterit
tantummodo illorum animus in nequitia, non habitare; Vice may peradventure have
some kind of Tenure in their Bosoms, but no Freehold; and who knows how
s^one the Lord may grant an Ejectio firmae to cast it out. And therefore
Fathers, forbear with too much rigor to provoke your children.

5. And lastly, The improvidence of Parents in the education of their Issue,
during their minority, may prove a great provocative both of grief, and anger
to them in their riper years. For what can more distract a man, than when he
is left at his own dispose, to see himself unfurnished of all such means, as
should support his Being in the world? We have the experience of it daily,
while some pine away to death in the contemplation of their necessities;
others, to redress them, venture upon lawless courses, and bring their lives
at length to a sad, and tragical Catastrophe, Cursing at their departure the
very Vrnes in which the Authors of their miseries do lie entombed. It behooves
a Father therefore, if he cannot leave his posterity a sufficient inheritance,
to train them up to some profession, which is indeed the surest fence to keep
them out of the iron clutches of an unsufferable want. The other is only an
Egyptian Reed; And how can we rely upon it for security, when according to
the Poet; Nunc ager Vmbreni sub nomine nuper Ofelli, Hor. Sat. 2. lib. 2.

Dictus erit nulli proprius, sed cedit in usum
Nunc mihi, nunc alii --
That land, which now does bear Vmbrenus name,
Ofellus lately did possess the same;
None shall enjoy it long; one while in me,
The right shall rest, another while in thee.


Fortune is Mistress over the greatest Patrimonies, and infinite are the
chances, whereunto they are liable. He that is as rich, as Croesus at the
rising of the Sun, may be as poor, as Irus before his going down. Job was
the wealthiest man in all the East, and yet upon a sudden; no room was left
him for the entertainment of his friends, but the loathsome dunghill. A Thief,
a Storm, a Fire is enough to bring to naught the labors of many years. But
knowledge is a thing exempted from all miscarrying, and a sure revenue to him,
that has it; (...), as Menander calls it; a possession out of the check of
all disastrous Accidents. Claudius Nero, when the Mathematicians had informed
him, Sueton.
that he should one day be deprived of his Sovereignty, cheered up himself
with this; (...). That there was no Climate under heaven so barbarous, but
would afford an Artist sufficient maintenance. Many therefore did excuse his
serious practicing of Music, and blanch it from asspersion, as being a
Science, which afforded him pleasure while he was a Prince, and might procure
him profit, when he should be a private person. Solon made a Law, that the
Father which had not bred up his son to some one trade or other in his youth,
should not be relieved by him in his age. The carelessness of those of Megara
in this kind, gave Diogenes occasion to say, that he had rather be their
sheep than their son; Aelian. l. 12. cap. 56.
intimating, their Providence to be greater for the breeding up of their
Cattle, than their children. And it is a fault too frequent in this our age. A
Gentleman is usually more sollicitous for his Horse, or his estate, than either
for Sons or daughters; He will be sure at any rate to provide a faithful
Steward for the one, and to enquire out a skillful Rider for the other; one
that shall look to the feeding and dressing of him with all di^igence; when
the weakest Tutor, so he be the cheapest, shall be thought fit enough for the
fashioning and informing of his Children. And hence it is, that for the
greatest part they degenerate from Virtue, and prove altogether distorted in
their lives and conversations. Iulians Apostasy is ascribed mainly to his
Governor, who being seasoned with bad leaven himself, did likewise sour him.
I find it in the Rolls of A^tiquitie recorded of one of no mean quality,
that coming to a Philosopher, and having asked him, what stipend he should
give him, to train up his son in the knowledge of Letters; a pretty round
sum was demanded, whereupon the Father replied, that he could with less
charge purchase a Slave and have him taught at hom^: I, said the Philosopher,
and so for one Slave thy house in a little space may be furnished with twain.
Young Natures are in this, like Looking-glasses; bend them toward the earth,
and they will show you nothing but what is earthly; turn them up to
heaven-wards, and whatsoever Objects they represent will be heavenly. Trees
grow not, either straight, or crooked, but as they are ordered by the hand,
which does first plant them. Cloth stained in the Wool, will hardly be
brought to any other hew; Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem
Testa diu --
New Vessels will savor long of that liquor, wherewith they were first
seasoned. We are all naturally prone to corrup^ion. Now when unsettled youth as
the Comic speaks, Magistrum cepit ad eam rem improbum, ipsum animum aegrotum
ad deteriorem partem plerumque applicat; lights upon a Guide addicted to
vicious practices, the craggy mind is commonly swaid to the worser part.
Parents therefore should be very wary, to whom they do commit the Education of
their children. A good Tutor is to be preferred before much Treasure. Blessed
be our Ancestors, says the Satyrist, and may their Ashes never be molested,
Iuven. Sat. 7
Qui praeceptorem sancti voluere parentis
Esse loco --
Who held a learned, and judicious Schoolmasters worthy the utmost reverence,
that the best Fathers or Mothers could by nature challenge to themselves. And
indeed according to Plato, the benefit, which we receive from these, our
Parents, and the gods, is far beyond the limits of requital. Philip of
Macedon, Patric. Ser^^. Lib. 2. Tit. 7. de Repub.
did not so much rejoice, that a son was borne unto him as that he happened to
be borne, when he might have Aristotle for his Teacher; And it was afterward
Alexanders own ingenuous acknowledgment, that he was no less beholding to
Aristotle for his breeding, than to Phillip for his birth. The one gave him his
Being, but the other showed him how to use it, with glory to himself, and good
to others. Diogenes the Cynik in his passage to Aegina was taken by Pirates,
who brought him into the Market at Corinth to be sold, where Xeniades bought
him out of their hands, and gave him not only the regiment of his Children, but
likewise of his whole house; A trust, which he so faithfully discharged, that
Xeniades himself was often heard to say, (...); Diog. La^r.
Fortune, I give thee thanks, that by thy means a good Angel is entered into
my house. I could enlarge my self in this discourse, but it shall suffice only
to give you a taste, and away; I pass therefore now from the Act prohibited,
and come to the Persons, in whose behalf it is prohibited, Children. Father
provoke not your Children.

The name is general, as in the former Verse, and denotes unto us even Sons
and Daughters in law, as well as natural Children; for even these may likewise
be provoked.

1. By suspecting without just cause the soundness and sincerity of their
affections; in secretly listening and enviously enquiring after every thing
they either savor do.

2. By suffering even our meanest servants to molest them, and to exercise a
kind of insulting mastry and dominion over them.

3. By branding their carriage and conversation with undeserved marks of
infancy.

4. And lastly, by giving evil Counsel, or carrying of Tales, whereby to
exasperate the son against his wife, or the daughter against her husband; a
practice hateful in any, but utterly to be abhorred in Parents, whose care
should rather be to tack the Vine to the sides of the house, that it might
grow there with pleasure and delight, than with a most unnatural and felonious
hand to tear it it from that, which should support it; and therefore parents
provoke not your children.

Your Children; He does not say this, or that Child, but universally, and
without any limitation, Your Children. Some are all for the Elder, and make no
more account of the younger, be they never so many, than if they were not the
fruit of their own bodies, but the spurious issue of some unlawful
copulation; a fault too general in this our land; and it arises from too great
an ambition of perpetuating their name, which transports them indeed so far,
that they grow forgetful of Nature. Others on the contrary, are all for the
younger; Quo serior, eo dulcior; they make the Dilling, their Darling; And this
in a manner is incident to all. Isaac was the Son, whom Abraham, as Josephus
writes; (...), loved above measure, with surpassing and more than ordinary
love. The like was Joseph unto Jacob; Genesis 45. v. ult.
I have enough, said he, when after a long miss of him, he understood of his
safety in the Land of Egypt, Joseph my son is yet alive. And I deny not but
affection may lawfully be extended, upon particular respects more to one child
than an other, provided always that none may be provoked. The Prohibition is
general: Fathers provoke not your children.

Children. The very word has in it an Argument, whereby Parents may be easily
incited to forbear that which is here forbidden. For it is no other, than if
the Apostle should have said, Be not injurious to your own flesh, wring not
out your own blood, wound not your own Bowels; be not cruel to your own
selves. For according to Aquinas, Filius est aliquid Patris; The Son is a
piece of his Father; and as the Philosopher tells us, (...); I will render it in
the Apostles phrase, No man ever hated his own flesh. It is said in the
Canticles, That Love is strong as death; And by this is intimated unto us, that
of all the affections in man, Love is the strongest, and (...), Love unto
children is most passionate of all. Multa volumus patriae debere, multa
parentibus, says the Prince of Orators, multa demum multis, sed filiorum causa
omnia volumus: We joy to do much for the good, and safety of our Country, for
our Parents much, and much for many, upon manifold occasions; but what is it we
will not do for our Children? These are our very Bowels, and in these our joy,
our love, our life, and all our Affections live.

1. In regard of Nature. For Bonum est sui diffusivum; The Lord in the
beginning said, Increase and multiply: So that it is the Ordinance of God, and
the instinct of Nature, for every Creature to cherish and save his own.

2. Reason will enforce the like. For who should be more dear unto us, tha^
they who have proceeded out of our own loins? with whom we are to live, and
to whom at length we must leave the honor of our Name, the reputation of our
Virtues, and all the Wealth, and Substance, which we have. These, Genesis 49.3.
as Jacob said of Reuben, are the joy of our youth, the beginning of our
strength, and how should we look upon them with a murderous, or malicious Eye?

3. And lastly, Religion above all persuades a tender respect unto our
Children. In Ephesians. 6.4. we have the same Precept which is here; (...), Fathers
provoke not your Children to wrath. And in the Gospel, Mar. 9.36.
our Savior embraced Children with an extraordinary love, as knowing, that the
Dead could not, but the living should praise him; and therefore he requires a
godly Seed, and would have Parents cherish their Children, that they may live
to glorify his Name.

If we desire joy; is there any joy like the joy of Children? There is joy at
every Birth, Joh. 16.21.
said our Savior; yea the very heathen were wont with great solemnity to
celebrate the nativity of their Children. If we stand upon honor; Childrens
children are the Crown of their Fathers; Pro. 17.6.
Psalm. 127.4.
They are like Arrows in the hand of a mighty Giant; they that have their
Quivers full of these will not be ashamed to talk with their Enemies, when
they me^t them in the Gates The Lord, Luke 1.25.
said Elizabeth, as soon as she had brought forth a child, has taken away
my rebuke from amongst men; counting it the greatest honor, that ever could
have happened to her self, and her husband to be the Parents of a blessed son.
In secular Story we read of one Dercyllidas, Plut. Apoph. Lacon.
a brave Commander, who coming to a public meeting, and expecting, as it was
the manner of the Lacedaemonians, that some of the younger should arise, and
give him place; not one amongst them all would stir, and the reason, which
they alleged was; that himself had begotten none, who in their age might do
the like to them. Last of all, in regard of Wealth, Riches are no way
comparable to a Child. Adam called his first begotten, Cain, which signifies a
Possession, as if his chiefest and only treasure, and yet he was then Lord of
the whole World, had consisted in him. Cornelia the wife of Paulus Aemilius,
Patric. Sen. de Repub. lib. 4.
when a certain Lady of Campania, that was come to visit her, having bragged
sufficiently of her sumptuous Robes, and precious Ornaments, desired in the end
to have a sight of hers; she sent immediately for her children, who being
come, Behold, said she, these are the Jewels and Gemmes in which I most
delight. In a word, all worldly things are nothing to the comfort of a child.
God had endowed Abraham with honor, health and victory; he had enlarged his
substance, increased his Flocks and multiplied his Herds; Genesis 15.2.
he stood possessed with Gold and Silver in great abundance; yet all this he
accounted nothing, because he wanted Children; His speech imports no less; O
Lord God, says he, what will thou give me, seeing I go Childlesse? as if
for a Child he would willingly have relinquished all those other blessings.

Iohs patience stood as immovable as the Center of the earth, notwithstanding
the news of much stern disaster, did without any intermission assault his ears
with the various reports of sad events. For though one came to him first, and
told him, that as his Oxen were ploughing, and his Asses feeding in their
places, the Sabaeans by violence drove the^ all away; then another, even while
his fellow was yet speaking, that Fire from heaven had consumed all his Sheep.
Afterward a third in like manner, that the Chaldeans had fallen upon his
Servants with the edge of the sword, as one scarce sensible of the loss, he
did not shrink a whit under the burden; but as soon as the last messenger had
related unto him the tragical destruction of his children, he then rent his
clothes, and shaved his head, and lying grovelling upon the ground, he filled
the Air with cries, and lamentations. The like subject did produce in
Psammeticus king of Egypt a quite contrary effect; for being vanquished by
Cambises King of Persia, and spying first his daughter, by and by his Son,
among those, who by the appointment of the Conqueror were led to death, he
stood stone-still, and uttered not a word; but at length perceiving one, that
only was an attendant upon his person, in the troop, he mourned bitterly;
and being afterward demanded the reason of so preposterous a grief, his
answer was; that the two first disasters did admit no character, only the
last, found Tears for an expression. And indeed many Accidents do far
surmount our best ability to bear them; Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes
stupent;

Slight cares will speak, when great ones have n^ tongue. But to pass by
this; we may see by these Examples; that Parents should not any way provoke or
hurt those, whom Nature teaches them continually to cheer and cherish. Other
Reasons there are, and forcible enough to keep them from provoking their
Children unto Anger.

Pro. 16.32.
1. The wisest and ablest men have found it a thing of no small difficulty, so
to suppress this passion, as that it might not hurry them into sin. Jonas
was a Prophet, a great Prophet, and appointed to preach to Niniveh the great
City, yet being but a little provoked by God himself, and that no otherwise,
than in his own erroneous and weak imagination, grew presently so impatien^,
that he did not stick to tell him to his face, that he was angry, yea, angry
with him to the very death. David was a meek man, a man after Gods own heart,
yet by the provocation of the Amalekites, he was so mightily incenst, that
never any Nero could have paralleled those bloody outrages, which he did act
in prosecuting their presumption. Much less then shall Children be able to
stifle in their bosoms, Hor. Epist. 2. lib. 2.
the fierceness of this fury.

2. Our anger toward them, is a maine occasion of Gods anger toward us. For
with what judgment we judge, we shall be judged, and with what measure we
mete, it shall be measured to us again. He that is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, shall be liable to judgment; and shall not he who unadvisedly,
and without just cause reviles his children be the like? They be the words of
our Savior himself. Mat. 5.22.
And therefore Fathers --

3. Anger in the Breast of Man serves but as a Porter to let the Devil in. When
is it but in a time of tumult and commotion, that he sowes in our hearts the
feed of Malice, Envy, Hatred, etc and works us to the acting of his most
damnable designs? When was it that Cain with a parricidiall Hand put a sad
period to his Brothers life, but when Rage, and Discontent were set enthroned
in his Bosom? And therefore Parents provoke not your --

4. And lastly, by provoking them to anger, we hinder in them the operation of
the Word; It cannot be grafted, Iam. 1.21.
where this Weed does grow. Yea, we weaken in them the power and success of
prayer. For who can lift up a pure hand, that has a muddy heart. Let not
Fathers then unless they desire to deprive their Children of eternal
happiness, provoke them to anger.

Again, Children must learn from hence, to fashion their minds to Patience, and
with Meekness to embrace what ever injuries, and indignities are done unto
them by their Parents. For though cruelty in a father toward his Child be a
grievous sin; Wrath yet, and stubbornenesse in a child toward his father is
a more enormous, and prodigious crime, Filios non modo reticere parentum
iniurias, sed etiam aequo animo far oportere, says the heathen Orator;
Children ought not only to conceal, and smother their Parents weaknesses and
imperfections, but submit themselves with mildness likewise to their greatest
oppressions. Quem ferret si patrem non ferret? says the Comik; with whom
should a man bear, if he should not bear with him that did beget him? It is
not for Children to expostulate with their Parents in this kind; but yet let
their Parents know, they shall be countable for all such harshnes unto God. He
gives the precept, and will require the performance. Therefore Fathers provoke
not your Children.

Provoke not. He does not say, Rebuke not, or Correct not your children. For
both are commanded and required; because great is the profit, which accrues
from both. For as touching the first; Hear counsel, my son, and receive
instruction, says Solomon, Pro. 19.20.
that thou may be wise in thy later end. And again, He that teaches his
son, Eoclus. 30.3.
shall vex hereby his enemy; but shall have cause himself to rejoice in the
midst of his Friends. Qui non vetat peccare, cum potest, jubet: Not to kill
sin where we may, is to cherish it. The Shepherd if he be not obeyed at
his call, sends forth his dog to fetch the straggling sheep again unto the
Fold; he has a Hook as well as a Whistle. And therefore as touching the
later; Children may likewise be corrected.

Prove. 19.15.
The Rod, says the Wiseman, gives wisdom, but a Child set at liberty
makes his mother ashamed. Chasten thy son therefore, Pro. 23.13.
while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his murmuring. If thou
smite him with the Rod, he shall not die: Thou shall smite him with the Rod,
and shall deliver his Soul from Hell. The Caution then must be this; Not to
make Food of that, which should be ministered only as Physic. Our Rebukes
must be mild, and our corrections moderate. Sweet Bals are best to scowre
away the Dirt; and behold the proceedings of our heavenly Father toward his
children, may serve all earthly Fathers for a Precedent, whereby to fashion
their practice toward theirs. He never is so far incensed against his, as
utterly to withdraw from them his fatherly kindness and compassion. If they
forsake my Law, Psalm. 89.31.
says he, and walk not in my judgments: If they break my Statutes, and
keep not my Commandments: I will visit their transgression with the Rod and
their iniquity with strokes: I will not yet take from them my loving kindness,
nor falsify my truth. We must not guide the reins with too rigorous and
stiff a hand. Metus hand dinturni Magister officii, says the Orator; Fear is
but a bad Tutor; and whatsoever lesson he teaches, it is quite forgotten when
we come to liberty. And thus from the Persons, in whose behalf this
Prohibition was awarded, we follow our Apostle to the Reason, upon which it is
grounded, (...), Least they should be discouraged.

It is drawn from the inconvenience, which usually follows this Act of
provocation. And this by the word in the original is manifested to be
wondrous great. For it is (...), which implies three notable Evils.

The first is a Heaviness of the mind, whereinto children, specially if they
be godly and religious, are cast by this unseasonable severity of their
Parents; and from hence arise in them sundry sicknesses, and diseases, by which
Nature is enfeebled, and many times even life it self is abridged. For as a
Moth is to the garment, Pro. 25.20.
or a Worm to the wood, so is Sadness to the Heart, says Solomon. Parents
therefore must have a special care to avoid this inconvenience, that they may
not be thought to have begotten Children, with an intent to become themselves
their Executioners.

The second Evil contained in this word, is that stupid dejection of the
Spirits, by which they become fearful, and unapt for any noble and ingenuous
designs. For finding by experience that their best observance is neglected,
and all that ever they can do for the pleasing of their Parents, rejected as
ill done, they set them down, and do no more, but wax dull and sluggish in
their undertakings. Now Parents must be very wary, that they drive not their
children into this state. For Children are as it were the Arms and Hands, by
which their age must be defended; the Feet and Thighs, by which their
Weakness must be underpropped: and might we not justly count him a madd man,
who with some Narcoticall medicine should so stupifie those parts, as never to
have the use of them again? Can we then think otherwise of those Parents, who
with their hardness and austerity, so dull, and stupifie their Children in
their youth, that they can neither help themselves, nor them in their maturer
years.

3. And lastly, this (...), carries with it, especially in those, that are not
of a good and generous disposition, a desperate kind of contumacy. For when
they see no hope of pleasing, they likewise cast away all care to please, yea,
many times they assume unto themselves a boldness to displease, and make it
their sport, and pastime to provoke their Parents. Now this in a Child, is the
very height of all impiety. Parents therefore must forbear such sour usage, as
may occasion in them this impiety. The Rider in breaking of a Colt does seldom
make use of the Spur, but seeks by fair and gentle means to ring him to a
perfect pace; It is the familiar managing of the Hawke that makes her forgo her
savagenes. A Lion may be stro^ed, he will not be stricken. Kindness may
prevail, where crabbednesse shall be excluded. It is not either Lightning or
Thunder, but only the sweet and gentle shows, which the heavens send down
upon the earth, that make her fertile, and willing to produce such food, and
fodder as is requisite for Man and Beast. The Sun by shining gently upon the
Traveller, made him of his own accord lay by his Garment, whereas to spite as
it were the blustering Winds, he girded it to him the more. Unseasonable
severitie is a retraction from duty. Let not Parents therefore provoke their
children, least they be discouraged.

The vulgar Latin reads it, Vt non pusillo animo fiant: that they may not be
pusillanimous, white-liverd, or hen-spirited, as we use to say, which many
happen to be, having been too much snipped in their Infancy. The Philosopher
gives the Reason, when he says, (...), that Fear is to the Blood, as cold is
to the water; it hinders Action, and preventeth even Motion. Some therefore
allege this for a reason, why the Children of Israel were not presently
brought into the Land of Promise; because having been bred up in the house of
bondage, they would not have had the courage to look upon an Enemy. Dicite
pusillanimis -- Say unto them that are fearful, says the Lord, be strong;
fear not; Esa. 35.4.
behold your God comes with vengeance; even God; with a recompense will he
come and save you. And thus we have done with the mutual Duties of Children
and Parents one toward the other.

The Ground of the first Book of the third TOME.
Servants in all things obey your Masters according to the flesh; not with
eye-service as men pleasers; but in singleness of Heart, fearing God; And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, etc.

TOM. III. LIB. I.
Having past the two first Combinations concurring to the constitution of a
Family; the one whereof was betwixt the Husband and the Wife; the other
betwixt the Parent, and the child; we come now to the third, which is betwixt
the Master and the Servant; whose mutual duties, one toward another being
thoroughly expounded, our Oeconomicks will be full and complete.

Now here as in the two former, the Apostle begins with the weakest, Servants.
And 1. he gives them a Precept. 2. Directs them in their practice. In the
Precept we will first consider the Persons, on whom it is imposed; Servants. 2.
The Duty which thereby is exacted, Obedience. 3. The extent of this Duty, how
far it is to reach, and that is, to all things. 4. And lastly, the Persons to
whom it is to be tendered. Generally, Masters. Particularly, Masters according
to the Flesh. This is the deduction of the Precept. The direction for their
Practice, is set down two manner of ways, Negatively, and Affirmatively.
Negatively, he shows the Faults, and Imperfections, which are incident to
Servants, and would have every Christian to avoid them: For he would not have
the^, either Eye-servers, or Men-pleasers. Affirmatively, he seeks to fashion
them to the contrary; For he would have their Obedience grounded upon an
upright heart, and guided by the fear of the Lord; Servants be obedient in in
all things to them, that are your Masters according to the flesh, not with
Eye-service, as Men-pleasers, etc. And thus having showed the several parts,
which must be the groundwork of our ensuing discourse, I return to the
Precept, Servants obey.

This Precept was so much the more seasonable, because servants in the Apostles
time being converted to Christianity, did think themselves hereby exempted
from the yoke of servitude; for it seemed unreasonable, that he, whom Christ
with his precious blood had redeemed from the power of the Devil should
continue a slave to him, who being not converted to the Faith, was still a
slave himself unto the Devil. But this opinion was altogether erroneous, and
no doubt suggested into the minds of men, by that great enemy of man, that so
the Gospel of Christ Jesus might be scandalized amongst the heathen, as
having no other aim, than utterly to subvert all discipline. The Apostle
therefore to silence such specious Plees prescribes a contrary command; in which
every word is of sufficient weight to evince both the Equity, and Necessity of
what is here enjoined. For he spoke here to Christians, and yet he did not,
call them Brethren though indeed they were Brethren, but he styled them
Servants.

The word in the Original is, (...), and implies, not such attendants, as we
usually now have. For though we hire them for wages, their condition yet is
free and ingenuous; but such as the ancients usually had, who were either taken
in war, and so were called of the Latins, Mancipia, because Manu capti; and
Servi, because in bello servati: Or they were bought with a Price, and were
therefore wholly in the power of their Lords, to be disposed of as they pleased.

And such a kind of Bondage may still stand with Equity, being used with
Mercy, and moderation. For,

1. The Jews being captivated, Baruc. 1.11
by Nebuchadnezar were commanded by God to quiet themselves in that estate, and
willingly submit their necks to the Babylonian yoke.

Genesis 17.11
2. Abraham had such in his house; Lev. 25.24.
and the Jews were permitted to have such.

3. The Apostles in their Epistles impose Subjection upon Servants, most of
whom in those times were no other than Bondslaves; Art thou called, says S
Paul, being a bondman? Care not for it; 1 Cor. 7.21
but let every man abide in that calling, wherein he was called.

4. Not only the Philosopher calls such kind of servants, (...), an animated
possession; but in holy writ they have the like Title. In Job. 1.3. the
Servants of that holy man are put into the Inventory, as a part of his Goods
and Chattell. And in Exodus 21.21. The Servant is styled his Masters money. But
many things are objected to the contrary. For,

1. Some affirm this servile condition to be against the Law of Nature.

2. Others to be a fruit of sin.

A third sort, will have it to be against the Law of Christ, who has
purchased such a liberty to the world, that now in him all are one.

The fourth and last kind of opposers say, it is against the Apostles own
Rule, in the 1 Cor. 7.23. Be not any longer the servants of men: To all which
I answer in order. And first to the first.

Every Subjection is not against the Law of pure Nature. For even in the state
of Innocence, there was a politic Subjection of the wife to her husband, and
of Children unto both. The Image therefore of God, in which we were created,
takes not away all Subjection, but only such a Subjection as takes away all
Dominion. But this can never happen to the basest Slave that is; for though his
Master have Dominion over him; he has yet dominion over the Creatures, and
this is in him a part of Gods Image.

2. It is true, that Bondage is a fruit of Sin, and so is Sickness, so is
Death, and so are all other temporal punishments whatsoever, and yet they still
remain; but as in them, so likewise in this, the curse is taken away to Gods
Chil^ren. Christ has purchased a liberty both for our souls and Bodies; but
so long as we live in this World, we must account it a great happiness to
receive primitias, the first fruits of it, and these are our spiritual liberty
from sin and Satan, from Hell and Condemnation, which is a forerunner to
that perfect freedom, which we expect in the Kingdom of Heaven, when we
shall not only be freed from the power of sin, as here, but even from all
molestation thereof; the sting of it shall be plucked out, and the Teeth of it
shall be broken; It shall not be able then either to bite or bark at us any
longer; Our enfranchisement, shall not only be from the evil of servitude as
now it is by Christ, but likewise from servitude it self.

3. I grant, that all are made one in Christ, and all Distinction of Bond, and
free is taken away; but how? It is taken away from the Spiritual Body of
Christ, which is the Church; but not from the outward Bodies and Societies of
men here upon Earth: For then there should be likewise no distinction either of
Countries or Sexes: There should be neither Scythian nor Barbarian; Male nor
Female. They are all one in regard of the inward, and spiritual man, as also
in regard of the means by which men are led to everlasting happiness, but in
regard of the outward Man they still abide Masters and Servants, Prince and
People, Bond and Free, Noble and Ignoble. Paul had converted Onesimus, a
Servant, and a runnagate, he did not keep him yet at Rome, nor discharge him
his Masters Service, because he was called, but sent him back to Philemon, who
although in regard of the Faith, he were to esteem him as a Brother, yet his
outward condition was to be a Servant still.

4. And lastly, concerning the Apostles own Rule, Be no longer the servants of
men; It must be understood of the Conscience, which is to admit no other Lord
than Christ, and not otherwise: for he speaks not there of any bodily service
unto men; nor is there indeed any one word throughout the whole Scripture,
which does any way countenance a licentious liberty. Religion frees no man
from his Duty, but rather binds him the more unto it: Search all the Records
of Truth, and ye shall find that the embracing of the Faith was never held a
dispensation from these Ties. The Anabaptists therefore err, that think the
Rule and Government of Christians over Christians, repugnant to the freedom of
the Gospel. The Papist likewise is mistaken, Gerson. qu. 1. de Potest.
Ecclesi. ca. 9. and qu. 2. c. 8.
while he counts Heresy a sufficient ground to take away the Sovereignty of
Kings, when the Apostle here allows not Paganism to prejudice the authority
of a private Master over his Family. If they be Servants, their duty is
required; Servants be Obedient.

The word in the Original is the same, which he used unto children; and as
there, so here it implies;

1. An humble promptitude in entertaining the commands of others.

2. A careful application of our best endeavors to a quick performance of
the same. Their Obedience must express it self;

1. With Reverence, and that internally, and externally; Internally, they must
not despise either the Person of their Masters, or the place, but must count
them worthy of all Honor, that the name of God and his doctrine be not evil
spoken 1 Timothy 1.6.
of. Externally, their speech and their behavior must be such as may not
savor either of contempt, or contumacy. They must fear their Masters. This is
that which the Lord himself requires in all his Servants. If I be a Master,
says he, where is my fear? Mal. 1.6. And in Ephesians. 6.5. Our Apostle exacteth
fear, and trembling from them toward their Masters.

The second Character of their Obedience must be Patience. They must endure
without resistance, rebukes and Corrections, be they never so bitter, and
unjust. For if when we do well, 1 Pet. 2.20.
and suffer wrong, we take it patiently, this is well pleasing unto God. Agar
being roughly dealt withal by Sarai, ran away, and would not abide her
chastisements, but the Lord by an Angel did control this course, and advised
her to return home to her Mistress, and to humble her self under her hand. A
Servant may lawfully withdraw himself, so it be done conveniently, and without
despising his Masters authority, till the fury of his unjust anger be allayed.
For so David conveyed himself from Saul; and the Egyptian that directed
David to the Amalekits made him swear, 1 Samuel 30.15.
not to deliver him into the hands of his Master from whom he was fled;
neither did David sin in (...) an oath. For in Deuteronomy. 23.15. it is set down
as a Law, that if a servant were fled from his Masters cruelty, especially if
he were a Heathen, who little regarded the very lives of their servants, he
should not be presently redelivered, but kindly entr^ated, till mediation
might be made for the reinstating of him in his Masters favor; but he must
not show him self at any hand peremptory and rebellious. And thus much of the
duty; the Extent of it follows.

In all things. A Servant, like a Bow in the hand of his Master must not be
bended or unbended, but according to his will and pleasure. I am a man in
authority, says the Centu^ion, and I say unto one, Go, and he goes; to
another, Come, and he comes; and to a third, Do this, and he does it. But
there are some of that sturdy disposition, that if the things enjoined them do
any way cross their credit, prejudice their profit, disturb their ease, or
are contrary to their liking, they will either not do them at all, or they
will do them with a left hand, and as they list themselves. Their usual
complaint is, that the master whom they serve is a churlish Nabal; and one that
forgets all humanity, both in exacting, and rewarding the service that is
done him. But this is not enough to unyoke them from their Obedience. For
though they receive no comfort from their masters; God yet, to whom, and for
whom they do their service, will not leave them unrequited. Jacob served a
hard Laban 21 years; In the day he melted away with heat; in the night he
was benumbed with cold; yea the very sleep departed from his Eyes, that
nothing might miscarry, which was committed to his charge; all which Laban
regarded not; but God in the end requited his care, and travail in a large
measure. And surely whatsoever a man does, that shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be bond, Ephesians. 6.8.
or free. And therefore Servants be obedient in all things.

In all things.i. in all outward things, which are indifferent and lawful.
Even Servants must look to that supreme Power, whereunto their Masters are but
subordinate, and be wary of doing any thing but the command of the one, which
they know to be countermanded by the other. The Master of our flesh is to be
obeyed so far as he commands not that, which is forbidden by the Master of
our Spirit, says Saint Hierome. They which please them in this kind are
utterly condemned. It is said of Pharaoh, That both he and his servants
sinned. And indeed many are contented to prostitute their best endeavors to
their Masters most adulterate designs. Absalons followers were very forward in
smiting of Amnon; and those of Caiaphas to spit in the face of our blessed
Savior, and to buffet him with their hands. Mat. 26, 67
Let a great one make a scoff of Religion, and presently his Attendants to
keep him company will do the like. As there are Flatterers in Princes Courts,
so also are there in private cottages. Many Apprentices, and Iourneymen, will
never be unfurnished of a Lie or an Oath; that they may fill their masters
houses, as the Prophet speaks, by bribery and cruelty; whereas indeed, they
should humor them no farther than stands with the safety of a good Conscience.
The Servants of wicked Saul were none of the best, yet they refused to execute
his unjust sentence upon the Priests of the Lord; though his commands had been
enough to countenance the deed. Let Christian Servants therefore much more
abhor to please any Flesh so far, as to displease the Lord. The Apostle
aims not at a lawless, and irreligious Obedience, he only forbids such a
dimidiated, and arbitrary subjection, as Servants according to their own fancy
are willing to tender, when he says, Servants be obedient in all things. This
for the extent. The Persons follow, to whom this Duty must be tendered, and that
is generally, Masters; Particularly, Masters according to the flesh.

(...). The very Title speaks the Equity of the Precept, as well as that of
Servants. For as the word Servant intimates an Obedience to be exhibited to to
another; so the name of Master implies a due Obedience to be exacted from
another. Whosoever therefore is a Master, must be obeyed, whether he be rich
or poor, kind or crabbed, a true believer or a false. The Apostle sets it
down indefinitely, without any difference of condition, Servants be obedient
to them that are your Masters; And we must understand it likewise without
distinction of Sex. For the Head of the Family, be it Man, or woman, must be
obeyed. 1 Timothy 5.14. No Salik Law for the cutting off of this. But to pass by
this; why does the Apostle say, Obey your Masters according to the Flesh? What
needed this addition? I answer, that this may be referred either to Masters,
or Servants. If to Masters, the sense is this, That Servants must be obedient
even to such Masters as are fleshly, and carnal men. And indeed what greater
praise can happen to a Christian man, than to show himself a Joseph in the
house of a Putiphar?

If to servants, they serve as a limitation, and show them to be subject only
in respect of their flesh; and so here are two things remarkable. The one
expressed, viz That the Bodies of servants are with Christian mercy and
moderation to be disposed of at their masters pleasure: They should learn
therefore from hence, willingly to suffer their flesh to be commanded. and
corrected by them. The other implied, viz. That none but GOD alone must be
acknowledged to h^ve dominion over their souls and consciences. It was the
answer of a Lacedaemonian youth to his Ma^ter; That he might command him what
was un^itting but he should quickly find that it was in his choice not to do
it. Sen.
Errat si quis existimat Servitutem in totum hominem descendere, says the
Heathen moralist; Pars melior ejus exempta est; Bondage descends not upon the
whole man; his better part is still exempted: the Body may be obnoxious to
the imperiousness of a Master; but the mind remains still as free as Air;
and can never be so pent up in her earthly prison; but ever, and anon she
will be breaking forth as far as heaven.

The Rule which man has over man, is only temporal, and in outward things. A
Servant must be of the same Trade and Calling that his Master is of; but he is
not bound to be of the same humor, or Religion with his Master. It is a fault
not to give the Master what thou oughtst; but it is a greater fault to give him
more than thou should. Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, but still
reserve for God that which is Gods. It is our Saviors own Caution; Fear not
them which can kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; fear ye
rather him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. And thus we
have done with the Precept, and are now to fall upon the direction for the
Practice; and first of the Negative part thereof, wherein two faults commonly
incident to servants, are absolutely prohibited. 1. They must not be
Eye-servers.

Eye-service is said to be that which is done only in the presence of ^he
Master, and with no better intent, than to please him for the time, that he
looks on. For his back shall be no sooner turned, but such a servants
labor will be at an end. Luke 12.54
Our Savior himself gives us his true Character. He sees his master deferres
his coming, and begins therefore to tyrannize over his Fellows, and gives
himself to rioting and drunkenness, consuming in those and other such
desbauched courses his Masters substance. And amongst the Heathen most were of
this nature. It was wittily and fitly therefore answered both of the Persian
and African; The one being demanded what Provender would best fatten up a
horse, replied; The masters eye: The other, what dung would most enrich the
Field; made answer, (...), The steps of the Owner: His continual walking about
to oversee what was done unto them himself. The Apostle would have this fault
to be far removed from Christian servants; His Exhortation therefore is
Servants he obedient to your M^sters in all things, but not with Eye-service.

Nor as Men-pleasers. And this may seem to be the Fountain from whence
issues the former faultiness. Now he may be said to (...) a Man-pleas^r,
that applies his best endeavors more to please man, than God. A fault frequent
enough in these later days, and which in many places has shaken the
foundations both of Church, and Commonweal. We are all of us, Habent hoc in
se natural blanditiae, etiam cum rejiciuntur. ^lacent; saepe exclusae,
novissime recipiuntur. Sen. qu. not. lib. 4. cap. 1.
high and low, naturally inclined to covet praise, and from what mouth so ever
it proceeds, we give it a cheerful entertainment, notwithstanding our own
Conscience whispers inwardly unto us, that it is not any way deserved. Croesus
King of Lydia drove Solon out of his Kingdom because he could not flatter him;
Dionysius put to death Philoxenus the Poet, because he wa^ so bo^d as to tell
him that the Verses which he had published, were absurd, yea some are ambitious
of it in a prodigious manner. Lucian tells us of a great Lady, who being fair,
Dialo. pro Imag.
and comely, but of a low stature, a certain Poet having composed Verses in
commendation of her, among other beauties extold her for her tallness,
comparing her for height and straightness to the Poplar, and finding by her
gesture, that she so gloried in this, as if she had felt her self really shot
up to a longer measure, he took all occasions to sing them in her hearing;
till at length one of the Assistants said unto him in his ear, (...): My
friend give over, that thou move not the woman to rise up from her seat, and
so betray the falsehood of thy Encomiums.

The like, but more ridiculous, is reported of Stratonico the Wife of Seleucus,
who being bald, and having scarce so many hairs upon her head, as one, whom
Martial mentions in his Epigrammes, Lib. 3. ep. 51.
employed a com^any of Poets to commend her Tresses, with promise of a Talent
to him that should do it best. Yea there are some that affect it in their
Pictures, and will enjoyne the Artist, when their eyes are naturally gray, to
make them black; when their Nose is long, to make it short, and so to alter,
or add whatsoever other perfection themselves do most approve and desire
should be in them; not remembering that in so doing they cause their fancy to
be drawn, and not their feature. Now this inbred propension in every one, to
hear and believe, whatsoever may be any way advantageous to his glory, is
that which draws so many Sycophants, about the Ears of Greatness, who make
her proud of what she neither is, no^ has no^ caring so they may raise
themselves, to ruin those on whom they most rely. But he that is truly wise
will ^^refully avoid them. Gul^d^us P^risi^^sis terms them. Sacerdotes
Diaboli; The Devils Priests; and Solomon says their discourse is Panis
mendacii, Pro. 20.17.
The Bread of Lies. Rehoboam was fed with it by his Courtiers; Ahab by his
Priests; They found it sweet at the first, but in the end it proved Gravel in
their mouth, and was an occasion of ruin unto both.

A famous Statuarie came to Alexander the Great, Lucian. dial. pro imaginib.
and offered to transform the high Hill Atho wholly into his Figure, making
him hold in either hand a City; No, said Alexander, I prithee leave the
Mountain Atho untouched in his place, and wrong it not so much, as to reduce
the vastness of it to the similitude of a Body so little as mine. O that the
sons of the mighty would learn of him, not to lend an ear to those, who
with a commendation too rank and over-growne, should go about to set forth
their merit. Tobias when a Kid was presented unto him, would not accept it,
till they had satisfied him, that it was not stolen; if great ones would do the
like by those Encomiums, which are daily given them, and admit of none, but
what were duly theirs, and not stolen from others, they should not be so
obnoxious to miscarrying as they are. But Aristippus has now no other Plee for
all his base insinuations, than that without the^ there is no life or
conversation to be had with Dionysius, or any other of his strain. Their
Ears he finds are in their heels, and unless he lay his head in the very
dust before them, he cannot be heard. Yet this shall not free him from the
stroke of vengeance. For if a poor, and silly wretch, that is afraid of his
M^sters wrath, and has a feeling of his own wants, may not yet for the
avoiding of the one, nor for the reparation of the other, insinuate himself
into his masters favor, by wicked and sinister means; what shall we think
will become of those, who in imitati^n of him, speak only placentia, Butter
and Oil to their Superiors, not caring how they dead in them all goodness,
so they may give a life to their own greatness? Surely the hand of the
Highest is drawing upon the very walls of such men's houses, the Character of
their destruction; and it shall quickly come down upon them to the bruising
and breaking of their hairy Scalpe; Let Subjects and Servants therefore be
obedient unto those, that have authority over them, in all things, but but not
with Eye-service, nor yet as men-pleasers.

M^n-pleasers. Who never do any service, but when it may be seen; desiring
out of their own particular ends, by flattering and deceitful courses to
purchase their Masters praise, but never striving to procure his profit. Such
as these I may well liken to Players, who seek so to perfect their Action, that
it may please, but the end of their pleasing is to benefit themselves. They
appear not upon the Stage till their spectators be come: No more do these
put hand to their work, but when their Master is by, to look upon them, and
applaud them. But Saint Paul would have Christian Servants in the performance
of their duties to know, that they are always in Gods eye, and it is he that
requires their diligence; They should not therefore serve as Men-pleasers: but
whatsoever they do, they should do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not to
me^. And thus from the negative part of the direction we will now pass to the
Affirmative.

In this 3. things are propounded for the fashioning and conforming of a
servants Obedience to the right model.

The first is, Singleness of heart, and is prescribed as a Counter-check to
that same (...), the deceitful service of the Eye.

The second is the fear of God, and meets with the other defect of servants,
by which with a fraudulent and sinister kind of industry, they only seek
the applause, and praise of men.

The third and last, is a courageous and cheerful performance of whatsoever
is enjoined them: for they must do it (...) Heartily, and with a willing
mind, and presently he adds the Reason, They are servants unto GOD, and not
to men. Touching the former, we may consider it two manner of ways. 1. As it
is in the Servants of God. 2. As it is in the servants of men. As it is in Gods
Servants, it excludes,

1. All Hypocrisy. For he that has a single heart, had rather be good, than
so accounted, whereas the Hypocrite, so he may seem fair in the Bark, cares
not how rotten he be in the Body. His desire is to satisfy his own lusts,
but he would not the world should be aware of it. Formal preciseness
therefore must keep his countenance, while Legions of unclean spirits revell
in his Conscience. Again, the single-hearted man will serve God at all times,
whereas the hypocrite upon the Sunday perhaps will show himself like the
Dominical letter zealously red, but all the week after, Hell shall not be
blacker than his deeds, nor the grave colder than his devotion.

2. It excludes, Mart. lib. 12 Epigr. 51.
fleshly wisdom, Bonus homo tyro est, says the Epigrammatist; and in the
Gospel our Savior says of his Disciples, Behold I send you out like Sheep
in the midst of Wolves. It is Saul that must make a Machivillian; It is
Achitophel whose words must be embraced as an Oracle. Jacob was a man of great
understanding, in matters that concerned the good of his soul, but in other
things so plain and open, that he lay exposed to the craft of whosoever would
surprise him.

3. It excludes, All spiritual Pride. For a Single heart, is an humble heart;
If God send crosses and calamities, it will not answer, nor justify it self,
but will make supplication, Cap. 9.16.
as Job speaks, to his Judge, and ingenuously acknowledge, that he does handle
him so for his corruptions. Yea if when he prays, the Lord vouchsafe to answer
him by the sweet whisperings of his blessed Spirit; so lowly yet is he
conceited of his own worth, that he will not believe, that he has harkened
unto him.

4. It is against the property of a single Heart, to be either doubled, or
divided. Men have a double heart, that waver, and are tossed with
uncertainties; such as are now for God and godliness, and shortly after for
sin, and for the Flesh; now resolved to leave such a fault; as persuaded it
is a fault, and by and by they to it again, as being persuaded it is none.
Again, Men have divided hearts, when in respect of the world, they will serve
both GOD and Mammon; or when in matter of worship they will bow to Christ and
Baal. The people that came to inhabit Samaria, 2 King. 17.33.
had a divided Heart, for they feared the god of the Country, because of the
Lions which he sent amongst them, and they feared also the gods of the Nations.

5. A single Heart, is a harmless heart, and surely he that harbors it in
his breast, is seldom prejudicial to his Brother, either in word or deed. Not
in word, for his desire is to live without blame, even in the midst of a
crooked and froward generation, and to shine as a light in the world. He has
learned of Michael the Archangell, not to return a railing accusation, no not
to the devil; but to say, Jude 2.9.
The Lord rebuke thee. Again, not in Deeds. He is not like Dan, a Serpent by
the way, or an Adder in the path, biting the Horse heels, so that the Rider
falls to the ground; Foenum non habet in cornu; he is no horned Beast, that
will be goring whomsoere he meets, but (...), an innocent and harmless Dove.

6. And lastly, a single heart, is a clear heart, a quiet heart, and a
constant heart.

1. It is a clear heart, a heart, which is at no time so overcast with mists
of ignorance, and Clouds of passionate Affection; but that it is able to
discern the things that are excellent. Phil. 2.10.


2. It is a quiet heart; The day of the Lords coming is to the Righteous a day
of redemption, when they shall lift up their heads; Luke 21.28.
but to the wicked a day of darkness; Amos 5.18
and why? but because of the terrors of a guilty conscience, which produce
nothing but cramps; and cold convulsions in the soul. Satan has no sooner
drawn a man to sin, but he would drive him into desperation, by possessing
him with fear. Cain after he had slain his brother, was so miserably
distracted, that he fled from his own Father, as from a deadly enemy.
Philosophers asking, why Swine make a greater noise when they be taken, tha^
any other Creatures, render this reason; that by an instinct of Nature they
know when they be taken, nothing is desired but their lives. Sinners are
Swine, 2 Pet. 2. ult. and ever grunting: their Heart is like the raging Sea,
which casts up nothing but mire, and dirt.

3. And lastly, it is a Constant Heart, a heart free from infidelity, free
from grudging, and free from all distrustfulnes. Such a one had holy Job, when
neither the fury of the Devil, nor the folly of his Wife, nor the frenzy of
his friends, could any way alter the dialect of his patience; but in the depth
of his disasters he cried out, Job 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil?
the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord.
Yea such a heart had blessed Paul, when having propounded a question, he gave
also the resolution; ^om. 8.35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish;
persecution, or famine, nakedness, peril or sword? Surely no, I am persuaded
that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall ever be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And thus much
concerning singleness of Heart, as it is in Gods servants; we will now treat
of it, as it is in the servants of men. And in these it may be discovered
diverse ways.

1. He may be said to serve in singleness of Heart, who eyes not the
condition of his Master; but whether he be rich or poor, mild or moody, he
considers his Authority, and thereto suites his Obedience.

2. If for Conscience sake, and not either for fear of punishment, or hope of
reward, he do apply his best endeavors to the performance of his masters
commands, counting, ipsum officium esse fructum officii; the thing done a
sufficient recompense for the doing.

3. He would seem what he is, and he would be what he seems. For there
are servants, who like lying Hens, will make a great deal of cackling,
though they seldom Lay. Like a Mill that is loose hung, they keep a mighty
clacking, but grind no Grist. I may liken them to nastie dung-hils, that are
covered over with Snow; an outward diligence distinguishes their inward sloth:
like the Partridges of Paphlagonia they have two hearts, the one pious, and
officious, stirring them up to all dutiful obsequiousness, so long as the
Master looks on; the other impious and inofficious, moving them as soon as
his back is turned to fraud and negligence; but he that obeys in
singleness of Heart, has but one heart, and that is ever like it self; as
painful being alone, as if he had the world for his spectator.

4. And lastly, he may be said to serve in singleness of heart, that serves
with a faithful heart. Now this faithfulness in a servant expresses it
self, in several things.

1. In the diligent and ready performance of what his Master shall enjoyne him.
Ye may see it in him, whom Abraham sent to seek a wife for his son Isaac.
Having received his instructions, he presently began his journey, and being
upon the way he invocated the the God of his Master for the good success, and
dispatch of his business; and when he was come to the house of Bethuel, he
could not be drawn to taste a morsel of meat, till he had delivered his
message; but servants now a days, I speak for the greater part, are like
Phoebus his Crow, they may be sent in haste, Ovid. lib. 2. Fast.
they will return at leisure.

2. In the concealment of his counsels and Secrets, a thing wherein servants
are usually too too much defective. For indeed they may be counted so many
spies in the house, whose common practice is, where they may be heard, to blaze
abroad, whatsoever may tend to their Masters or Mistresses reproach; having at
once cast off, both the religious fear of God, and also the reverend respect
of his Image in the persons of their Superiors. I find yet such fidelity among
some heathenish slaves, as may set a blush upon the face of Christian servants.
M. Antony the Orator, had one, Val. Max. lib. 6. cap. 8.
who though he were conscious to those incestuous practices, whereof his Master
was accused, and known to have carried a Lantern before him at such times,
did yet with patience endure the greatest tortures, that an incensed rage could
possibly devise to put him to, and by his constant secrecy delivered him from
the malice of his adversaries. Macrob l. 1. Saturn. Calls him Vrbinus.
Panopio had another, who when the rest of his fellows, upon his proscription
had given notice to the Soldiers, that they should find him at his Country
house, came and informed him of his imminent destruction, and having changed
apparel with him, and put on his Ring, conveyed him out at a back door,
went presently into his masters chamber, lay down in his Bed, and there
received that mortal wound, which was intended unto him. It is but a short
story, yet full of admiration, that a man on such a su^den and in such a hurry,
should so calmely compose himself to die for another. There is yet a third
example, equalling; if not surpassing in some respects either of these. Antius
Restio, perceiving his Domestics, when the Triumviri had proscribed him, so
far from grieving at his misfortune, that all their care was to ransack his
Chests, and make havoc of his goods, stole avay by night from amongst them;
yet not so covertly, but that one of them, whom he had often caused to be
cruelly whipped, ignominiously branded, and used with all the contumely that a
Rocky-hearted Tyrant could devise, had a curious eye upon him at his departure,
and while they that enjoyed a happier condition in his house, were ravening
upon his substance, he who was only the shadow and resemblance of his
insulting pride, and inhumanitie, showed himself a constant follower of him in
his misery; and by a Stratagem did bring his life out of the check of danger.
Abunde fuisset iram remittere; ille vero adjecit etiam charitatem: In such a
case as this, not to have sought revenge, had bin an act which might richly
have deserved praise; but he did likewise add a Character of his Love: As if
he had been trained up in a better School, than that of nature, and taught
by Christ himself, to recompense good for evil. All which considered, I
cannot but set a brand upon the brow of Fortune, who suffered such noble and
heroike spirits to lie disgraced under a servile name.

It is true, Quot servi, tot hosts. A man's worst enemies are commonly those of
his own house; but many times they come not such to our hands; they are made
such by our usage: we desire they should rather fear us for our severity,
than love us for our lenity: They must not so much as open their lips before
us, but like senseless statues, keep a continual silence. Nay, they cannot
cough or sneese, but they are sure of rebukes, if not of blows; yet these are
only natural infirmities, and cannot be suppressed, when the motion takes
us. No marvel therefore, if these, that may not speak before their masters,
delight themselves in speaking of their Masters; whereas others, whose mouths
are not sowed up in this manner, have often set their own life at naught for
the preservation of theirs. In conviviis loquebantur, sed intormentis tacebant;
they talk at the table, but in the midst of Tortures are as sile^t as the
dead of night, and will not be made to find a Tongue wherewith to betray,
either the life or reputation of their Lord.

If thou have a servant therefore, treat him with love like a Brother. Sit
tibi quasi anima tua, says the Wiseman, Ecclus. 33.29.
Let him be unto thee as thy soul; He does not say, Dimidium animae, the one
half of thy soul, as Horace calls a friend, but anima integra, thy whole
soul. Sicut viscera mea suscipe, says Paul to Philemon, concerning his
fugitive Onesimus, Receive him as mine own bowels. But alas! many use their
servants, as they do their shoes, when they are grown old, they cast them on
the dunghill. If they happen to be sick presently out of doors with them.
But if God will one day lay it to our charge, that we did not visit the sick
in other men's house^, what vengeance must we expect, when he shall charge us
with casting them out of our own? The Centurion went to Christ for the
recovery of his Vassal. And surely they which neglect the good of their
attendants in this kind, are men, as Paul calls them, Sine compassione, without
compassion. The like are they, who in any other kind are currish and crabbed
unto them; And how should any Fidelity be expected from them, when we never
cast so much as a mild aspect upon them? The best Vessels if they be long in
the Sun, will hold no liquor. It is the like with servants; the heat of our
anger continually beating upon them, makes them plenos rimarum, full of leaks,
and unwilling, if not unable to keep and retain, what is committed to their
secrecy. Let us show them more of our favor, and then we may rely more on
their Faith.

3. The faithfulness of a servant expresses it self in well husbanding of
that which is committed to his charge; not purloyning the least thing that
belongs unto his Master, to dispose it either to his own, or others use,
without his consent; a sin too frequent amongst many; but to deter them
from the practicing of it any more, let them look into the fifth of Zachar. v.
2. and they shall read of a flying book, the length of it is twenty Cubits,
the breadth of it is 10. and it is full of curses, even from the one end to the
other, It shall enter into the house of him that steals, and craftily
conveigheth to his private use, that which should go another way, and shall
consume the Timber, and the stones thereof.



Solomon. He that robs his father or Mother, Pro. 28.24.
and says it is no sin, is the companion of a destroyer.i. He will easily
join with open robbers, to spoil others of their goods also. Besides, to say,
it is but a small thing, and my Master will neither be the better, nor the
worse for it; The truth is, he that will crack his conscience for a trifle,
will hardly be kept from straining it, when Achans Wedge of Gold, or his
Babylonish garment shall come in the way: He that will serve the Devil for a
Penny, will be more serviceable to him for a Pound; he will increase his
work, as he augments his wages. And whether it hurt thy Master or no, that is
not the question, it hurts thy own soul, by transgressing the commandment,
and incurring the curse.

4. The faithfulness of a servant is seen in wisely distinguishing with Joseph
the things commit^^^ to his trust, Genesis 39.8.
from those which are excepted. It was wanting in our first Parents. All the
Trees in Eden were allotted for their use, only one was exempted, yet so
exorbitant was their Appetite, that they usurped upon that, and brought thereby
the wrath of God upon themselves, and their posterity.

5. It is fidelity in a servant, I will not say, obstinately to deny, but
modestly to delay the execution of such commands, as in his own true
judgment, and understanding, cannot be performed but with prejudice either to
the state or honor of his Master, till such time as he may inform his
ignorance, or reduce his willfulness to a more judicious contemplation of the
business. The French Inventary will afford us a remarkable example in this
kind. Philip D. of Burgundy, knowing that the Town of Campiegne, situated
upon the River Oyze, in the borders of Picardy, might much advantage him in his
Designs, resolved either by love or force to reduce it into his subjection;
whereupon he began a fresh to practice with Charles VII. who notwithstanding
he had been formerly deceived by his only glossings, did yet afford a
credulous Ear to his new enchantments, and to assure himself of his
friendship, did faithfully promise to surrender it up into his hands; to which
effect he wrote several times to the Lord of Flavy, whom himself had
entrusted with the charge and government thereof; that he should deliver it up
unto him. But he considering the importance of the place, delayed the Duke,
till he had wrought the King to a revocation of his Grant, by letting him know
the dangerous consequences that might have ensued thereupon; regarding more the
loyalty he ought unto his Sovereign, than the profit, which might have accr^ed
unto himself from the Duke, had he been forward in the Action. And indeed as
the Historian says; C'est un bon service de desdire le Maistre, quand il
command a son dommage. It is a special piece of service to put off the
Master, when he commands to his own detriment.

6. And lastly, it is seen in avoiding all lying and dissembling, whether for
his Masters, his own, or other men's advantage. Now that servants may be the
better incited to this faithfulness, let them consider:

1. The promise which is annexed thereunto, The faithful person shall abound
with blessing. Pro. 28.20.


2. The punishment which attends the contrary.

God often pays the unjust Person with his own Coin; he scourges him with
his own rod; bringing upon such as have bin unfaithful servants, poverty,
want, or other worse calamities, and that by the means of unfaithful servants,
that their sin may return upon them with more bitterness.

3. Let them know, that the only way to learn how we should rightly use our
own portion of Goods, is by the careful use of other men's, as they shall
happen to come into our hands. For he that wretchedly rioteth and consumes his
masters Goods, Luke 16.12.
is for the most part given over by Gods just judgment, to be a waster of his
own. Let every servant of man therefore, if he desire to be the true servant
of God, labor in all his courses to show a single heart; For better is the
poor in the uprightness of his heart, than he that abuses his lips, and is
a fool. Yea let us all take heed, that Satan beguile us not from the
simplicity that is in Christ Jesus. And thus much concerning the first thing
required to the fashioning of a servants Obedience, according to the true
model Singleness of heart. The second follows, and that is the Fear of God.

The only thing indeed, which will make all our ways, words and works to
savor of simplicity and sincerity. As the cause therefore with the effect, the
Apostle has placed it, with Singleness of heart, and that right well. For he
that fears and regards only man in the performance of any duty, will prove
wavering and unconstant, as being guided and directed by an unconstant rule.
For the Fear of man takes no impression longer than he is present; but the
Fear of God stands firm in the breasts of the godly, because they have him
ever before their eyes, and he neither ought, nor can at any time be imagined
as absent. The very Stoic could affirm, that there is a God within, Epictetus.
and a good Angel evermore about us, and that they need no light to look into
the nature of our actions. What was that, which preserved Joseph from the Siren
inca^tations of an adulterous and lustful Mistress, but the fear of the Lord?
How can I do, said he, this great wickedness, and so sin against my God?
Had he been a mere man-pleaser, he might, and would no doubt have satisfied
her lewd demands; but because he reverenced his Celestial Master, he could not
do that injury to his terrestrial. It is the fear of God, which must
restrain servants, from whoring, drinking, stealing, gaming, and other the
like prodigious and enormous courses. It is the fear of God, which must make
them diligent and faithful in their business; as knowing, that though the eye
of their Master be away, yet that of their Maker is upon them, who will not
wink at their error, but will severely punish their offense. In a word, it is
the fear of God which will move them with Abraham's servant, daily to power
forth their prayers to heaven, in the behalf of their Master, and the rest of
the family, and for the good success of his own endeavors. Servants then
must learn from hence, so to labor in their several places and functions, as
to fear God, even that God. 1. Who set them in that Calling. 2. Whose eyes are
evermore upon them, watching and observing with what diligence they discharge
their duties in those Callings.

Again, Masters must also learn, if they would have painful and trusty
servants, to choose such as are religious; and frame to religion such as they
have chosen; that knowing what it is to be subject to their Master in heaven,
conscience may compel them to be subject to their earthly Master also.
Would thou have thy servant to please thee in all things? work him first to
please God in all things: Would thou find him faithful? see then he be a
Joseph, that will not sin, and be unfaithful to the Lord. Would thou have
him profitable? see he be an Onesimus, and then, howsoever in times past he
were never so unprofitable, he will be profitable to thee and others.

Commonly, all that if stood upon in the choice os servants, is only skill an
ability for those services, wherein we purpose to employ them. So it is said
of Solomon, He saw Hieroboam was a man fit for the work. But as for Religion,
no great matter is made of that, and yet it is all in all. For I avouch, the
ungodly servant, how fit so ever he may seem for our turns, to be
unprofitable; and that a servant fearing God, though coming far short of the
other in wit, knowledge, and dexterity for the well managing of businesses,
ought yet to be preferred before him, as far more profitable.

For first, the evil servant draws the curse of GOD upon all his endeavors,
so that many times the wisdom of such a one, like that of Achitophel, does
vanish into foolishness; whereas on the contrary, by virtue of Gods blessing,
prospering what ever the righteous man takes in hand, Psalm. 1.3.
even his foolishness and simplicity, in respect of the deep policies of the
wicked man is turned into wisdom, and sorteth to a very good and happy
effect. When Joseph had the ordering of Putiphars affairs, and Jacob of
Labans, all things were well. The little of the just man, Pf. 37.16.
says David, is more than great riches of the wicked. It is spoken there of
his wealth; but it is true likewise of his wit, of the inward gifts of his
mind, as of the outward Goods of this life. A little wit, a little skill, and
a little knowledge in a godly servant, shall go farther, and prove more
advantageous to his Master, than twice as much in an evil servant.

2. The wicked servant does not only bring the curse of God upon himself and
his endeavors, but upon the whole family wherein he lives. So Achan endangered
the whole Army; Jonas the whole ship, in which they were; whereas on the
contrary, for a godly servants sake, other in the house have fared the better.
Such a one is like the Ark of God under the Roof of Obed-Edom. 2 Samuel 6.1^.
He brings with him a blessing upon his Master, and the whole household.

Neither are ungodly servants unprofitable only to the body, but also to the
soul, infecting all that are about them with the contagion of their corrupt
example; whereas the other by their good and virtuous lives adorn the Gospel
of Christ, and cause it to appear beautiful in the eyes even of profane and
irreligious Masters, gaining them often times to the love, and liking thereof,
even as the believing wife does the unbeleeving husband. Masters therefore must
either choose such servants as are religi^us, or seek to ma^e them such when
he has chosen them.

But what shall Masters do, that their servants may be such?

1. They must cause them to pray, and read the Scriptures in their private
houses.

2. They must bring them to the public hearing of them in the Church.

3. They should be a light and a Lantern to them themselves. Pessima defluxio
quae provenit a capite; A sick head distempers all the other parts; and a
dark eye makes a dark body.

4. And lastly, they must restrain them from profane company, and allow them
liberty at convenient times to converse with such as fear God. While Saul was
amongst the Prophets, himself did likewise prophecy. Let it be a fragrant
flower, or a stinking weed, which we handle, our Fingers will be sure to
retain the smell. Judas was honest while he conversed with Christ: 'twas
after he had conferred with the Priests and Elders, that out of a greedy
desire of the wages of unrighteousness, he plotted the death of his innocent,
and harmless Master. And thus much concerning the second thing required to the
fashioning of a Servants obedience to the true model, it is the fear of God;
I come now to the third, Whatsoever they do, they must do it heartily. And
here we will, 1. Consider the Duty. 2. The Inducement thereunto. As concerning
the Duty.

Whatsoever they do they must do it, (...), with a heart, and a soul. The
word implies two things.

1. That they should do what their Masters enjoyne them chearefully, and as it
were for their life, without any murmuring, or repining. And it is very likely
that some Christian servants in the time of the Apostles obeyed their masters
more for the necessity of their condition, than any willingness they had unto
it. S. Paul therefore seeks to cure this evil, when he commands them to do
whatsoever they do, freely, from their heart, and without any enforcement.

Now then may we be said to do a thing with our heart, when the heart not
only desires to do it, but withal rejoices, and is much delighted in the
doing of it. On the contrary, when the heart holds off, and is a verse and
refractary, though the outward work be done, it is done yet only by the hand,
and not with the heart. For as Prosper well, Si quid invitus feceris, fit de te
magis quam facis; If we do any thing unwillingly, it may rightly be said to
be done by us, but it cannot be said to be done of us; and in this our master
has no more from us, than he has from his Ass, or from his Ox, a mere
extorted labor; and what reward can we expect for this? Animus est, qui parva
extollit; sordida illustrat; magna, and in pretio habita dehonestat. It is
only the condition of the mind, says the Morallist, which gives the form to
ever thing, and makes it either respected, or disrespected both of God and man.
It was the heartinesse of the poor Widow in the Gospel, which made her two
Mites be so applauded by our Savior, when the large offerings of the Pharisees
were not a jot regarded. The Soldier that brought a little water in his Helmet
to his Sovereign, was more regarded of him than the greatest of those Peers
that courted him with costly presents. It is in service, as it is in sacrifice;
if the heart be wanting, it can never be acceptable.

2. In that he says, (...); he shows, that servants should not only
express life in their actions, ^ut likewise Love in their Affections; and no
less approve of the Commander, than they do of his commands. And indeed these
are things for the most part combined one to the other. For no man can go
chearefully about a business, unless he love and respect the person that
enjoyneth it. And therefore in Ephesians. 6.7. It is expressly set down, that they
should serve (...), with good will. And indeed according to S. Ambrose, Nemo
melius obtemperat, quam qui ex charitate obsequitur. None serve like those,
that serve, because they love. And thus much concerning the Duty; the
Inducement follows.

As to the Lord, and not to men: that is, as they who rather and more
principally serve the Lord, than men, even in the peformance of those offices
which are exhibited unto men. For though the use and benefit of the work be
to redound to man, the mind of the worker yet is to look specially unto God.
And here we must note, that the Negative particle, does not infer it, an
unlawful thing to serve men, or in serving to regard them. It only shows, that
in the performance of all Duties we should not look so much to our earthly
Lord, as to Christ our heavenly Lord. It is a known rule in the exposition of
holy Writ, In comparationibus saepe negari illud, quod non est excludendum, sed
tantum alteri postponendum: that in comparisons a thing many times is denied,
which must not yet be utterly excluded, but only postposed to another; as in
Mark 9.37. Whosoever receives me, says our Savior Christ receives not me,
but him that sent me..i. he receives the Father that sends, more, than me
that am sent; for he receives me for his sake. And so in this place.
Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord and not to me^.i. to Christ
your Lord rather than to me^; because it is for his sake that ye serve them.
And indeed there is great reason, why even in vile and external duties they
should be said rather to obey God, than men, though they do them wholly at
their command, and only for their profit.

For first, they which obey are Christ's by right, more than their earthly
Lords: They bought them to be their servants with gold, and Silver; but Christ
bought them to be his with no l^sse price than with the effusion of his own
most precious blood; they redeemed one^y the body, and that no farther than out
of one servitude into another; but Christ has ransomed both soul and body
into a glorious liberty, that shall last for ever; and therefore Christ is to
be served before them. 2. Our earthly Masters are to be obeyed no otherwise,
than Christ prescribes; they are to him as a steward to a Noble man; he has
the command of all the inferior Servants; but if he command any thing that is
contrary to the will of the Lord, they are to suspend their obedience.

3. Christ himself has declared it to be his will and pleasure, that
Servants should obey their Masters; and in his wisdom and power he has
ordained some for sovereignty, and some for subjection; All which considered,
Christian servants may be rightly said, even in the performance of any office
to their Master, to serve the Lord, and not men. And it is a great motive to
do whatsoever we do, heartily, considering that the eye of Christ can scrue
it self into our inmost retreates; and that in every Action, he more regards
the heart, than the hand.

The defects of men toward men in their observance arise from a want of fear
and reverence toward God. We have it from the mouth of a Heathen, That he who
behaves himself impiously and perfidiously toward him, can never be
Single-hearted toward Man. In all the works therefore of our vocation, we
must study rather to keep a good Conscience, than to gain the applause of
men. For how laudible so ever our outward Obedience may seem, it is but
hypocritical and adulterate if referred to an ill end. A Christian servant
must not think it enough to please his earthly Lord unless withal he please
Christ who is his heavenly one. To conclude, this is the manner of Christian
obedience, that every faithful man should so do the works of his Calling, as
if there were none in the world besides God, and himself. For then he will
not dare to do those offices for men, which he knows are hateful unto him,
but will show himself so far serviceable to the one, as that he may be
truly serviceable to the other. And thus much concerning the Precept imposed
upon servants, as likewise of the Obedience required at their hands. Now follow
the Inducements which must stir them up to the tender of this Obedience; and
these are drawn from those things, which usually make the greatest impression
in the minds of men, Reward and Punishment. In handling of the former we will
consider,

1. The quality of the Reward proposed. It is a Reward of inheritance.

2. The Person from whom it is to be expected, and that is the Lord; Ye shall
receive from the Lord.

3. The certainty of receiving it; Ye know that he shall receive.

4. And lastly, the Reason of this certainty. For Ye serve the Lord Christ. As
touching the quality of the Reward.

It is the Reward of Inheritance. But in this may some say, lies a
contradiction. For a Reward is commonly that, which we give unto servants; an
inheritance which we bequeath to sons. Whereunto I answer, that the Apostle
speaks not of any temporal Reward, which might in worth be correspondent to
their labor, but of that eternal beatitude, which God conferreth upon his
Saints, and which far surmounteth the worth and excellency of all humane
obsequiousness whatsoever: and he calls it, (...), a Retribution; not that men
are able any way to interest themselves therein, by the dignity of their
works, but because in regard of some circumstances it obtaines the similitude
of a recompense.

For first, as Wages are not given, but to them, that work; no more is the
Kingdom of heaven conferred on any, that are idle. They that would have it,
must not lie snoring in the lap of worldly pleasure; but diligently labor in
the works of their Vocation.

2. As wages are not given till our work be ended, no more is life eternal,
till our course be finished: after the Race the runner must look for his
reward; 2 Timothy 4.8
and after the combat the Soldier expect his Crown.

Now as this heavenly reward is for two respects, in which it resembles wages,
entitled by the Apostle, (...), a Retribution; so for two other respects, in
which it differs from wages, it is called (...), An Inheritance. For,

1. Wages are given as a due to him that works; but this heavenly reward
proceeds wholly from the grace and liberality of him, that does confer it.
For when we have done all that is commanded us, we are yet unprofitable
servants; ^uk^ 17 10
and what have we done, which was not our duty to do? We are all of us, Filii
divini beneficii, The Children of divine kindness, as S. Augustine terms us,
by grace saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God.

2. Wages have usually a proportion with the work for which they are paid; but
this heavenly reward has no proportion with our services; For what proportion
can there be, betwixt that which is finite, and that which is infinite? It is
called therefore an Inheritance, to exclude it wholly from being a Desert. For
Children come not to inherit their Fathers lands by virtue of any merit;
because most an end the land is purchased before the Child is borne; much
less can we by any such title lay claim to heaven, who can not pretend so
much as this, that we came out of the Loins of our Celestial Father. For
we are his Children only by grace, and not by any privilege of Nature. So
speaks the Apostle, Ye have received the spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15.
by which ye cry, Abba Father. Now Adoption admits no Merit. For if Civilians
define it rightly, Adoptio est gratuita assumptio personae non habentis jus in
haereditate ad participationem haereditatis; Adoption is the free assumption of
a person, that has no right in the inheritance, to a full participation of the
same.

The right which we have to eternal life, (...), as Hesychius speaks, is not
a guerdon, but a gift. We have it, Propter promissum, according to S. Gregory,
yet not propter commissum; It is not factu^, but pactum, says S. Aug. the
Mercy of the Giver, not the Merit of the Worker, which deriveth it upon us. The
possession of this life yet, is as the Apostle terms it, (...), a Reward, or
Retribution. And the Lord so styles it; not to puff us up thereby with any
vain conceit of our own sufficiency; but only to cheer and hearten up with
some kind of solace, the debility of our Nature. And therefore when the
Scripture says, that God the righteous Judge will one day render the Crown of
righteousness to those that are his:

1. I except with S. Augustine, where should this righteous Judge bestow his
glory, but where the mercy of a loving Father has bestowed his Grace? How
should any righteousness be seen, if Grace, which justifies the sinners,
and wicked men, did not precede? Quomodo ista debita redderentur, nisi prius
illa in debita darentur? How should the things which are due, be rendered, if
first the things that are not due, were not given?

2. I add, how should he impute righteousness to our works, if his own
indulgency should not hide that unrighteousnes, which is in them? How should
he think them worthy of Reward, unless out of the riches of his mercy, he
did abolish that in them, which is worthy of punishment? Yea the Scripture
seeks to humble us a little farther. For it does not only forbid us to glory
in our works, because they are the free gifts of God; but teaches us withal,
that they are stained and defiled, and such as being brought to the rule of his
judgment, will be no way able to satisfy.

But how then are we to understand that saying of the Apostle in Heb. 6.10.
Where he says, God is not unrighteous, that he should forget our works, and
the labor of our love: as if in justice it were fit he should remunerate our
good endeavors? I answer; we must remember first of all, that even this
promise, like all the rest, could afford us no benefit at all, if the free
covenant of mercy, whereon relies the hope of our salvation did not go before.

2. Being resolved in this, we ought to be securely confident, that God will
not suffer our good performances, how short so ever they come of true
perfection, to pass without a worthy Retribution. For according to S.
Augustine, Fidelis Dominus; qui se nobis debitorem facit, non aliquid a nobis
recipiendo, Psalm. 32. and ^09.
sed omnia promittendo: The Lord is faithful, and makes himself our debtor,
not by receiving any thing from us, but by promising althings unto us. Now
promise is a debt. It Is requisite therefore, that God should recompense our
works, though not forany worthiness in them, yet for his own engagement. Here
is matter then of comfort, generally for all that groan under the heavy
burdens of their sins, and earnestly desire reconcilement; if they do what
in them lies, a reward attends them, and it is a Reward of Inheritance, even a
weight of immortal glory, in comparison whereof all the sufferings of this
present world are to be counted nothing: And this must animate them to
persevere with all alacrity and patience in the exercise of godly works; for
unto these belongs this good, and gracious Retribution. But servants may draw
from hence a more particular solace. For it is to them that the holy Ghost
himself does particularly apply the words, and that without any limitation or
exception; to show, that there is no Vocation so vile, so abject, and so base,
but if men piously undergo it, a reward shall follow it. Servants thereto
should not,

1. So much regard the outward face of their Calling, but how mean so ever it
be, so it be lawful, and honest, should labor to discharge it with a good
Conscience. For this is the counsel of the Apostle, Let every man abide in the
same Vocation, wherein he was called; For he that is called in the Lord being
a servant, is the Lords freeman; And has as large a Patent to be good as in
the highest degree of dignity whatsoever. Nulli praeclusa est virtus, omnibus
patet, says the very Heathen, Virtue keeps open house, and without any
respect of persons gives a fair access to all that come, whether they be
Male or Female; rich or poor bond or free. Lazarus in his rags shall be
admitted into her inmost Cabinet, when Dives, notwithstanding his Purple and
fine Linen shall not be received into her utmost Courts. Honor, beauty,
riches, and the like, are no incitements to her favor. We our selves choose
not a horse by the sumptuousnes of his trappings, nor she her followers by any
accessory complements. If their manners be blameless, no other defects shall
ever lessen the^ in her estimation. Again, he that subjects himself to
fleshly lusts, is in a baser bondage, than he that is enthralled to a fleshly
Lord; The one being voluntary, and so an argument of a degenerate spirit; the
other only of necessity, which never brings with it a brand of infamy. Di^g.
Laer.
Diogenes showed as free a mind, when the Pirates set him forth to be sold in
the Market, as ever he had done in his better fortunes. For being then demanded
by a Chapman, what he could do; I can rule and govern, said he, them that
are free. And afterward, so little prejudice and inconvenie^ce did he meet
within that servile state, that when his friends would have redeemed him out of
it, he said, they were unwise. For Lions were not servants to their Keepers,
but their Keepers rather unto the^; of whom they stood in fear, and durst not
for their lives provoke. Other immunities there are, the consideration whereof
will help to sweeten the bitterness of this condition: some of them are wittily
comorized by Martial in an E^igramme, which h^e wrote to one, who much groned
under this burden. The tenor of it is this; Lib. 9 ep 94.
Quae mala sunt domini, quae servicommoda, nescis
Condile, qui servum te gemis esse diu.
Dat tibi securos vilis lecticula somnos;
Pervigil in pluma Caius, ecce jacet.
Caius a prima tremebundus luce salutat
Tot dominos; at tu, Condile, nec dominum.
Quod debes, Cai, read, inquit Phoebus, and illine
Cinnamus; hoc dicit, Condile, nemo tibi.
Tortorem metuis? podagra, Chiragraque secatur
Caius, and mallet verbera mill pati.
Sure, Con^ilus, while thou do so bemoane
Thy servile state, those troubles are not known
It seems, to thee, which Masters do attend;
Nor does thy shallow judgment apprehend
The great advantages a servant finds
Above his Lord, in many several kinds.
On a course Matt sleep closes up thy sight,
When he in Down lies waking all the night.
At break of day he trembling must salute
A thousand Lords; whilst thou to him standst mute;
He cannot step into the vulgar streets,
But with some churlish Creditor he meets,
Claiming his debts with a disgracing note,
When none can challenge Condile for a groate.
Do thou the torture fear? he would endure
A thousand stripes to be from Gout secure.


When we cannot fram^ our fortune to our will, let us conform our will to ou^
fortune; and not suffer the dislike of our condition, to m^ke us neglect the
discharge of our Duty.

2. Servants may learn from hence, not to fix their eyes upon those trivial
recompenses, and rewards, which are promised them by men for their good
service, but still to look to that eternal Reward of Inheritance, which God
the Father promises to his obedient Children. So did Paul in the execution of
his Vocation; he sought not for any glory, grace or gain from the hands of
men, but only for that Crown, which the Lord in the great day of his
visitation will give unto all that love his appearing. And thus much concerning
the Quality of that Reward, which the Apostle, the better to stir up
servants to Obedience, propounds unto them. The next point is the Person from
whom the reward is to be expected, and that is, (...), From the Lord.

A sure Play Master, and one that has Will, and Power to make good what ere he
undertakes. Will, for he never uses either delays, or shifts in the
peformance of what he promises. Twenty years was Jacob a Servant unto Laban,
during which space by false pretexts and forged Cavillatitions, ten times did
he alter and change the Wages, whereon they had agreed. And it is the humor of
many Masters to be unmercifull to their servants in this kind. Those of the
Apostles time thought it enough to use them, as they did their Beasts. Occon.
lib. 1 cap. 5.
(...), says the Philosopher, Let them have meat, and it is a sufficient
meed. To comfort therefore such, he shows that howsoere they may be neglected
of their earthly Lord, they have yet a heavenly Lord, who is liberal and
munificent, and will not suffer their Labors to pass without requital, so
their obedience to their Masters be hearty, and such as becomes religious and
Christian men. And what greater assurance can be looked for? He gives us
himself the Character of his bounty, in Genesis 1.29. Ecce dixi, Behold I have
said, is that of man's; but, Ecce dedi, Behold I have given, is that of Gods: He
opens his hand, and not his mouth; he shows his works, and not his words.
Manifold are his works, says the Kingly Prophet, Ps. 104.24.
and the earth is full of his riches. Man may sometimes peradventure say, Ecce
do; Behold I give, as moved thereto by some precedent merit of the party, to
whom he gives; But Gods Motto is, Ecce dedi, Behold I have given; He provides
for us, before we are borne; Fecit, quae fecit, omnia pro homine, prinsquam
dixerat, Faciamus hominem; He made al, that he made for man, before ever he
had said, Let us make man. He loved us, when yet we had no Being. His Will
therefore is not to be doubted of, much less his power; And thus much
concerning the person from whom the Reward is to be expected. I come now to
the third point, and that is the certainty of receiving it; Ye know ye shall
receive --

Ye know. It is a plain inference, that every true Christian, whether he be
bond or free, should be sure of his wages, so long as he performs his work.
And indeed there is not the poorest Worm, that crawls upon the earth, but if a
Tongue were given it to dispute with man, it might maintain against him, that
the hope he has in Christ Jesus only set a part, he is of all Creatures the
most miserable. But that unspeakable comfort, which is now locked up in the
Bosoms of those that are marked with the Seal of Gods Spirit, and have
received the adoption of sons, is, that though their present life be full of
misery, and vexation, and that themselves are oppressed, and cast down on
every side, they know yet, that he who raised up the Lord Jesus Christ from
the dead, shall also raise up them at the later day, and for all the light and
momentany afflictions, which they have endured here, reward them with an
exceeding weight of glory; They know it.

And indeed Faith should be confident; By Faith ye stand, 2 Cor. 1.
says the Apostle; And By Faith we live, says the Prophet; Abac. 2.
It is the very soul and Spirit of the inward Man. If we believe not, we are
dead to Godward; and his soul will take no pleasure in us. Woe unto him,
says the Wise man, that has a double heart, and to the wicked lips, and
faint hands, and to the sinner that goes two manner of ways. Woe to him that
is faint-hearted, for he believes not; therefore shall he not be defended. It
is not the property of faith to waver like a Reed to and fro; nor of the
faithful, like a Wave of the Sea, to be ever rolling. We are willed therefore
to come to the Throne of Grace with boldness, and not to cast away that
confidence, which has great recompense of reward; but to trust perfectly in
that grace, which is brought unto us by the Revelation of JESUS CHRIST.

Qui dubious est, infidelis erit, says an eminent Father; Doubt quickly turns
into distrust. For they which receive not the love of the Truth, that they may
be saved, the Lord shall send them strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that they shall believe lies. It an honest and virtuous man, says Saint
Cyprian, should promise thee any thing, thou would give credit unto him; And
when God does promise thee immortality, will thou be so faithless as to
distrust him? this is not to know God at all; but as holy Bernard speaks, Hoc
est in Ecclesia constitutum, in domo fidei, fidem non habere; This is to be
placed in the Church, that is in the house of Faith, Rev. 2.25.
without Faith.

It was Christ's admonition to the Church of Thyatira; That which ye have
already, hold fast till I come. Let us apply it to our selves, and not suffer
the hope and consolation which we have in the mercies of God to be taken from
us. The confidence of of a true Christian is an Anchor, which being cast into the
lanched bosom of our blessed Savior, may peradventure slipp a little, but it
will soon take hold again; It is a Sun, Tert. de Aanima. c. 41. and cap. 53.
which for a time may be overcast, but on a sudden the cloud shall be
dispersed; and it shall appear with greater luster. It is a Fire, which for a
while may lie concealed under the Ashes, but at length it breaks forth into a
brighter flame. Like the Arc, it may be taken by the Philistines; but maugre
all their malice, it shall with joy and triumph be returned back to Israel.
The sweet persuasions, which the godly have of everlasting happiness, may be
often shaken, but can never be shattered; they may be bowed by the violence of
the Tempest, but shall never be broken. They shall come again to their former
vigor; And howsoever they end their lives; whether by the hand of Tyranny, or
by the teeth of wild Beasts; they go away with a sentence of peace in their
lips; as Noah Dove, when it reverted with an Olive Branch to the Arc; Christ
is my life, and death is my advantage.

Knowing, that is, being thoroughly assured, that they shall receive from the
Lord a Reward of Inheritance. That servants therefore may be the better
induced, freely and fully to tender their obedience to those that are their
Masters according to the flesh, notwithstanding any cruel usage, or unjust
neglect, the Apostle propounds a Retribution, whereof he would not have them
doubt, but with a settled assurance expect it from the Lord. Servants, says
he, obey your Masters in all things, knowing that ye shall receive from, etc.

And shall the base and secular works of poor and miserable servants then be
thus rewarded? why this must animate and encourage us, not to grow weary of
well doing, but to go on in all holy and religious courses; For surely the
great works of piety in Gods service shall be more highly rewarded. Again,
shall the works of servants be rewarded? Here is matter then of comfort for
them, and matter of reproof for those, who being the children of God, are many
times yet so overborne by unbelief, that they distrust the acceptance of
their prayers, and good endeavors. For God will have them know, that they
shall receive from him a Reward of Inheritance; than which nothing is surer a
man's own.

And thus much of the third point, The certainty of receiving that which Christ
has promised. I come now to the fourth and last, and that is the Reason,
whereupon this certainty is grounded; For ye serve the Lord Christ.

Wages and Works are Relatives. And therefore Equity requires, that from him
a Reward should be expected, to whom our labor is exhibited.

But how may some say, Can it be deemed a credible, and likely thing, that
they which undergo base offices for men here upon earth should be said herein
to serve Christ, who is now all glorious, and has his residence in the highest
heavens, where he has the full ministry of Angels, and needs not at all the
obsequiousness of Man?

The answer is at hand, and has already been declared, viz. that whatsoever
services are done to men at the command of Christ, and for the glory of Christ,
are held as done to Christ himself. For as S. Hierome rightly upon this place,
says, Servit DEO, qui propter Deum servit homini: He may be truly said to
serve God, that serves man for Gods sake. Yea Christ verifies it himself,
when he says, Mat. 25.40 et v. ult.
In as much as ye did it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it to
me. And again, In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye
did it not unto me. This is there spoken only of works of charity, as men
either do them, or deny them, one to the other; but it may be extended to all
such Works of Obedience, as are prescribed, and enjoined us by GOD. For when
we do them unto men, we do them unto him, that commanded them to be done
and when we deny them unto them, he counts them as denied unto himself, and
not without just cause. For he who being commanded by God to obey Men, shall
refuse to submit himself to humane authority, would, if he were able, exempt
himself withal from that which is divine. When the Israelites therefore would
no longer endure the rule of Samuel but would have a King to reign over them;
1 Samuel 7.7.
They have not, says God, cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I
should not reign over them.

Now from hence we may learn.

1. That there is no servitude, or Bondage, which is not honorable, if men
demesne themselves, therein honestly, and faithfully. For they which are such,
are servants unto Christ; and to retain to him, is the very noone-point of all
dignity.

2. That there is no rule or principality, that can vindicate a wicked man from
shame and from disgrace. For such are servants to the Devil, which is the very
depth of misery and dishonor. And thus much concerning the first inducement,
by which the Apostle would stir up servants to Obedience; The promise of
Reward. I come now to the second, A threatening of Punishment. But he that does
wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done, and there is no respect
of persons.

Out of this, we will observe.

1. A Commination denounced against all, that shall prove defective in their
duty.

2. An Anticipation of a secret Objection, which might seem to weaken,
infringe the certainety of this punishment, in these words, Neither is there
respect of persons.

As touching the first; Some take it as denounced against tyrannous and unjust
Masters, to the comfort of the servant, that is so oppressed. For it is no
other than if he should have said; Though Masters be wicked and cruel, do
not ye yet suspend your Obedience, but perform that which is your duty, and
leave the revenge to God; For at his hands they shall receive what ever wrong
they do. Now wicked and imperious Masters may many ways prove injurious to
their servants.

1. By defrauding them of necessary food and raiment.

2. By denying them their due wages.

3. By urging them to labors that are above he strength of their Body.

4. By wounding their very souls with virulent reproaches.

5. By bruising, and breaking even their Bones with undeserved strokes. All
which calamities in a manner happened to the people of God during their servitude
in Egypt. That servants therefore may not through impatience rise up against
their Lords, or through discouragement neglect the offices, which are imposed
upon them, the Apostle tells them, that whosoever he be that shall thus
oppress the^, He shall receive the wrong that he has done..i. He shall
perceive and feel the vengeance of the highest, proportioning his punishment
according to his injustice. A proof of this we have upon the Egyptians, whom
God afflicted with far greater plagues, than they were able to afflict his
Israelites. As likewise upon Saul, 2 Samuel 21.9
who was punished in his posterity for the Gibeonites, whom he had slain,
thinking to gratify thereby the people, because they were not of the seed of
Abraham.

Other Interpreters refer it unto servants themselves, as if the Apostle
should have said, If the hope of a Celestial reward cannot draw you to your
duty, let the fear yet of a grievous punishment drive you thereunto: Be not
injurious to your Masters either out of stubbornness, or sloth. For GOD the
righteous Judge will with severity exact the forfeiture of your improbitie: and
of this we have an example in Gehezi, 2 King. 5.26. But with Saint Hierome, I
think that both interpretations are to be conjoined.

1. Because the Apostle speaks generally to all.

2. Because this Commination is inserted betwixt the duties of servants and
Masters, that so it might seem equally to appertain to both. So that this I
take to be the meaning of the Apostle, He that does wrong, whether it be the
Master, in misusing of his servant; or the servant in defrauding, and despising
of his Master, either shall receive from God, the wrong that he has done. We
must learn from hence then;

1. That every sin shall meet with punishment from God, though peradventure
it may escape the severity of men; and what will it avail us to have avoided
their hands, when we shall fall into his?

2. That earthly Lords, how great soever they may be in power, are no way
privileged or permitted to make litter for their ambitious feet, of those that
are under their authority. For even they themselves are under God; And as the
Trigaedian speaks, Omne sub regno majore regnum est; No power so great, but it
is subject to a greater. All must be countable to God.

3. That those men of all others are the most miserable, that count it their
happiness to tyrannize over others, as Sylla did; for they shall receive the
wrong they do.

4. And lastly, Eye-servers and Men-pleasers such as by a deceitful show of
industry, gain the good opinion of their Masters are here taught, that they
lie still exposed to the wrath of God. For he, who is their heavenly Lord
discernes their fraud, and their hypocrisy. Quaecunque facio, ante te facio,
says S. Augustine, and illud quicquid est quod facio, melius tu vides, quam
ego, qui facio; Whatsoever O Lord, I do, I do it before thee; and it is more
apparent to thy eyes, than to mine that do it. It behooves every one therefore
to have a care, that what he does be well done. And thus much of the
Commination. The Anticipation follows, And there is no respect of persons.

Masters might object and say; Who shall call us into judgment for the ill
usage of a slave? The very Law affirms, that no injury can be done to them.
But say we should be questioned about them; we will evade either by favor out
of the hands of Justice, or by force; or if not so, a Bribe shall charm the
uprightnes of the Judge. The Apostle meets with these conceits; and shows that
it is otherwise with divine judgment, than with humane. Earthly Tribunals are
like spiders webbs, the harmless Fly sticks fast, while the hurtful Hornet
breaks through. But this great judge of heaven and earth, will not be
terrified by any power of the wicked, nor yet made flexible by favor, He
accepts not, Job 34.19.
as Elihu speaks, the persons of Princes, neither regards he the rich more,
than the poor; for they be all the works of his hands. And suitable to this
is that of S. Ambrose Iustus Index est dominus, causas discernit, In Ephesians. 6.
non personas; The Lord is a righteous Judge, and regards not the Person, but
the Plee. He hears the complaints of the prisoners, and has a listening ear
to the cries of those that are appointed unto death; nor shall the wrong they
suffer escape the fury of his vengeance. I read in profane Story of one
Autronius Maximus, Macrob. l. 1. Saturn.
who having first of all most inhumanely whipped one of his slaves, did
afterward fasten him to a Gibbet, and on a solemn Festival before the
beginning of their shows, did cause him in that miserable plight to be
carried up and down the place, as if he had intended him, like an Antic to a
Mask, the Comicall praeludium to their ensuing sports. A cruelty so barbarous,
and void of all humanity, that Jupiter, offended with the spectacle, appeared
in the night to one Annio, willing him to let the Senate understand, that he
did much abhor it; and without some speedy expiation of the crime, would
visit them and their state with extraordinary judgment, which he neglecting,
the one and only Son he had was taken from him by sudden death; afterward
being warned hereof again, for the like carelessness, himself was stricken
with a weakness throughout his whole body; so that in the end, by the advice
of his friends, he was carried in a Litter to the Senate House, where he had no
sooner related what had been discovered unto him, but his health was presently
restored, and he went on foot out of the Court back to his own home; out of
which he came not but by the help of other. It is attributed to Jupiter, but
was the Act of the true God, whose eyes, and ears are always open to the
afflicted; the remembrance of it may serve as a Bridle to curb the arrogance
of masters, and to keep them from all insolent oppression.

Again, servants might likewise object and say; What though we obey not our
earthly Masters heartily? And what though we deceive them sometimes, as
occasion shall be offered; will GOD take vengeance for it upon us poor silly
souls? Great is the burden of our sorrows, and many be the miseries, which
we endure by reason of their imperious haughtiness. God will not therefore
surely add unto our grief by any exercise of his severity, but will rather
make us taste of his mercy. The Apostle therefore to cut off this vain hope
likewise even in them, shows, that God is just, and will not be moved out of
pity to favor the poor, nor out of envy to detract from the rich. He has
expressly prohibited this respect of Persons in others, and cannot therefore
practice it himself. In Exodus 23.3. Thou shall not esteem, says he, the
poor man in his cause. And in Levit. 19.15. Ye shall not do uniustly in
judgment. Thou shall not favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person
of the mighty; but thou shall judge thy neighbor justly. So that with him there
is no respect of Persons.

From hence then we may learn,

1. That not only the wrongs and injuries, which are done to Kings and men of
high pre-eminence, but likewise those which are offered to subjects, I and to the
basest slaves, have God for their revenger. It behooves therefore the king and
the subject; the master and the slave to demean themselves ^prightly one toward
the other considering that both are equally liable to Gods divine examination.

2. Magistrates and such as are Gods Vicegerents upon earth, have here a
pattern for their imitation, teaching them, all respect of persons being laid
aside, to give unto every one his due Astrea whom the Poets feigned to be the
Goddess of Justice, being forced by the iniquity of men to forsake the earth,
did fly immediately to heaven, and there took up her seat inter Leonem, and
Libram, betwixt those two of the twelve Signs, which are called the LION and
the Balance, where she sits as the Egyptia^s painted her, with her head
hidden amongst the Stars, to show that Magistrates in the administration of
Justice, should like the Areopagites have their eyes canopied up from all such
objects as might sway their judgment beyond the rule and line of equity; a
Judge and an Altar, said Architas, are both one. Men fly to both in case of
danger, and necessity. That he may be therefore both, he must know it is his
duty to protect the Pesant, as well as the Peer; the slave as well as the
superior. And thus I here break off the thread of this discourse, in which if
any chance to tax me for the length, I must unburden my self upon the
Apostles method, which gave me the occasion. It was my resolution at the
first, fully to ponde and examine every word of his, that from them I might
derive the greater weight unto mine own. In handling therefore of the two
first combinations, I followed his concisenesse; and here where he took a
larger field, I was forced to do the like.

But why may some demand, was he so brief in those, and did so much enlarge
himself in this?

I answer, the reason may be threefold.

1. Because the property of Pagan servants was to cozen and defraud their
Masters, and in their absence, like so many traitors, as Cato termed them,
feloniously to curse, and speak evil both of their persons, and proceedings.
Witness that speech of one in the Comedy -- (...). He thought him self
overjoyed, when he could get but any opportunity to rail in secret upon his
Master: and howsoever they to whom he the^ spoke were converted to
Christianity, it was but newly yet, and any little coffeehouse offered them
by their Masters, might have made them with the d^g retu^ne to their vomit; for
the prevention whereof he seeks by strong enforcements to tie them to their
duty.

A second reason may be to express the riches of Gods mercy, who despises
not the very slave that is despised of all; but seeks to make even him a lively
stone for the building up of his most glorious Jerusalem: and because husbands
are willing to inform their Wives, parents careful to teach their Children;
whereas Masters utterly negl^ct their Servants; God to supply the defect, does
here afford them a large Volume of instructions.

The third reason is for the comfort of servants, who by this pressing of their
duty, may well resolve themselves of Gods affection. The lover never thinks
his mind sufficiently vented, and is therefore still courting the Object of
his love. And so it is here with God; he does dilate himself in drawing them,
to show, that he does much desire them.

A fourth and last reason may be, the intimation of his own humanity. The
Physician, when he meets with a needy Patient, tells him in brief, that
Kitchen physic must be his only remedy. And so the Lawyer when he lights
upon a Threadbare Client, to shake him off the sooner, makes him believe his
cause will not be worth the trial. S. Paul teaches them charity, venting his
counsel and advise more freely, and more fully in the behalf of those, whose
inheritance in this world was nothing but the extremity of misery, than he
had done for the^, that were of better quality, as if the saving of one of
those had been a thing more meritorious than the other. And thus having
apologized for my tediousness in this point, I leave the servant, and come to
the Master.

The Ground of the second Book of the third TOME.
Masters give unto your servants that which is just, and equal, knowing that
ye also have a Master in Heaven.

TOM. III. LIB. II.
THis VERSE which is made the first of the fourth Chapter, I cannot liken
better than to a Tree, that by the violence of some earthquake is removed out
of one man's ground into an others. For it should be the period of the former:
and so not only the matter of it, which is oeconomicall, and the fame with
that in the eight Verses immediately going before, but that likewise of the
Verse following, which is of a differing strain, does plainly show it.
Chrysostom therefore, Aquinas, Hugo, Illyricus, Musculus, Zanchius, etc.
dispose of it no otherwise; and we subscribing to their opinion, will assume it
as a part and parcel of the precedent: thus then it divides it self into two
branches. In the former he shows, how Masters are to carry themselves toward
their servants: Ye Masters, says he, do unto your servants that which is just
and equal. In the latter he alleges a Motive to induce them thereunto;
Knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.

As touching the first; In that he does apply himself now to masters, we are
taught that every true dispenser of Gods Word, should not only bend his
endeavors to the fashioning of servants, and those of Inferior rank, but
should also instruct, exhort and edify Masters and Magistrates, together with
all those, that have submitted their necks to the yoke of Christ. Again,
howsoever it be usual with Superiors, and that not without just cause, to
complain of the faults of their inferiors; themselves yet are seldom free
from taint, and from corruption. The Apostle therefore would have neither
Masters nor servants to upbraid each other with their imperfectio^s; but every
one to amend his own.

2. Concerning the persons in whose behalf this duty is here prescribed,
servants; They may observe to their endless comfort, the great solicitude and
care, which God has of their welfare. He respects both their souls and
bodies. For touching their souls; No Mon^rch has a greater interest in the
Kingdom of heaven than they, if in Singleness of Heart they discharge those
duties which he in his diviner wisdom thought good to impose upon them. As
fair a recompense attends the one, as the other; and therefore the Apostle
delivers it with a kind of Emphasis; Servants be obedient to your masters,
knowing that ye also shall receive --

Again, as if he were enamoured of the one; he seems to Court their
affections with the profer of his choicest Treasure, and so to draw them to his
Will; whereas the other, if ye read and mark the Scriptures, are usually
driven thereunto by his most grievou^ plagues, and deadliest punishments Esaias
must tell the King, that Tophet is prepared for him of old, and it is deep and
large; that the burning of it is fire and much wood, and the breath of the
Lord, like a River of brimstone does kindle it. Eliiah must threaten Ahab, that
the Dogs shall eat him of his Stock that dies in the City; and him that
dies in the fields shall the Fowls of the air devour. He calls to the one in
storm and tempest; but in a soft and still voice to the other. Boanerges the
Sons of Thunder are sent to shake the Cedar; but Barionah, the son of
Consolation must hearten up the Shrub. The state and condition of a servant in
the Apostles time was enough to bruise the very heart. God therefore seeks not
to break it, but to bind it up. Servants, says he, be obedient to your
masters, knowing that ye also shall receive --

Again, to comfort servants in their distress a little farther; as he shows
himself there tender over their souls, so does he here over their Bodies. And
because it is an easy thing for any man to abuse the power and authority which
he has over another, and that there is not a more pernicious Creature, than a
tyrannical and cruel master, he limits even their proceedings with his
precepts; charging them to use those that are under their government with
Justice and Equity. Ye masters do that which is --

To come then to the duty it self; it consists of two particulars.

1. Masters must do to their servants that which is just. (...). And in this
is included whatsoever may be due to servants by any legal Tie; or according
to the positive Laws, it excludes whatsoever may redound with hurt and
prejudice unto them. It has reference then both to their souls and Bodies.
Masters must do that which is just to their Servants, in regard of their
Souls.

1. By using all possible means to help them unto Grace, as by training them
up in the fear of God, by prayer, instruction, and other both public and
private ways.

2. Having by Gods blessing, and his own industry brought them to some
perfection in this kind, to prevent a future relapse, they must be very wary
to choose such for their associates in the family as be just. For if it be an
injury to bring a Servant into the house, that has either the Plague, or some
other Contagious Ulcer running upon his body, and shall appoint him to work
amongst the rest, whereby to endanger also them; It must be an injury beyond
compare, to bring in a lewd servant, that has the Plague-soare of sin upon
his soul. For the infection of such a one is far more dangerous than the
other.

Now for their Bodies; Aristotle propounds three things so necessary for
servants, that they may be accounted due; (...), Work, ^od, and Correction.
To these we will add a fourth, (...), and and that is the hyre, which is due
to our servants, who are not slaves, like those of former times. Now it
pertaines to the justice of the Master, to see, as occasion shall be offered,
that all these things be exhibited unto them in a due measure: and it is
madness in him to do otherwise. For in imposing his taskes, if he tie them,
as the Egyptians did the Israelites to more, than they are able to undergo,
they will soon grow faint and feeble; if to less, sluggish and idle.

2. In giving them Food; if he detract and withhold that which is needful and
convenient, he pines them.

Again, if he feed them delicately, he makes them insolent.

3. In using correction; if he be too outrageous, and will punish them beyond
the quality of the fault; he may kill their bodies; Again, if he be too
remiss, and will suffer them, whatsoever they commit, to pass uncensured, he
destroys their very souls.

4. In the allowance of their wages, he that is too pinching may dishearten
them from doing well; and again, he that is too prodigal, may the more
enable them to do ill. So that in every one of these there is a mean
required, that Masters may do unto their servants, (...), That which is just.

1. Then that he may not err in the first; let him know, that every man is not
a Joseph to manage himself alone the business of a whole Family; Even Moses
when the burden is too great, must have a Iethro help him to support it. Let
him therefore put a hand unto the Plough himself; and as Solomon speaks, Pro.
27.23.
let him be diligent to know the state of his own flock.

2. As touching the second; He that pampereth his Horse shall find him
restife, when he would use him; so he that travails him, and will not feed
him, shall be forced for the ending of his journey to make a Hackney of his
own legs. Let him provide therefore a portion, and give them their Ordinary
in due season.

3. To avoid the third; Let him wink at slight faults; and for such as are
gross and palpable, let him punish them as Plato did, by Deputy; or if he
will needs do it of himself, let him stay till the violence of his passion be
allayed, that he may do it with instruction, and moderation, and in such a
manner as may be profitable to them, and his whole Family.

4. And lastly, that he may not prove unjust in the fourth, he must allow
them such a competency of wages for their work, that they may not only be
able to furnish themselves with things necessary for the present; but have also
some remnant in store for the future. It was Jacobs diligence, which looked for
this; and it was Labans duty to afford it; Chi ben serve, assai dimanda, says
the Italian Adage. And thus much for the first particular. Masters do that
which is just.

The second follows, And equal to your servants; (...), says the Original,
which signifies Equality, or Equabilitie. But we are not so to understand it,
as if masters were bound to exhibit to their servants the like honor, and
observance, that is exacted from them. For as Plato well, (...). Equal things
cease to be equal, when we apply them to those that are unequal. This (...)
therefore does not denote unto us the works and offices of servants and
Masters; which are indeed so differing, that they are plainly opposite; but it
is referred to the mind, and manner of working, which in a kind of an
analogicall proportion should be the like in both. As for example; the proper
office of a servant is to obey, that of a Master to command. Now these in no
wise must be changed, for they be particular kinds of duties, and diversely
appropriated; but to do that which we do in singleness of heart, and with
all alacrity and cheerfulness, as servants unto Christ; these are duties
equally common unto both. And in this look how the Master would have his
servants demean themselves toward him; so must he demean himself toward his
servant. If he would have them to obey him in sincerity and the fear of God;
his care must be to command them in sincerity, and the fear of God; if he
would have the^ to serve heartily, and with good will, he must be sure to
govern them with a mild and fatherly affection. So shall he truly render unto
them this (...), this Equality, which is here enjoined.

Briefly then to epitomize the difference, which is betwixt these terms. That
may be said here in this place to be just, which the law requires; or which
is due to a servant by any Legal Obligation; and on the other side, that to be
equal, which charity and Christian mildness does exact, and which is du^
unto them by a moral obligation. Now the special works of this Equality in
a Master are these.

1. To account of his Servant, as one made of the same mould, and partaker of
the same grace with him self. Not as many do, with a proud and lofty mind so
to vilify and contemn him, as if his eye were too good to behold so base an
object. For howsoever Master and servant be words implying a difference of
condition; man, and man yet are names denoting the same Nature. Fortune says
Plato, has distinguished the one from the other; but nature is the same in
both. Eisdem seminibus orti eodem fruuntur coelo; aeque vivunt, aeque
moriuntur: Both consist of the same Elements, and are enlivened by the same
principle. Their coming into the World, and their going out is alike in both.
This considered, Saint Paul in his Epistle to Philemon commands him to receive
Onesimus, being converted to the Faith, No more as a servant, but above a
servant, even as a brother beloved.

And in this we may find matter of comfort for Inferiors, and again matter
of Humiliation and Moderation for Superiors. For the Servant is Christ's
freeman; 1 Cor. 7.
and the Master is Christ's servant. Let then the brother of low degree rejoice
in this, That he is exalted in Christ, Iam. 1.
to be equal with the greatest Prince that ever swayed a Scepter in the World;
yea to be far above him, if he be out of Christ. Again, according to
Saint James advise in the same place; Let the Brother of high degree rejoice in
his Humility; even in this, That in Christ, he makes equal with himself the
meanest. Let him not glory in any outward preheminency he has over them; but
let his rejoicing be, that such a poor and silly Beggar is his Fellow. And
sure this can be no disgrace, or shame to any. For if God acknowledge them to
be his sons, what disparagement can it be to us, if we acknowledge them for
our Brethren? Nay, it is a credit, as Saint James shows, a matter to be
boasted in; for if they be our Brethren, then is God our Father.

Let no man therefore of what rank or calling soever he be, fear to admit
the poorest Christian for his Brother, though he were his own bondslave, but
let him do unto him, That which is just and equal. Let not the pride of his
heart so puff him up in regard of his outward condition in the world, as to
make him forget his Inferior, and so to carry himself toward him, as if he
were not his Brother of the same Crhistian profession, and of the same precious
faith with himself. And that he may the better do this, let him champe a
little upon the various changes and alterations, whereunto all humane affairs
are liable. Cuivis accidere potest, quod cuipiam potest, says the Mimik.
Whatsoever we see happen to any man, may happen unto us. Joseph was free
borne, and yet became a slave. And who can promise to himself an exemption
from the like fortune? Res Deus nostras celeri citatas

Sen. Herc. sur.
Turbine versat -- says the Tragoedian. We are driven with a Whirle-winde out
of one state into another; and no security is to be looked for in the best Quem
saepe transit casus, aliquando invenit; The Pit her may go often to the water,
and yet at length come broken home. He knows not at what years Hecuba began
to serve; nor when it was that Croesus, the mother of Darius Diogenes, I and
Plato himself, were made to subject their necks to the yoke of Bondage; that
waxes insolent upon his own liberty. But here I would have no man to mistake
me; as if Superiors, might not lawfully maintain the Superiority and
Authority which they have over their Inferiors. My meaning only is, That no
inequality in their civil Calling, should make them forget the equality in
the Christian. We must so temper our carriage, that as our equality in Christ
may not make us forget our inequality in the world; so on the other side, our
inequality in the world, should not make us forget our Equality in Christ.
Masters must do unto their servants that which is just and equal.

The second operation of this Equality, is so to deal with our servants in
all occurrences, as when Reason shall require it, to give way unto them. Esa.
40.
God is absolute in his Empire, and yet he says not, like a Tyrant, Sic volo
sic iubeo -- Nor as the sons of Eli; By fair means, or by foul, 1 Samuel 2.17
I will have as much as my heart desires; But, Quod expedit facere, faciam;
He will do that only, which is meet to be done. And so must Masters to
their Servants. It is an equality, which holy Job professes to have exhibited
always unto his; and should he not have done it, he should have been
obnoxious to the wrath of GOD; If I did contemn, says he, the judgment of
my servant, or of my maid, when they did contend with me; what shall I do
when God stands up? and when he shall visit me, what shall I answer?

The third is out of a due consideration of humane frailty, mercifully and
gently to entreat our Servants, and with all benignity and love to cherish
them, when either age, sickness, or any other calamity shall have enfeebled
their strength, and made them altogether unable for employments. And for this
very cause it seems to me, that a Master was called by the ancient Romans
Pater-familias, Macrob. Saturn. lib. 1.
The Father of the family, because with a fatherly tenderness he was to look
to all those of the household, as being committed to his trust, and custody.
The Centurion showed himself to be truly such a one: First, In that he took
the pains to come himself unto Christ for the recovery of his diseased
Servant. Secondly, In that he counted him as a child; Lord, said he, (...), my
Child lies sick at home of a palsy, Mat. 8.6.
and is greevously tormented.

The fourth is, with a gracious Eye to weigh the merits of a faithful Servant,
and to give him out of course, and above his composition, some kind
remuneration. For when a Servant in his love and fidelity toward his Master
shall have shown himself more than a Servant, equality requires that the
Master in his liberality, and bounty toward him, should show himself more
than a Master. Servus sensatus sittibi dilectus quasi anima, says the Wise
man. Love an understanding Servant, as thou would thine own Soul; defraud
him not of liberty, neither leave him a poor man. In this he should not so
much regard, what law, and humane custom may require, as what Charity, and
Christian meekness does injoyne. For if he perform not those, he shall be
counted unjust, even before the Tribunal of men; but if he do not these he
shall be arraigned, and condemned of wickedness and cruelty before the
Iudgment-seate of God. There must be an equal, and analogicall proceeding
amongst all sorts of men; and whatsoever superiors do at any time exact from
those that are under them, they must be very careful to return unto them the
like, Ephesians. 6.9.
(...), the very same; Si non specie tamen analogia; if not in kind, yet in
proportion. For this is that, which is here commanded: Masters do that which
is just and equal unto your servants. And thus much of the Precept. The motive
alleged by the Apostle for the observation of this precept is the point that
follows. Knowing that ye also have a Master --

Now this is twofold. For first, they must know that themselves also have a
Mast^r.

Secondly, It is no ordinary master, but a Master in Heaven.

As touching the first. The only thing which moves many to be injurious to
their Servants is a high conceit of their own absolute power: They think
themselves Lords Paramont; and altogether free from the check of any; hence is
it, that often times they break forth into bitter outrages, and when a thing is
not instantly done according to their mind, as if there were no difference
betwixt their Servant, and their Dog, they care not with what fury they assault
him. The Apostle therefore to bridle this intemperancy, which is nothing but a
fruit of our arrogant insulting flesh, would have them know, and remember,
that themselves are also Servants under the command of one, and the same Lord,
and so consequently, fellow servants with their servants. Now it is altogether
dissonant from reason, that a servant, though he be of higher rank, and more
honorable place should deal unjustly, and tyrannically with his fellows. For
it is an Axiom with God in the government of his household, what measure we
mete to others, the same shall be meted unto us again. We may see it
exemplified in the Gospel. He that had ten thousand Talents remitted him, Mat.
18.32.
and yet was merciless in exacting an hundred pence, O thou evil servant,
said the Lord unto him, I forgave thee all thy debt, because thou prayedst me;
And ought not thou also to have had pity upon thy fellow servants, even as I
had pity on thee? So the Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors,
till he should pay all that was due unto him. It behooves therefore godly, and
religious Masters, so to think of their servants, as to know them for more
than servants; And again, so to conceit of themselves, as to know that they
are less than Masters, even fellow laborers with their Servants in the work
of the Lord.

Worldly Greatness does usually forget her own subordination to a higher
power; and is by reason of this so puffed up, with insolency, that in her
carriage toward others she heeds nor Justice, nor equality; we have it
instanced in Pharaoh. Moses and Aaron came unto him with a message from the
Lord saving; Thus says the Lord God of Israel; Let my people go, that they may
celebrate a feast unto me in the wilderness: And Pharaoh replied, Who is the
Lord, that I should hear his voice and let Israel go? I know not the Lord,
neither will I let Israel go: But what event had this his supercilious pride?
Did it not bring a miserable ruin and des^^ation upon his whole Kingdom?
Masters then, do that, which is Just and equal to your Servants knowing that
ye also have a Master, who can, and will exact from you a strict account of
your whole carriage and proceedings, even toward them. For as it follows in
the second place; He is a Heavenly Master.

That is; one, who is Just, omnipotent, omniscient, and to shut up all in a
word, God himself. And this is a special consideration whereby to restrain
the cruelty of Masters toward their Servants. For what is the reason, that
Masters behave themselves so insolently toward their Servants, but because
they see them altogether destitute of any power or faculty to withstand their
violence; and are withal persuaded, that there ^s no Judge that will enlarge
himself so far in their behalf, as to take upon him the reparation of their
wrongs? The Apostle therefore to abolish this conceit, will have Masters to
know, that is, assuredly to hold, and believe that they also have a master, and
such a one, as is not mortal; but celestial, and will not suffer them to go
unpunished, if in any sort they abuse that authority, which by delegation they
have received from him over their Servants. Being subject to such a master they
ought with all holy respect to observe in every thing, this Justice, and
equality, which is here prescribed

For first, this heavenly master is omniscient: and there is no wicked or
unjust act can be so closely committed as to lie concealed from his knowledge.
His eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, and there is nothing in
Heaven, in Earth, or in the deep, which he does not see, yea though it were
hid, I say not within the Reins and Hearts of our Bodies, but in the Reins
and Heart of the lowest destruction. Omnia coram illo nuda says the Apostle;
All things are naked before him. It Is more than shameless impudency therefore in
the fight of such a master to entreat our fellows cruelly and proterviously.
For even the worst kind of servants will be sure to afford (...), that same
eye-service, which was spoken of before. And he of whom we read in the Gospel,
never went about to molest or afflict the rest of the household, till hi^ Master
was gone a great journey, and far enough removed from his sight; but this
heavenly Master has his eye evermore upon us; and therefore we can at no time
safely domineere in an imperious manner, and beyond all Justice, and Equality,
over those that are under our government and jurisdiction.

2. This heavenly Master is just and holy; and all iniquity whatsoever is
exceeding hateful unto him. Earthly masters may peradventure now and then,
either applaud the improbitie of their servants, or at least connive at it,
because themselves are faulty and defective in the like kind; But there is no
hope that he who dares vio^ate justice and equity, should please his heavenly
Master. For both the wicked and their wickedness are hateful to the Lord.

3. And lastly, This Master, which we have in heaven, is Omnipotent, and able
therefore to revenge himself on those whom he abhors; nor can any man
rescue or deliver himself out of his hands. The Children of Israel, and the
sons of Anak; David and Goliath, were unequally matched, yet was it man to man:
where if either party be the weaker, it may be redressed in time, either by
themselves, or their abettors; or if never, the body alone indures the smart;
the soul is not a whit endangered; but this Master is the most mighty Lord,
whose face is burning, and whose eyes are full of indignation; he lives not
upon the earth, that can abide his wrath^^ For lo! ^he foundations of the
Mountains shake, and the Hills do melt away like wax, because of his anger:
It extends not only to the killing of the Body; but to the casting both of
soul and body into Hell. Behold he breaks down, and it cannot be built;
he shuts up a man and he cannot be loosened. Woe woe be unto us cried the
uncircumcised Philistims, though they were a mighty Army, and stood in battle
array, who shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty Gods? Erring in
the number, but not in the power of the glorious Deity. Who is able to stand
before him, cried the men of Bethshemesh? The very Pillars of Heaven, 2 Samuel 6.
says Job, tremble and quake at his reproof. At his rebuke he dries up the
Sea, and makes the floods desert: Esaias 50.
Their fish rott for want of water, and dye for thirst; He clotheth the
heavens with darkness, and makes a Sack their covering.

How fearful a thing then shall it be for sinful man, whose foundation is
but dust, not like those of the Mountains, and the Pillars of his body, but
flesh and blood, inferior to the Pillars of Heaven; and all whose moisture in
comparison of the Rivers, is but Stilla situlae, the drop of the Bucket, to
fall into the hands of the living God, who lives for all eternity beyond the
days of Heaven; and is therefore more able to avenge the neglect, and base
contempt of his Commandments. The anger of a Prince, though it seem as
dreadful as the Messengers of death unto us, may be pacified; if not, his
anger is mortal like himself. His breath is in his nostrels, and promises to
them that fear, an end of his life, and wrath together. The hostility of a
deadly foe may be resisted with hostility again; though his Quiver be an
open Sepulcher, Hier. 5.16.
and they all very strong. If not, he can but eat up our harvest, and our
bread, our sons and our daughters; our sheep, and our Bullocks; our Vines,
and our Figtrees; and destroy our Cities. But if the anger of the Lord of Hosts
be kindled, who can put it out? If he be an enemy, let heaven and earth join
hand in hand to work our safety, neither shall avail us; he is the only
Lord of all, Sap. 6.6.7.
neither shall he fear any greatness: with him the mighty shall be
mightily tormented. Let Masters then diligently ponder, and consider these
things; as,

1. That they also have a Master.

2. That this their Master is a heavenly master, that is, Omniscient, a hater
of all injustice: and withal omnipotent, able to put in execution whatsoever
he determines; and this will sufficiently spur them up, daily and duly to
exhibit Justice and Equity to their servants. For if they would have God be
merciful to them, they must be merciful to those. And thus having wrought out
my materials I here desist with my Cord, in twisting whereof I must confess
strength was rather affected than length. If any therefore shall chance to
blame me for my concisenesse, and think the worse of my Book, because of the
brevitie, I will vindicate my self, and it from his illiterate censure, with
that of Martial against Gaurus. Lib. 9. E. 1


Ingenium mihi Gaure probas sic esse pusillum,
Carmina quod faciam, quae brevitate placent;
Confiteor, sed tu bis denis grandia libris
Qui scribis Priami praelia, magnus homoes.
Nos Bruti puerum facimus, nos Lagona vivum,
Tu magnus luteum Gaure giganta facis.
Thus prov'st thou Gaurus, that my Wit is small,
Because the verses, which I daily make,
Only for shortness are esteemed of all;
And I confess in this there is no mistake;
But thou that do the great and dread^ull wars
Of Priamus in twenty books set forth,
Largely discoursing of those bloody jarres,
Art sure a man of rare and mickleworth.
We Brutus Child do to the life display;
Thou mighty man make Giants out of Clay.

Laus, honor, and gloria Sanctae and Individuae Trinitati.
FINIS.
October. 9. 1635.
PErlegi hoc opus, cui Titulus S. Paul's Threefold Cord, etc. quod continet
paginas 255. aut circiter, in quibus invenio nihil sanae doctrinae aut bonis
moribus repugnans, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur: sub ea tamen
conditions, ut si non intra annum proxime sequentem typis mandetur, haec
licentia sit omnino irrita.

Gulielmus Haywood, Capell. domest. Archiep. Cant.


