GODS HVSBANDRY: THE FIRST PART.

TENDING TO SHOW THE DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE Hypocrite and the true-hearted
Christian.

AS IT WAS DELIVERED IN CERTAIN SERMONS, AND is now published

By WILLIAM WHATELY, Preacher of the Word of God in Banbury in Oxfordsheire.

MATTHEW. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, but he which does the will of my Father which is in
heaven.

LONDON, Imprinted by Bernard Alsop for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1622.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IT is a thing I think, good Read, if not impossible, yet exceeding
difficult, for a Minister of Gods word to open his mouth with so much
discretion, but that if he seek to beat down the false hypocrite, the weak
Christian will come betwixt, and take the blow upon his own head, which was
neither meant nor due unto him; and contrarily, if he feeke to raise up the
weak Christian, the presumptuous hypocrite will by and by lay hold on those
words, and pervert them quite, to the nourishing of his foolish security. My
care has been to tread so even a path in the following Treatise, that I might
not give any just occasion to the such mistaking of either party. And I hope I
have so tempered my pen, that the poor Christian shall not (unless in an
ouer-extreame brunt of tentation) be less able to enjoy his proper consolation
for any thing that has been here uttered, to the discarding and amazing of
hypocrites; nor the hypocrite (unless out of an extremity of wilful
blindness) be able to nestle himself warm, in the misapplying of comforts
intended to those alone, that be such as he alone seems to be. Now what
thou art that shall read this book, I cannot possibly know; and how thou will
censure of me for it, as I cannot conjecture, so neither will I be careful or
trouble my self about it. If thou shall commend me, I hope I have a little
better insight into mine own imperfections, than to be tickled with thy
praises, which perhaps thine ignorance, or partitality may give, rather than
any desert of mine (which I know to be none at all of any good thing) may call
for and challenge: but if thou shall reproach and dispraise me, sure I should
have both more wit, and somewhat else to do, than to make any account of thy
disliking and censorious words; knowing (as I do know well enough) what thou
art, my fellow servant, not my Master; a fellow-prisoner, not a Judge.
Wherefore if thou be wise, save a bootlesse labor of speaking either well
or ill of me; neither of which can advantage thee, or do me any good or hurt;
and rather bestow thy self in reaping some profit by that which I have here
written, with a desire and intention of profiting thee. If I have spoken what
thou knew not before, now inform thy self: if what thou knew, but
consideredst not, now digest thine own knowledge, and (having an addition of
one more witness to the truth thou did formerly confess) know it surer, know
it better. If I seem to thee to utter truth, embrace it, because it is truth;
if to err, consider by what reasons thou can convince me, of having erred;
and let mine error occasion thee with more firmness to cleave to the truth.
In a word, thou may (if thou will) get some good by reading; if thou will
not, who can help it? And (that I may be bold a little to touch the sore of
those that read books, specially Sermons, which yet there be not many that
will read) let me put thee in mind, that the common fault of hearers, is
incident to readers also: they hear alone, to be judges of the speakers gifts,
or to censure his imperfections: they hear not with any intention of
reflecting their thoughts upon themselves, to censure themselves, and find out
their own faults. So in reading Sermons, the greater number read only to see
what a man can say: to judge of his learning, reading, wit, phrase, etc. and to
carpe at his defects in any of these. Long enough may such both hear and
read, before either the pen or the tongue will conueigh any goodness into
their hearts. Wherefore if thou please to bestow pains in perusing these
Sermons, read them with none other intention, but that one of trying thy
self, whether thou be an hypocrite, yea or no; so dare I promise thee some
fruit of thy reading: for either (in finding out thine hypocrisy) thou shall
perceive thine unhappiness, and be capable of help; or else (in meeting with
uprightness) thou shall enjoy thy good estate, and be encouraged to proceed.
Thus with my best prayers to God for thee, and the good success of all good
labors to do thy soul good, and with a request of reaping one particular
prayer of thine for me, if thou reapest any good by these lines, I bid thee
kindly farewell, and rest

covetous of thy souls health, William Whately.
From my Study in Banbury. April 6. 1619.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
CHAP. I. Opening the Text. 1 CHAP. II. Showing, that there is a mixture of
hypocrites and true Christians in the Church, and why? 5 CHAP. III. Showing the
description of hypocrites. 12 CHAP. IIII. Of the diverse sorts of hypocrites. 19
CHAP. V. Showing the general notes of difference betwixt the true-hearted, and
the hypocrite. 26 CHAP. VI. How the hypocrite agrees with the true Christian in
knowledge, and withal how they differ. 33 CHAP. VII. Showing how the hypocrite
and upright do agree and differ in faith. 41 CHAP. VIII. Showing how the
repentance of hypocrites is distinguished from the repentance of true
Christians. 48 CHAP. IX. Showing how the conversation of hypocrites does differ
from the true Christians. 58 CHAP. X. Containing the first use of the point
belonging indifferently to all, viz. to examine themselves whether they be
hypocrites, or no. 73 CHAP. XI. Showing the second use, what they must do that
are found to be but hypocrites. 87 CHAP. XII. Showing a third use for the
upright. 95 CHAP. XIII. The uses of the point in regard of others. 99 CHAP.
XIIII. Showing that fruitfulnes is the true distinctiue note betwixt true and
false Christians. 106 CHAP. XV. Showing what this fruitfulness is. 109 CHAP.
XVI. Containing an exhortation to all, to try if they be fruitful. 127 CHAP.
XVII. Showing what they must do that are unfruitful. 131 CHAP. XVIII.
Exhorting all to get fruitfulness. 135 CHAP. XIX. Containing comforts for them
that are found fruit. full. 146
GODS HVSBANDRY: TENDING, TO SHOW THE DIFFERENCE BETWIXT THE Hypocrite, and the
true-hearted Christian.
John 15.2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away; and
every branch that bears fruit, he pruneth, that it may bring forth more
fruit.


CHAP. I. Wherein the Text is opened.
THe lips of the wise do feed many, says the wise Solomon. How truly was
this saying verified in our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, who (being the
Wisdom of his Father) delighted (as it was foretold of him) to open his mouth
in a Parable, and to utter dark sayings of old. And as in the whole course of
his life, his mouth was a wel-spring of waters of life, evermore sending forth
the streams of sweet refreshing doctrine; so chiefly toward his end (in the
foresight of his near approaching departure) does he enlarge himself more
than ordinary, in diverse most worthy speeches, to instruct and comfort his
sorrowful Apostles. In this Chapter amongst the rest, intending to persuade
them to goodness of life, he lays down certain grounds as a foundation,
whereon to raise his purposed exhortation. One ground stands fast in these
two Verses, which contain a sweet and comfortable Parable, wherein our
Savior sets out the care, that himself and his Father take of his Churches
welfare. Himself he compares to the body of the Vine, from whence the sweet
sap of all heavenly graces, is plentifully derived to every branch, according
to the capacity and measure of every one. His Father he compares to an
Husbandman, who does plant, and mound, and dress this Vine: and last of all,
gather the fruit thereof in his own eternal and unspeakable glory and
praise. And (that the matter may be better noted) he prosecutes this part of
the comparison more at large, showing the principal husbandry of GOD the
Father about this Vine. This husbandry is set out by the subject and parts of
it. The subject of Gods husbandry is described by the common nature and
different kinds thereof. The common nature is in those words, Every branch in
me; that is, every professor of Christian religion; every one that makes
himself or others believe, that he believes in Jesus Christ, and imbraceth
the heavenly doctrine of the Gospel. Faith in Christ makes a branch, I mean
the external profession of faith; and if it be true, then does it make a true
branch; if hollow and fained, then a branch alone in appearance. The kinds of
branches are two; some that do not bring forth fruit, some that do. Some
professors of religion are sound-hearted, and some are hypocritical. And the
care of the Lord extends it self to every particular professor of either
kinds: of those that carry a show of being Christians, some do live a godly
life in the sight of the world, and some do not; and the Father of Heaven
carries himself, as beseems his Wisdom, Justice and Goodness unto both.
And this is the subject of his Husbandry.

The parts of it are two; and those different, according to the different kinds
of branches; The unfruitful branch he cuts off: that is, the hypocrite he does
bring to eternal destruction, fitting and ripening him for hell, by more and
more separating him from Christ, and all the benefits of Christ, till he have
finally brought him to damnation. Every false Christian, whose life is not in
some degree and good measure agreeable to his profession, is by God plagued and
punished with eternal death; and every of Gods ordinances, and whatsoever else
befalls him, is turned (through his own wickedness, and Gods just hand
against him) into a means of working out, and increasing his damnation. And
this is one part of the Lords Husbandry, his severity against hypocrites. The
second part is that, that concerns good branches, representing the goodness
of God or the sound-hearted Christian, set out in the matter, and end or effect
of it. The matter is purging or pruning. The Gardener with his pruning-knife
does cut off such unprofitable and luxuriant twigges from the branches, as
would hinder the increase of grapes: so God by diverse means which he has in
a readiness, and by name, afflictions, sanctified to that purpose, does
diminish, subdue and mortify the corruptions and disordered affections of his
true-hearted servants, which would else hinder them from living in holy and
Christian manner before him. The end of this pruning, and also the effect (for
these two terms are often incident, yea always, if a wise and sufficient
work man have the managing of any business) is no hurt to the branches, but
even the greatest good that may be, for the increase of their fruitfulness,
the causing of all virtues to grow in them, and the enabling of them more and
more to conform their lives according to the doctrine of godliness. And such
is the order and meaning of this verse. Now I proceed to collect some
necessary points of doctrine from thence.

CHAP. II. Showing that there is a mixture of hypocrites with true Christians
in the Church, and why.
FIrst then let us mark, that our Savior distinguishes the branches in the
Vine into two sorts; fruitful and unfruitful. Questionless we may conclude
from hence, that Christ meant to teach us, that in his visible Church, there
should be a mixture of true-hearted Christians and hypocrites. In the societies
of men professing the true Christian religion; neither are al true, neither are
al false: but some honest, sound-hearted, upright Christians; other-some,
hollow, dissembling, hypocritical actors of Christianity. Some are in very
deed and substance, that that they are called and taken for: others have a
mere and bare name of Christianity, and nothing within them answerable to
that name. Matthew. 13.1.24.47.
This is the point which our Savior teaches also in the Parable of the
Grounds, whereof among four kinds, one alone proved good. So in the Parable
of the field which had Tares sowed in it, together with good Corn: in the
Parable of the Draw-net, that gathered not good Fish alone, but much
unprofitable filth withal. So much also does Paul signify, when he tells
us, that all are not Israel, Romans 9.6.2.28.
which are of Israel; and that he is not a Jew, which is one without, but he
which is one within. And again, of the Congregation in the wilderness, he
affirms, that though all did eat of the same Spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10.5.
and drink of the same Spiritual drink, yet God was not well pleased with
them all. And Saint John affirms in plain terms, 1.John 2.19.
that all are not of us (in truth of heart) which are amongst us, in show of
profession. To this truth the continual experience of all Ages yields a
manifest and lamentable testimony. In Adams family (the mother Church of all
the world) there was Caine as well as Abel, both offerers to God: but the
former in a false semblance of piety; the latter, in the truth of faith and
devotion. In the Arc were accursed Came, and blessed Shem. In Abraham's house,
scoffing, wild Ismael, and religious Isaac. In Isaacs house, plaine-hearted
Jacob, and the murdering-minded Esau. So in the wilderness, gaine-saying Core,
with his accomplices Dathan, Abiram and the rest, as well as Moses, Joshua and
Caleb. In aftertimes, Elies sons (a pair of prodigious dunces, ill living and
dumb Ministers), as well as faithful Samuel, the Lords true Prophet. A Saul
and a David; an Achitophel and an Hushai; and so upwards even to Christ's
family, and there was a Judas and a Peter. What Church can be free from
dissemblers, if this little domestical Church, that had such a Pastor and
such members, had yet a Devil lodging within it? Wherefore it was so too in
the times of the Gospel; halting Ananias and Saphira, as well as just
Barnabas; Corinthian flaunters, as well as true Teachers: yea, and which is
more to be wondered at, false Apostles as well as true, dispersed here and there
in all Churches. Lo, how Christ's floor has chafe, as well as wheat lying
in it; and his field has Goats as well as Sheep feeding in it. Reasons why
some be hypocrites.
Let us inquire a reason of this mixture, both why some be false, and why some
be true. Of the former, we must fetch reasons from Man, from Satan, and from
God. From Man; 1. From Man.
because hypocrisy is one of the evil weeds that does naturally grow in his
corrupt soul, it being very agreeable to his naughty heart, to dissemble
goodness in some cases; and having seen the truth, to make show of yielding,
though in heart he yield not unto it. For oftentimes the truth is laid open so
clearly before the eyes of his mind, partly through the euidenee of outward
proof, partly through the inward light of illumination, as he cannot but
acknowledge it, as the eye cannot choose but see such objects, as are set in
convenient manner and distance before it. Yea, many times custom, education,
and bringing up in commonly received truths, does so accustom and wont the
mind unto them (as usual eating does the palate unto some kind of food),
that he cannot tell how to deny them; yea, that for his credit sake, and out
of a desire to be well respected amongst his neighbors, he cannot but be
forward in declaring his opinion of them. Nature therefore will attain to the
knowledge and profession of divine truths, with the bare help of a common
grace of inlightning: but the true doctrine of godliness, is so contrary to
the most beloved lusts of men, so opposite to their natural corruptions, and
tends so wholly to beat them out of themselves, and to bring them in
subjection unto GOD, that through the strength of these corruptions, and that
voluntary slavery wherein they remain willingly enthralled unto sin, they
neither will nor can (indeed they cannot, because they will not) give a
dutiful and submissiue entertainment thereunto, and so become but hypocrites
at the best. So that it is no more wonder, to see a man prove an hypocrite,
then to have a Crow prove black: for the Crow does not more naturally bring
blackness into the world with her, than a man does bring with him guile and
dissimulation; seeing he has in him so much imperfect goodness, as will make
him receive the form of godliness, but withal so much tyrannizing badnesse,
as will not give him leave to receive the power of it.

Again, 2 From satan.
the devil is very busy to water and cherish the seeds of guile, that are
borne and bred with us, and within us: for out of his malice, he is very
desirous to keep men from salvation, and to hold them under his own command
and tyranny. Wherefore if he cannot retain them still, as his absolute and
professed vassals, yet he takes great pains to maintain a more secret
dominion over them, and to become the Lord of their hearts, in a more private
and indiscernable manner.

Wherefore when he is cast out from a manifest domineering over them, by the
shining of the Lamp of true religion within them, John 12.31.
as Christ sore told that he should; yet still he strives by craft, and
policy, to keep possession of the turret of their hearts, as being loath to
be beaten out of his old and long usurped kingdom, so long as any one
defensible fort remains. Now the devil works effectually in the children
of disobedience (as the Apostle testifies), Ephesians. 2.2.
and so finding them full apt to dissemble, and making the matter worse by his
forcible tentations, and subtle insinuations, it is no marvel if many come no
further than to bare shows; especially seeing men are usually so careless in
searching themselves, and in resisting his tentations.

Last of all, 3. From God.
the Lord of Heaven does most justly punish a number of men, that live within
the visible Church, by giving them over to the devil, and their own hollow
hearts, to be beguiled and deceived with outward appearances of goodness, so
to avenge himself upon their careless or wilful contempt, or neglect of the
offers of grace made unto them: for where the doctrine of salvation by Jesus
Christ is in any degree made manifest; there does God proffer the spirit of
grace withal, and is ready for his part to bestow it. But when men do
neglect or reject this goodness, making more account of the base vanities of
this world, then of those most precious treasures, offered unto them by the
Lord; then does he most righteously depart from them, and turn them up into
the hands of Satan, to be blinded and hardened by him, and of their own
corruptions to be kept under, and vanquished by them, that so he may most
holily accomplish his most wise and eternal purpose, of glorifying himself in
their just damnation at the last. And thus there is a kind of working of God,
as well as of Satan and men, in the hollownesse of them that be hollow; the
Lord carrying himself most righteously and wisely: the devil and men most
wickedly and foolishly: he intending and attaining his own holy and good ends,
they following and seeking after their own abominable and unholy desires. And
thus we may plainly see how it comes to pass, that many hypocrites are found
in Gods house.

Now upon what reasons stands it, Reasons why some be true hearted.
that all be not as bad as any, but that some do sincerely embrace Christ? the
reason of this also must be taken from Man, 1. From man.
and from God. From Man; because he is in his very making, capable of truth,
and a subject of that nature, as may have truth wrought in it by good means;
even as the blind man's eye, because it was a man's eye, was capable of having
the power of seeing wrought in it. For it is a very false and cauilling
exception, that is taken to the doctrine of man's servitude to sin, when it is
inferred hence, that a man is turned into a stone or trunk. Nay, man has a
soul endued with those natural faculties, which may receive the impression of
grace, by means which God does sanctify for that purpose. Indeed so far is
he subjected to the dominion of sin, that he wants all active power of
converting himself to God; but yet such natural faculties remain within him,
as that he wants not a passive power of being converted, if God convert him.
Let a man's leg be cut, and though of it self it will nor heal or knit
together again; yet it has a power of being healed and knit again, by the
means of some plaster or medicine skilfully applied: but cut a stick of
wood, or break it in pieces, and no playsters will make up the wound, or knit
the broken pieces together again. So is it with corrupted mankind; and this
is all, that the truth of Gods Word will give us leave to ascribe to man, as a
reason of his being truly ingraffed into Christ, he is capable of such a work
of Gods Spirit.

But the Principal and only active cause, 2. From God.
is Gods power and goodness, that cause, beyond which, it is a madness to
enquire for any other cause. The Lord does please to bestow effectual grace
upon those, whom he will receive to mercy; whereby they have not alone their
minds enlightened to some perceiving of the truth of Gods word, but also their
wills, by the mighty operation of the holy Ghost, subdued to the obedience of
the same. So by the infusing of a new life into them, they are enabled to
become such, as he does wish them to be, and as themselves desire to be
accounted. Were it not for this grace, all in the Church would be hypocrites as
well as any: but it pleases the Lord to bestow that grace upon one (whom he
has enabled to desire it, that he may graciously bestow it), which to another
he gives not, but leaves him to his own carelessness of it; that (missing
it by his own default) his blood may be upon his own head. So the perdition
of hypocrites is of themselves, because they willingly refuse the goodness of
God, which he does offer them; the soundness and happiness of the Saints of
God, is of his free grace, that breaks the yoke of sin which held them
under; and makes them willing of unwilling, and able of unable, to turn
themselves unto him. For to imagine (as some will needs do) that the Lord
does deal no more bountifully with one, than with another, of the members of
the Church; but that the cause why one becomes an hypocrite, the other
prevails to uprightness, is merely and wholly in themselves, is a fancy (I
think) so contrary to all, both Scripture, and experience of Gods Saints, that
hardly can any be deceived with it, but he that never felt what it was to be
upright, and whence it came. And thus have we laid before you the truth of this
point

CHAP. III. Showing the description and sorts of hypocrites.
NOw it is very requisite, that we make a plain and sound explication of it,
to the intent, that every man may discern of himself, and of his own estate,
whether himself be an hypocrite yea or no. We will therefore do our best to
lay the matter open clearly, that it may be evidently discovered (to them
that will take the pains of inquiring about the point) who is guilefull? who
without guile? and for this purpose it is necessary to stand upon these four
heads: First, to show what an hypocrite is: secondly, to show the diverse sorts,
or rather degrees of hypocrites: thirdly, to set down some general notes of
difference betwixt the true-hearted and the hypocrite. Lastly, to declare more
particularly the agreement and disagreement of them both, in four principal
and maine graces, whereof the one has alone the shadow, the other the
substance; that is, first, in knowledge; secondly, in faith; thirdly, in
repentance; fourthly, in good life, or in obedience.

First then, for the describing of an hypocrite, What an hypocrite is; viz;
we must make use of a necessary rule of Logic, which bids us to define the
concrete by the abstract as they term it, as no man can possibly declare what
a white thing is, but by conceiving and expressing what is whiteness; nor what
a proud man is but by understanding what pride is; nor what an hypocrite is,
but by knowing what is hypocrisy. And again we must understand, that virtues
and vices do not denominate their subjects, unless they be in them in so high
a degree, as to prevail and be predominant over their contraries: as nothing
is called white, but that in which whiteness so prevails, that it partaketh
more of white, than of any other color: and if a thing do so partake of
whiteness, we call it white, though it fail much of the whitest whiteness
that may be. So is he called a proud man, in whom pride prevails; an
infidel, whom infidelity rules; a reuengeful man, in whom revenge does bear
sway; and a covetous man, in whom covetousness reigns. And so must we
likewise conclude in the present matter, that he is an hypocrite, in whom
hypocrisy prevails and bears rule.

To the making of an hypocrite therefore, three things must concur: A
prosessor of Christian religion, in whom hypocrisy rules.
first, a fit subject; viz. such an one as does (at least in appearance)
profess himself to be a Christian, and to believe in Christ. As nothing can
be called an unfruitful branch, if it be not a branch; so neither can any
man be termed an hypocrite, unless at least externally he be in Christ: in
this meaning, as we now take the word hypocrite, in opposition to a sound
member of Christ. Secondly, there must be in that subject an adiunct, that vice
of hypocrisy: and thirdly, this vice must be in that subject, in such degree
as to bear to rule; and to be, as they term it, predominant. Wherefore for
our further information in this matter (which is most exceeding needful to be
very distinctly known and conceived of) we must search into the nature of
that crooked, What hypocrisy is, viz.
selfe-couering and selfe-cousening vice of hypocrisy, about which we need
not go far, but alone turn our thoughts to the Apostles description of it,
2. Tim. 3.5.
viz. that it is a form of godliness, without the power thereof. It a false
fained goodness, a goodness alone painted, and put on, and counterfeited. In
plain words thus you may describe it; A corruption of the will, A corruption
of the will, inclining it self to do some good, and leave some evil for ones
own sake.
whereby it inclines it self to seem good, by doing some good, and leaving
some evil for ones own sake. For every man is naturally desirous to have
other men esteem him good, and to esteem of himself also, as of one that is
good; and because, neither will his neighbors conceive so of him, neither can
he so conceive of himself, without some ground for such conceit; he is
therefore willing to do something that may work in others, and in himself
such an opinion of him, and to avoid some other things, that might procure the
contrary opinion. Yea, every man naturally is willing to be happy, and willing
to think, that he shall be happy, yet because this thought cannot be
maintained, without some color of reason, he is also willing to do some
things, that he may think will further his happynes, and avoid some other
things that will hinder it. Now when a man that lives in the Church, out of
these natural desires, that are inseparably united to his reasonableness,
does incline himself in some things, to yield to the Doctrine of Religion,
that so he may serve his own turn, in fulfilling his own desires: this is
false goodness, goodness alone to the eye; it is called goodness, as a false
shilling is called a shilling, because it looks like a shilling, having the
same stamp, and a little filuer at top, though in ths midst it be nothing
but brass, or some such base and unworthy matter. If a man (I say) be moved
for his own credit or ease sake, yea, or for his own faluation sake, to be
willing to do some good, that God in his word commands; and to forbear some
evil in the same Word condemned, and not to be willing to do all good
commanded, and avoid all evil forbidden; this is but guilefull hollow,
imperfect. dissembled goodness, so esteemed by men, and so appearing to them,
that can look alone upon the bark and outer rind of things, not so appearing
to the pure eyes of God, nor so accounted in his true judgment, that searches
into the marrow, and pith, and depth of all things. For God himself is the
chief good, and in a manner the only good, neither is any thing good, but by
participation from him; and so that goodness which is not (as it were) derived
from him, as from the original of it, nor directed to him, as to the scope and
end of it, because it has nothing to do with him, therefore indeed is not
goodness, whatsoever show it may carry to the world. So that as true
goodness, is will to be good in all things for Gods sake; so is false
goodness a will to seem good in some things for ones own sake. Ease may move
a man to do some good, and avoid some evil, so may credit, so may profit.
Now if any of these things do chiefly and principally work upon our wills, as
the motives and ends of our actions, then is that goodness but hypocrisy and
seeming goodness; and that man who living in the visible Church, suffers this
vice (of being induced but to some good things, not all; and withdrawn but
from some evil (not all) for his own credit, profit, ease, or the like
cause, not Gods sake only or principally) to sway and bear rule in him, he is
an hypocrite. Hypocrisy rules where it is not seen and lamented.
But when and in whom does this vice prevail? may some man say, I answer;
even then, and in that man, where and in whom it is not seen, opposed and
resisted by the spiritual weapons of frequent confessions, hearty petitions,
earnest lamentations, and diligent application of the word of God against it
for to beat it down: for all vices must be distinguished into two kinds:
some are more fleshly and gross (as I may term them) that do follow the
temperature of the body, and their strength and weakness does much what
depend upon the constitution thereof: such are wrath and choler, gluttony and
filthiness, and diverse other like. Now it is not of necessity, that these
vices be actually in all the corrupt generation of Adam; alone they are in
every one (as I may term it) virtually, so that if the same soul were put
into another body, whose temperature would fit the turn of those vices, it
would be as plentiful in them, as any other man is, or as it self is in any
other vice. Now there are other vices of a more spiritual nature (as I may
term it), I mean more immediately and principally flowing from the corruption
of reason and of will, and from the native defilement of the soul, in its
chief faculties; such as are pride, unbelief, forgetfulness of GOD,
inconsionableness, and by name, this hypocrisy. And these last kind of vices
are in all men indifferently since the first sin of Adam, by whom all became
dead in sins and trespasses; though it must not be denied, that in some they
grow more headstrong, than in others; and do more manifestly and violently
show themselves, according as they are more or less nourished with means and
occasions, and (as it were) soyled with helps and opportunities fit for them.
And as for all these vices, there do they prevail, and there they must be
called predominant, where they are not observed, bewailed, acknowledged,
oppugned, and that by spiritual weapons, and that constantly. For it is most
undeniable, that whersoeuer any vice is, there it rules, unless it be
mortified and crucified by the spirit: that is, by spiritual means and
ordinances, faithfully used, wherewith Gods Spirit fails not to work; and it
is as certain, that this grand member, or lim rather, of the body of death,
which we all bring into the world with us (I mean) hypocrisy is in every man;
wherefore it has dominion in him, unless it be, as was formerly spoken,
discerned and oppugned. And therefore also it is great reason, that such one
should receive his name from hypocrisy; and be entitled an hypocrite. And so
I would think, An hypocrite is a professor of Christianity, that does not see
and resist his hypocrisy.
an hypocrite maybe fitly called a professor of religion, that does not see,
bewail, and fight against his own hypocrisy, that is, his aptnes to make a
show of goodness, by doing only some things that are commanded, and avoiding
only some things that are forbidden for his own sake, not indeuouring to do,
and avoid all such things for Gods sake. Not the having, but the not oppugning
of hypocrisy, makes an hypocrite.
And this thing is worthy to be diligently marked, that I spoke of the
predominancie of vice, because it is of marvelous great use, for the true
trial of our felues, according to those things that afterward shall be set
down for that purpose. For not every one that feels in himself some of
these signs, and effects of hypocrisy, that shall be named, is by and by an
hypocrite: but he that has them in him, and takes no care to find them out: or
if he must needs find them out, continues not to make war against them by
prayers, and tears, and the sword of the spirit, and the like weapons of our
Christian warfare. And of the description of an hypocrite hitherto. I go
forwards to show you the sorts or kinds of hypocrites: for well may we say,
that a notable difference in degrees, may give just occasion of distributing
the things so differing, into diverse kinds, as the Scripture divides the
heavenly Bodies into the greater light for the day, and the lesser light to
rule the night.

CHAP. IIII. Of the diverse sorts of Hypocrites.
AND of hypocrites within the Church, Of hypocrites there are two kinds, the
gross hypocrite, and the close hypocrite.
we shall find two kinds; the greater hypocrite, and the lesser hypocrite: the
gross hypocrite and the close hypocrite; both well called hypocrites, because
in both, that vice preuayleth; and yet the one distinguished from the other by
the names of greater and lesser, or grosser andlesse gross, because the degree
of prevailing in one; is far higher and fuller than in the other. As even of
Leapers, some were not so much leprous as others; though both leapers and
uncured. And of diseases, some are more vehement than others, though both
mortal? And of wounds, some are deeper and broader than others, though both
deadly.

Now a gross hypocrite is he, in whom hypocrisy so far prevails, The
gross hypocrite is he, that knows himself but to dissemble, and yet cares not
for it.
that he knows himself but to make a show of goodness, for some sinister
respect, and yet cares not for it, out of the most exceeding story-hardnesse of
his heart. This hypocrite hides himself from the world, but not from himself;
he cousens others, but himself does not deceive himself: for he is full well
acquainted with his own intentions, and perfectly privy to the windings of his
behavior; in very deed sometimes, even smiling to think, how he beguiles the
world with a certain finenesse of outward carriage, and seeming. Many a man
makes a show to be religious, by doing diverse good things, in the mean space
knowing full well, that he does not in heart regard any of these things, but
alone that he thinks it fit so to woo the times, or to fish for the favor
of some particular man, or to compass some or other of his own earthly, and
self-respecting proiects. Many a parishioner comes to Church usually each
Sabbath, and receives the Sacrament commonly when his neighbors do, who does
in his heart no more esteem of Church nor Sacraments than a very Pagan; and so
much he does know by himself too, and yet is never touched with any remorse
of heart, for his so palpable, and to-himselfe-euident dissembling. Yea, it is
to be feared, that many a Divine studies hard, preaches (not learnedly alone,
but) holily (too for matter and words); and yet in his own soul makes no
more account of preaching, than of a play-booke, but that he seeks by this
means to live in the world, and to attain a Benefice. Many a son and
servant of a godly father or master, will hearken diligently at Sermon, and
bring home (by memory of writing) all the substance of the Sermon; yea, and be
diligent at prayers in the family, and perhaps also pray himself, with very
good and commendable petitions and words; when as all this while he is guilty
to himself, of making no reckoning of any goodness; and in truth cares for,
nor thinks of any thing else, but winning the favor of his parent or master,
or credit and reputation with those amongst whom he lives: and yet his soul
is no more moved with sorrow, for this his most gross guile, then if he were
the truest hearted person under heaven. For in truth, of all sins in the
world, nothing does bring a greater extremity of deadness, and senselessness
upon the soul, then this abominable hollownesse, when it prevails in this
degree, that now I am entreating of. Such hypocrites as these were Absolon and
Achitophel. Did not Absolon know, that he regarded not the religion of a vow?
Did not Achitophel know, that he made nothing of Gods house and the sacrifices:
but (even as a staule) the better to attain the favor of Douid, and his own
advancement? Doubtless they were well enough seen in their own purposes and
proiects, and could not but confess at the bar of their own conscience (but
that they would not consider of it), that in very truth they did but serve
themselves (and not God) in all their seeming religiousnesse. Such hypocrytes
also were the greater number of the Pharisees, which made our Savior Christ,
so tart and earnest against them at all times; for well did he see, that they
did all their good works to be seen of men; and that their forms of piety
and godliness were mere paintings, and that they regarded nothing, but to
make themselves great in the earth, and even under color of long praying,
sought only to devour widows houses. Phil. 1.15.16
Such also were those Preachers, of whom the Apostle affirms, that they did
teach Christ not purely, but of contention, as it were to put down Paul, and
to win the Garland from him, and so to add affliction to his bands. And
these be gross hypocrites.

Now there are a sort of dissemblers, The close hypocrite, is he which is an
hypocrite, and yet does think himself upright.
not so notorious nor so gross as these, and yet still under the power and
dominion of guile; who think themselves to be true Christians, and make
account, that they have that religion and piety, which they seem to have, and
yet in very truth have it not; but (as S. James 1.22:
James speaks) deceive their own selves, as well as others, though the worst
for them is, they cannot deceive God. There are a number of professors of
Religion in the Church, of whom all that know them, have a very good opinion:
supposing them to be most worthy Christians; yea, which in their own hearts
do verily think of themselves, that they be indeed the sons and daughters
of God, and that they serve him, and not themselves; when as in very deed,
they do nothing else but cosen themselves, and the whole world; for within,
they also are very rottenness, and serve themselves alone, and not the Lord
Jesus Christ. Such an hypocrite was the Apostle Paul before his calling, who
was strict in all the Legal observations, Philip. 3.6.
and unrebukable before men, Acts 22.3.
and zealous of the Law, and (as he thought) earnest for the God of his
fathers; yea, Romans 7.9.
who was alive before the Law came (in his own esteem) and made full account
to go to heaven; and yet for all that, he was but a whited tomb, and a
rotten carcass; a Jew without before men, not within before God, as himself
afterward did know, how (even by experience of his own case) to distinguish.

Now if any man demand, The close hypocrite accou^teth himself upright alone
out of ignorance, or for want of searching into himself.
how it should be possible for a man so far to beguile himself, as to
think, that he has that virtue indeed, which he has alone in show? The
answer is; that children and fools, will easily take a gilded copper ring,
for a ring of gold; and so blindness and want of understanding is the cause,
that many men do so far mis-take themselves. And again, the answer is, that
many a man thinks himself a great scholar, whose learning yet does nothing
excel his neighbors: because he compares himself with himself, and does
not prove himself by exercises of learning, and by comparing himself with
others: and so, many a man esteems his estate to be very good, when indeed he
is a plain banquerout, and owes more than he is worth; only because he is
slack and careless in casting up his reckonings: even so the close hypocrite
is an hypocrite, and yet knows it not; because out of his abundant self-love
(which makes him give ouereasie way to a good persuasion of himself), he is
loath to bestow pains, in searching and examining his own heart. Would a man
be frequent and careful in trying himself; he could not be an hypocrite, and
not know it? but often a thing lies hid, for want of due seeking, that with a
little careful searching, would soon be brought to light. So hypocrisy
rules, and yet is not perceived to rule, because men will not enquire much
after it; and the nature of it is, to be crafty in hiding it self. And these
be the two most remarkable sorts of hypocrites, whereof yet it must be
considered, that there is a great difference to be made.

The gross hypocrite is to God, The gross hypocrite is as loathsome to God,
as the most notorious sinner, not so the closer hypocrite.
the most hateful of all the sons of men: no kind of sinners are more
loathsome to God, than those that set themselves wittingly to serve their own
turns with a bare show of religion, when in their hearts they do quite and
clean neglect it. These men are more grievously to be punished, than any the
most notorious and infamous sinners amongst men. A thief, an whore, a
murderer, a witch, shall not receive a more bitter damnation, than this most
palpable dissembler: for he does most extremely abuse and dishonor God, and
his most sacred ordinances, dallying and mocking with him to his face, and even
scorning and deriding him to his teeth (as men use to speak) and trampling
under feet the richest and fairest of all his precious treasures of goodness.
But it is not so with the close or lesser hypocrite, that is an hypocrite, and
knows it not: he is not so bad either in Gods account, or in the account of
wisemen, as the notorious and open offender, neither shall his case be so hard,
as the case of such vile wretches, because his sin is less wilful, and
therefore also less odious in Gods eyes.

And from this difference it comes to pass, that the gross hypocrite is so
seldom converted, as a man may well make a question, Whether any man, having
any while continued in such palpable dissembling, were ever truly turned yea or
no. But the close hypocrite many times becomes true hearted: many a man (being
by education, or by casual falling into some good family, brought alone to a
form of piety, and yet not wilfully setting himself to be guilefull) is
after some time truly sanctified, and becomes vpright-hearted before the
Lord. A close hypocrite by the growth of his hypocrisy, may soon become a
gross hypocrite.
But a close hypocrite hardening himself against the Word often, will at the
last become a gross hypocrite, loosing even these shadows of goodness, which
at first he had, and wherewith he did for a time beguile his own soul. Judas
(in all likelihood) was at first a close hypocrite, not thinking himself to
dissemble, nor of purpose making a show to respect Christ for hope of future
advantage by him (in his heart mean while making no more account of him, than
of another man), but because he hardened himself in his sin of theft and
covetousness, at length hypocrisy grew stronger in him, and he became as
palpable a dissembler as ever was, when he durst betray his Master (that Son
of man) with a kiss. For sin will easily grow from a smaller quantity to a
greater, and from lesser degrees to more fullness and largeness. And this
distinction of hypocrites into two kinds, is of singular use in the
examination of our selves, and serves excellently to discover men unto
themselves, which else would easily think too well of themselves. Many a man,
because he knows himself to be none of those, that do wittingly play the
hypocrites, therefore imagines, that the name of hypocrite should not be given
to him: but now the knowledge of this difference, must make us more wary over
our own hearts, and stir us up to take heed, lest happily we be found in
the latter kind, though not in the former: for the truth is, neither of them
both can be saved, unless they reform themselves.

CHAP. V. Showing the general notes of difference betwixt the true man and the
hypocrite.
AND so have I dispatched the second point I undertook to show, viz. the sorts
of hypocrites. I now come to set down certain general notes of difference
betwixt the true-hearted, and the hypocrite. These are very many; I will insist
alone upon four, which to me seem the most evident and easily-discerned. An
hypocrite is most troubled with other men's sins, the upright hearted with his
own.
First, the hypocrite is a great find-fault abroad, a little find-fault at
home. Many things (almost all things) are out of order in his neighbors; in
him, little or nothing is amiss, if you will take his own judgment. Yea, the
smaller faults of others, he knows how, even skilfully to aggranate; his own
greater faults, he wants neither will nor wit to extenuate: so that in
thinking or speaking of his brethren, and those that live with him, and about
him, he can discover diverse great and strange enormities, and is much troubled
at them; in thinking or speaking of himself, all things are well, and in very
good order, at least not so far amiss, as to procure any great trouble or
disquietment to him. Other sins and wrongs (for those sins pinch hardest
that seem wrongful) make the hypocrite often even weary of his life: but
seldom do his own sins so much perplexe him; unless in the agony of
bitter tentation, as it fared with Judas, when his conscience and he fell out.
This note our Savior Christ does point us to, when he brings in the
hypocrite speaking to his brother in this wise, Match. 7.4.
Let me pull the moath out of thine eye, when in the mean space he felt not
the beam in his own eyes. A good man can see a moath abroad, but not with the
neglect of a beam at home: but the hypocrite will make a great stir about a
small matter in others; in himself the greatest are slightly passed over. But
how now the true-hearted? even quite contrary: the faults of others do less
trouble him, than his own; and he can far rather excuse and defend them
than himself. Yea, he has more to say against himself before God in secret,
than against all the world besides in public; and he will rather pass by a
sin any where, than in his own breast and life. He follows Christ's
counsel, and pulls out the beam first, that afterward he may see to pull
out the moath. Thus, Paul speaks bitterly against himself and his own
sins, esteeming himself as the least of all Saints, and the greatest of all
sinners; this was after his conversion, for before he would have had him by the
ears, that should have so entitled him. And indeed it must needs be so, both
with the hypocrite, and the upright, as has been spoken: for the hypocrite is
destitute of the love of God, and moved only by self-love, even to that
little goodness he seems to have. Now love (we know) is a blinding passion,
and will not suffer a man to discern the faults of him, whom he loves: but
the true Christian is endued with the love of God, and out of that love
embraces the courses of piety: but for himself, he is blessed with that
excellent grace, of loathing and abhorring himself in dust and ashes, out of
the knowledge he has of his own corrupt and sinful nature. And from this
hatred it cannot but follow, that he will prove a severe censurer of himself;
for hatred does whet on the wit to spy faults, and to amplify them.

Secondly, An hypocrite is confident of himself.
an hypocrite is always confident of himself, and of his own power, not to be
overtaken, at least, of such and such great sins, which (perhaps) he never yet
has committed; yea, he thinks always, and often brags, that all the world
should not draw him to do such abominations: and from this presuming of
himself it comes, that he is so bitter and pitiless, in speaking against
others that have offended; and also, that he is of himself so exceeding
ventrous, and so ready to rush upon occasions of evil, for that he misdoubteth
not himself, but imagines that he shall certainly do well for all that. And
in the maine matter, he is most of all confident, likely never so much as
suspecting (because he will not suspect) himself to be an hypocrite (unless
it be in some heavy cross or tentation) but still sleeps quietly in a secure
opinion of his own uprightness, and being sure GODS child. So was Paul once
alive without the Law: so the Jews with whom Christ talks, boldly did
affirm, even (say Christ what he could to the contrary) that they had God for
their Father, John 8.41.
though he assured them, they were of their father the devil; and therefore we
may be sure, they were at best but hypocrites. But now, The true christian is
fearful of himself.
the true Christian is jealous of himself, lest he also should be tempted, and
out of this doubting of his own strength, withdrawes himself from the
occasions of evil, lest that (before he were aware) be should be overcome by
them; yea, he is somewhat fearful ofentimes of his own estate, whether he
be a true Christian yea or no; meeting with so much falsehood, and so many
fruits of guile, that often he stands amazed at himself, and is feign to
call the matter into question with himself, and to discuss it much and hard,
before he can settle his mind in that assured persuasion of himself, that he
is upright. Thus the one (not fearing himself) takes all for granted, that he
thinks true of himself, without proouing; the other (out of much fear) is
much in proouing himself, and will not believe any thing, without proof.

A third note of difference is this, James 1.8. An hypocrite is changeable as
occasion serves, a true Christian constant.
the hypocrite is (as Saint James speaks) variable in all his ways, wavering
off and on, differing according to the difference of time, place, company, and
the like, if he be put to it. So in persecution he falls off: when wealth and
honor comes in, to draw him another way, he is gone; he is not still suitable
to himself. When piece is favored, he is for it; at other times, when it is
out of countenance, he is at best a newter, perhaps against it. In places where
goodness is in good request, he is good; elsewhere he alters himself, and
gives himself leave to cease being good; and for company, he is most times as
the company; and in truth is a man so apt to turn, that (unless he chance to
be of a sour, or a testie nature) he is for all companies. He is not the same
prinately, that publicly; betwixt God and himself, that before others; at
home and abroad; neither indeed strives to be. But the true Christian, he is
fixed and constant, always the same, rooted, grounded, established, and does
not give himself over to changes and alteration. I eonfesse, he also finds
it much harder to be good in some times, than in some; and in some places and
companies, than in others. The devil fails not to take the advantages of
time, place, company, and to press more hard upon him to do evil, when he
has these opportunities standing fauourably-for euill-doing; and likewise to
pull him backward (with more violence of tempting) from God, when these things
stand cross to goodness; yea, his corrupt nature is capable enough of the
helps to evil, and hindrances from good, which change of place and company
do bring with them. Yea, sometimes alterations in these things, may even
adaunt him for a while, and according as they find him weaker, make him now
and then start back from some good deed, or rush forward into some evil: but
still he would not alter, he is ashamed that he finds himself somewhat
altered, and he returns in conclusion to be the same, notwithstanding the
variation of these circumstances. A Compass Needlewell touched with the
Adamant, will always be turning Northward; and though with shaking it may for
a time be pulld backward, yet it returns again (after a little standing
setledly) to the old point, and (as soon as ever it can be suffered to follow
its own inclination) it trembles and hangs Northward: so whatsoever change of
things befall, a true Christian hangs in his desires to Godward; and if the
vehemence of a tentation, through fear or hope, do shake him off a little, yet
he quickly turns to Godward again, and is never well, till he have returned
to the point of obedience. Not so the hypocrite; for he (because he is not
good for Gods sake, but his own) if matters come to that pass, by occasion of
changes, in time, place and company, that goodness may be an hurt to him, or
badnesse a benefit, or no hurt; is wholly sweyed by respect of himself, and
takes leave to himself, to please himself in his so changing. The one is
chafe, the other a tree; so mainly they differ.

Last of all, An hypocrite is most troubled with the outside, a true Christian
with the inside. Matthew. 23.25.
the hypocrite (as Christ charge the Pharisees) are still making clean the
outside of the Cup and Platter, not regarding though the inside be full of
ravening and covetousness. Christ's meaning is plain enough, That dissemblers
look altogether to their outward or open actions and speeches; not regarding
the thoughts and corruptions of their hearts. All their care is, that they may
not be known to do evil: but the closer disorders of their inward man, they
can easily bear withal; it little vexes them to find, what evil
imaginations, and sinful inclinations they have within. But the true Christian
(according to the counsel that God does give to Jerusalem by Jeremiah) is
careful to wash his heart, Ierem. 4.14.
and to make his inside clean, and not his outside only. He labors to
keep his hand and tongue unspotted of the world; and if any blot cleave to
him, he is diligent to wash it off by humiliation: but he is also careful to
keep his soul pure from the hidden cogitations and inclinations after evil.
And if here it fall out, that he gather any filth, he scoureth the inside
with as much diligence, as the Pharisie used to do his hands. So then the
hypocrite has little to do with his heart: the evils thereof do not much
disquiet him, he takes small pains to resist and oppose the secret and dark
disorders of his soul. But the true Christian finds himself to have a world
of labor within: he is much vexed with these heart-euils, and has far more
to do in the inward rooms of his soul, than in the outer court of his
conversation. An hypocrite (like a slothful or sluttish servant) leaves the
nookes and corners unswept, and uncleansed; the true Christian, (as a true
lover of cleanness) is careful to ransacke, and purge every corner of his
soul: so you have the general differences betwixt the fruitful and the dry
branch. But the heart will easily put off these generalities; and therefore
most hypocrites will not find themselves by these notes: for nothing is more
common with our deceitful spirits, than when such general notes are given, to
make our selves believe, that all is well with us, though all be out of order.
I will therefore proceed to a more particular discovery of the hypocrite, by
showing how he agrees with the upright (and yet still differs from him) in the
four chief and principal graces, wherein he oftentimes does think himself
as abundant as his betters: but now I will so plainly lay open his failings,
that he shall no longer mistake (with so wide mistakings) unless he will
add wilfulness to his error.

CHAP. VI. How the hypocrite agrees with the true Christian in knowledge, and
withal also how they differ.
THere are four chief graces; and (as I may call them) Cardinal virtues,
which the holy Ghost does work in the hearts of all the true members of
Christ: these are Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, good Conversation, or
obedience. In each of these, the hypocrite does somewhat resemble the true
Christian, and yet in each the dissimilitude is as true and evident, as is
betwixt gilded copper and pure gold. An hypocrite may be as abundant in
knowledge as a true Christian, and more than many a true Christian.
Let us see the similitude and dissimilitude in Knowledge: Now it cannot be
denied, but that the false-hearted man may conceive as many divine truths in
his mind, as the truest Christian that is; yea, many times it falls out, that
the knowledge of the hypocrite does in quantity much exceed that of the true
Christian. Who can doubt, but that the Pharisees were better seen in the Law,
and in all points of Divinity, than the poor blind man? yet he was true; they
hypocrites. An hypocrite may have a better wit, a better memory, a quicker
conceit than the upright: he may have better education, more means, more
teaching than the upright; and consequently may much excel him in knowledge.
Nay, no doubt, but that a very dissembler may be so abundant in the knowledge
of the Word of God, that he may be able to discourse and talk admirably, of
any truth in Divinity: yea, to make a most excellent prayer, with exceeding
good words, and exceeding good matter; and also to preach the Word most
plausibly, and most fruitfully, so as to gain to himself the name and
estimation of a worthy and a godly preacher too. Who can make any doubt, but
that Judas did preach, and preach very worthily? and is it not manifest, that
there shall be some, who will plead prophesying, and casting out devils in the
name of Christ? who must yet be rejected with this grievous (and yet
righteous) answer, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Did not diverse also
preach Christ at Rome, not sincerely, but of contention? yea, and that so, as
the Apostle rejoiced in their preaching? Wherefore it cannot be denied, that
their preaching was sound and orthodoxe for the matter of it, and also
fruitful and profitable, for the event of it: for else it could not have
occasioned the Apostles rejoicing. You see then most evidently, that a very
dissembler may have so much knowledge, as to be a commendable and profitable
Minister of the Gospel; when many a man and woman, that is sincere and sound in
their very souls, may come far short of the twentieth part of that knowledge.

But where then is the difference of the sanctified, and of the unsanctified
knowledge, seeing in matter and degree it may be the same in both true and
false persons? I answer: In two things; The knowledge of an hypocrite does
swell him, of the true Christian does abase him. 1. Cor. 8.1.2.
in the effect, and in the extent. First, for the effect: the hypocrite is
puffed up with his knowledge; it swells him, and makes him big with conceit
of himself, and disdain of others. The Apostle Paul is plain in that point;
knowledge (meaning it of unsanctified knowledge, such as is that of hypocrites)
puffs up. And again; John 7.49.
If any man think that he knows any thing (that is, be conceited of his
knowledge), he knows nothing as he ought to do. You may see this point
apparently in the Pharisees; This ignorant people that know not the Law are
cursed. And again; Thou art altogether borne in sin, and do thou teach
us? Lo how the understanding of hypocrites does make them insult over others,
whom they think to understand less than themselves; how it fills them as with
conceit of themselves, so with contempt of others, as it were simple fellows,
and very punies, in comparison of them. For why? the hypocrite knows only to
talk, not to practice: he makes his knowledge a rule for his tongue and
lips in discourse, not for his life and deeds in conversation: he never
uses his insight into the Law, to examine himself thereby; and to mark, how
far short his practice comes of his knowledge: but alone imployes it (if
need be) to discourse, to teach others, and reprove others. Hence it comes,
that his knowledge does heave him up, and like meat ill-digested, begets the
wind of selfe-conceitednesse; because he will needs imagine himself so much
the better, by how much he conceiueth more things, and can discourse better:
for he with his knowledge will lay heavy burdens upon others, but himself will
not touch them with one finger; that is, he is a great exactor of duty from
others, and here he straineth himself to the utmost; but he takes leave to
himself to be careless enough of doing after his knowledge, as a man that
holds a lant-horne in his hand before others to guide them right, himself
not heeding the light that is in his own hand, nor caring where he sets his
foot. But how now the true Christian? Why he, the more he knows, the more he
discerns how short he comes of his duty, and so is he the more mean in his
own eyes, and the more humble, and the more ready to learn of others, and to
take directions from them. His understanding does depresse him, rather than
exalt him in his own conceit, because he uses it as a strait rule, to
discover to himself the crookedness of his own actions, and to make himself
see his own exceeding great defectiuenesse in those things, wherein he ought
to be far more plentiful and forward. The nearer his knowledge comes to
perfection (because he uses his knowledge as a Lant-horne to his feet, and a
light to his paths), the more he perceives how far short himself comes
of perfection; for as he knows much, so is he ever calling upon himself to
do what he knows, and falling out with himself, for not striving to do
more, seeing God has pleased to make him understand so much. You may see this
most evidently in the Apostle Paul; there was not in all the earth (whilst he
lived) a man of a larger heart, more richly and plentifully adorned with the
knowledge of all the mysteries of godliness, and of a more deep understanding
in things divine; and yet there did not walk on the face of the earth, a more
humble man, a more mean in his own eyes, more willing and ready to submit
himself to all baseness, to bear any thing, and endure any thing, and to be
made and accounted as the refuse of the world, as an abject, of no reputation.
To conclude therefore, the knowledge of the hypocrite does swell his heart, and
lift him up with conceit of himself; the knowledge of the upright does abate
the conceit of himself, and makes him viler and viler in his own eyes: and
this is a most sensible difference. The true Christian, the more he knows,
the more ready he is to learn of any man, out of his humbleness; for he
knows as well the imperfection of his knowledge, as any other thing. The false
Christian, if he have any more than common quantity of knowledge, does even
almost scorn to learn of any body, because he still conceiueth his knowledge
to be more than it is.

Further, The hypocrite will wink against some truths: the true Christian is
ready to yield to every truth.
for the extent of knowledge, the difference is clear; the hypocrite for all
his large knowledge, great learning, quicke-sightednesse, is yet almost always
wittingly ignorant of some one or other duty, sin or truth, that he might
know, if he would but use his eyes to look about him. It may be ever said of
him in some, or other point, as it is said of them in Peter, 2. Pet. 3.5.
This they know not, and that willingly. What duty for fear of loss,
disgrace, or the like inconvenience he has no will to perform; that he will
not see to be a duty, lest his conscience should check him, for not performing
it. And some fault, that he does not resolve to leave, because it is
profitable, delightful, or otherwise beneficial; that, he cannot perceive to
be a fault, that he may not be enforced to fault himself for not amending it.
In what truths it would be against his credit (as he supposes) to change his
opinion, those he will not see to be truths, though he do see them: Matthew.
13.15.
yea, he winketh with his eyes (as the Scripture speaks of the Jews and
Pharisees) and will make a shift not to know in the very sunshine of clearest
light, in such points. The Pharisees saw enough to persuade them, that Christ
Jesus, the son of Mary, was the true Messiah: Romans 1 18.
but yet they could not be persuaded of it, they would not yield unto it, and
they could not see it at length, because they would not confess it. This is to
detain the truth in unrighteousness, a plain fruit of hypocrisy, when the
light beats upon a man's soul, and he begins to be convinced, and to
think within himself, sure this is a truth; yet because the following of that
truth would make against his commodity, or his credit, or some other carnal
desire of his, therefore he will cast about again, and set his wit upon the
tenters, and never give over plodding, till he have met with some trick or
other that may delude himself, and hide the truth from his eyes, and (if it
may be also) from the eyes of others. This is, in seeing, not to see, and to
hoodwinke ones own self; yea, to give ones self over to the God of this
world, to have his eyes blinded by him; and so blind will the hypocrite be for
all his knowledge, making himself also, as Christ tells the Pharisees, a
blind leader of the blind. But the vpright-hearted man is quite contrarily
disposed; He is willing, desirous, ready, to know all that God teaches, and to
see all that the Lord reuealeth unto him. If the light begin to shine upon his
eyes, he is careful to open his eyes, and let in the light; for he knows how
harmefull it is, to turn day into night, by shutting the windows (as it were)
to stop out the sunshine. If the Lord please to offer the knowledge of any
thing formerly not known unto his conscience, and he find himself beginning
to be persuaded, that this is doubtless so or so, by such proofs or reasons
out of the word of God: he does not struggle and strive against his own
thoughts, because of inconveniences which he sees will follow him, if he should
yield: but setting aside all such respects, and little accounting of any
inconveniences, in comparison of smothering up the light of his own soul, he
resolves to be convinced, what ever come of it, and so betakes himself unto
God, and prays, and seeks knowledge, and finds it, as you see in
Cornelius. A good man uses his knowledge to guide his affections; and
therefore will yield to know that, that may make against him in diverse
respects. An hypocrite suffers his affections to overrule his judgments, and
therefore will not know that, that may cross his affections; the one guides
his foot by his eye, and he will see any thing that is offered to his sight;
the other guides his eye by his foot, and if he can possibly make any shift,
will not see what he minds not to follow. How quickly was Peter, and (by
him after) the godly Jews, convinced of the calling of the Gentiles? but how
wilfully did the wicked Jews (which were but hypocrites) resist this truth,
and forbid the Apostles to preach to the Gentiles? And thus we have showed the
likeness and unlikeness of the true and false-hearted in knowledge. We will
now enquire, how they differ and agree in faith.

CHAP. VII. Showing how the hypocrite and upright do agree and differ in faith.
FAith is a most excellent grace, consummated and accomplished by two distinct
acts of the mind: by assenting to the known truths, and applying the same to
every man's self in particular. In both these acts of Faith, the true-hearted
and dissembler do both agree and disagree. For the first; The hypocrite
assents to the divine truths, as well as the true christian.
the hypocrite as well as the faithful saint of God does assent unto the
doctrine of the Scriptures, persuading himself in his-heart, that doubtless
it is from God, and is therefore a most certain truth: by name he may belceue
the doctrine of the Gospel, (concerning the salvation of man by Jesus Christ,
God and man,) to be most sure and undoubted. Thus it is said of Simon Magus,
that he believed. The stony ground also did believe: and there were that
believed in Christ so, as that yet he did not trust himself with them, which
manifestly proves that they were but hollow. And surely Ananias and Saphira
did persuade themselves that the Gospel was a true doctrine, The hypocrite
assents to be firm and rooted, as the true christian does.
and gave credit unto it as unto a sure and excellent truth. But the difference
is, that the hypocrite assenteth alone confusedly and slightly, to the whole,
in gross, and with a kind of faint consent: not to each particular part, with
a firm and well grounded assent. This difference our Savior Christ notes in
the Parable of the grounds, Mark 4.5.6.
when he tells us that the seed in the stony ground had not much earth, and
that therefore it withered. The hypocrite hearing the doctrine of the Gospel,
or being brought up under it, takes it upon trust, thinks, sure it is true,
and (having a little light affoorded him from GOD in the reading or preaching
of the Word,) thinks sure this must needs be from God, it cannot but be so,
and there an end. A more distinct, particular and serious consideration of the
things revealed, he stands not upon: he does not muse and ponder much of the
excellency, fruit, benefit, divinity, and heaven linesse of Gods word, and the
several parts thereof: but the Christian, by much pondering upon the Word, and
by often resolving his faith into the truth, wisdom, and power of God, who is
the author of the Word, is fast grounded and established in the faith. The true
Christian cease not to make himself feel the power of the Gospel in
himself more and more, and so indeed he is rooted in beleening; the
hypocrite neglects the thus pondering and musing of the Word, and taking
experience of the efficacy of it in himself; and so, soon withers or is
choked up. The house that has a foundation will stand in strong blasts, the
tree that is deeply rooted, will not easily be blown up, but want of root
and foundation causes the house to tumble, and the tree to be blown up, This
difference, though it be a certain difference, yet is not so manifest, till
the days of tribulation come, or till some trial be made by some means. For
often the true Christian is much more molested with tentations of doubting
about the truth of the Word (as the holy man was that said, Psalm. 73.13.
I have washed mine hands in innocence in vain), than the hypocrite. For Satan
knowing that the dissembler does but dissemble (as no doubt he can well enough
tell where he reigns and rules) is not so busy to disquiet his thoughts;
yea verily if he have any doubtings, he lets them go as they came, because he
builds not his hopes and happiness upon the truth of this doctrine. But the
true Christian, as having laid (as it were) the wager of all his bliss upon
the truth of the Gospel, is exceedingly vexed and discontented with these
doubting thoughts: even abhorring himself, and ashamed of himself, that in so
evident and excellent truths, he should find any aptness to make any
question. And this also Satan perceiving, does strive to molest him continually
with such doubtings, and with the stirring up of many objections, which he
cannot tell which way better to answer, than by loathing them, and being much
discontented at their rising in him. So that I say, the strength and firmness
of the upright persons assent, above the dissemblers, is not so evident till
the day of trial: but then it most manifestly discovers it self. For the
one will by no means be turned from embracing and following the believed
truth, because he believes it steadfastly, being rooted in faith; the other
quickly gives over following it, because he believed it faintly, having taken
little pains to feel his assent unto it, with much strength of assurance,
gotten by much continuance of meditation about it. Thus the winds and waves
must show where is a foundation to others; but he that is founded, may know
that he is founded, by the labor he does bestow in digging deep to lay the
foundation; that is, in much musing to resolve himself of the truth of the
Word, by finding the powerful operation of it in himself daily; and he that
has not a foundation, may (if he will) know that he has none, by his neglect
of this labor and pains, to lay it in his soul: but faith does apply as well
as consent. It is manifest, that our justifying faith is a putting on of Christ
Jesus, an eating and drinking of him, a receiving of him, that is, an applying
of him to every man's self: for how can either food nourish, or apparel keep
warm, if it be not applied? and how should Christ profit a man, if he be not
made his own?

Now the hypocrite also seems to apply the promise of the Gospel, The
hypocrite does apply the promise of salvation by Christ to himself, as well as
the true Christian.
and Christ, and his benefits offered therein, even unto himself in special,
being strongly conceited, that Christ is his Savior, and that God is his God,
and that he does rest and stay himself upon God, and upon Christ for his own
salvation; and this he does sometimes so violently, that he thinks himself
to make no doubt of his being saved, being in this matter also given over to a
strong delusion, to believe a lie. Surely the stony ground could never have
gone away rejoicing as they did, if they had not persuaded themselves of their
own particular welfare, and had not made full reckoning to be made partakers
of the benefits of that doctrine, which they did embrace. And did not the Jews
in the eighth of John, boast with great boasting, that they had one Father,
even God? And can any man doubt, but that Ananias and Saphira did at first
persuade themselves, that they should be saved by Christ as well as others? But
let us see the difference then, which stands in these things. The hypocrite,
The hypocrite so applies the promise, that he neglects to apply the
commandments and the threats: but the true christian applies all indifferently:
he does ouer-greedily feed upon the promises (as a child will do on sweet
things, even to surfeting; and (as you know) children are apt to eat their
meat without bread): in the mean space not caring to apply to himself the
Commandments for his direction, and the threats for his humiliation; yea, the
more forward he is in taking to himself the promises by way of usurpation, the
less careful he is of taking the precepts and threats of the Word, and laying
them close to his soul also. Thus he makes it manifest, that it is not the
holy Ghost which does enable him, to lay hold upon the promises, and to rest
himself upon them: but that it is the presumptuous boldness of his own
self-love, which makes him forward, to lay violent hands upon any thing, that
he thinks is good for him, and to pull it to himself (as it were) whether
God will or no. But now the true hearted Christian does in the same degree,
apply the other parts of the Word to himself: that the promises of salvation,
and Gods goodness in Christ. He does not sever, what God would have joined:
but (because it is the good Spirit of God, that frames his heart to receive
Christ, and rely upon him, therefore by the direction of the same Spirit,
which must needs move him to be of the same mind toward those things that are
equally true, and equally from God) he feeds also upon the sour herbs of the
threats, to humble himself as need requires, and cease not to urge the
precepts upon himself for his continual direction. So the hypocrite
separateth, what God would have joined, picking out of the Word that, that
likes him best, I mean the comfortable promises; and casting the rest behind
his back. But the true Christian joins those things together, that God would
have joined; making use of the whole Word to himself, as well, as much, as
carefully (in their times and places) as of the promises. Again, the hypocrite
applies the promises falsely, not according to the tenor of the Scripture, The
hypocrite applies the promises falsely to himself, not regarding to seek for
in himself the conditions by which the promises are limited.
but according to his own fancy; not duly deducting his particular
persuasion, out of the general directions of the Word: but sophistically
concluding in his own behalf, according as best likes him. The Lord has
made many gracious promises in his Word; by name, that principal promise of
salvation. And it has pleased God to limit these promises to those that do
such and such things, requiring (as you would say) certain conditions to be
performed on his part, that must enjoy these promises. Now the hypocrite, he
never looks to his part, nor minds what care he has of standing to the
condition, but gapeth after the good thing promised, without any more ado, and
thinks himself sure of that upon some sleithy reason, and there an end.
Therefore John Baptist warned them, that they should not begin to say, we have
Abraham to our Father, but should bring forth fruits worthy amendment of
life. Here he shows the fore (as it were) of their presuming and false
faith, by telling them of the remedy. An hypocrite, he loves to be short in
applying the promises, and does it by enthymems; Christ dyed to save sinners,
and therefore I shall be saved; forgetting to tell himself what things are
required of such sinners as Christ must save, and to consider before he draw
that conclusion, whether himself have the properties of such a sinner, yea or
no. Or thus, I shall be saved, because I come to Church, receive the
Sacraments, do many good things, or the like; not remembering that more is
required than all this, of him that would be saved. But now the true Christian,
The true-hearted applies truly, still urging himself to performance of these
conditions.
he is more wary, and better advised in drawing his conclusion, he will be sure
to find in himself those graces, which are required in him whom the promises
do concern, before he conclude to himself, that he shall receive the
promises. He will not content himself to say, The Temple of the Lord, The
Temple of the Lord; I come to Church, etc. nor to say, I have Abraham for my
Father: but he must find in himself fruits worthy amendment of life, or else
he will never give credit to his own thoughts, that it shall be well with him:
So the one does build his special conclusion upon false grounds, and falsely
deducteth his particular assurance out of the general promise, the other
truly gathers his comfortable assurance to him self, and will not hold fast
his conclusions, unless he can by the Word of God assuredly justify his
premises. The one reasons falsely out of GODS Word, because he neglects to
prove both propositions from thence: the other is never well, till he can make
good, by evidence of Scripture, both parts of his reason, and so his conclusion
must needs hold good and sure: for the holy Ghost having wrought those graces
in him, which the promises do specify; causes, that by comparing himself
with the promises, he can soundly comfort his own heart: but the hypocrite not
having these graces in him, and yet desirous to enjoy the benefits offered,
will rather believe upon slight proofs, than that he will seem to himself
to want a part in so precious and excellent benefits. Thus the difference of
the faith of the true Christian and the hypocrite has been laid open. The
next thing wherein we must make a comparison betwixt them, is in the point of
repentance.

CHAP. VIII. Showing how the repentance of hypocrites may be distinguished from
the repentance of true Christians.
REpentance (which is a turning from sin unto God) has two parts: the one
humiliation, in regard of the faults that have been already committed; and the
other reformation, in regard of that part of the life which is to come
hereafter, by leaving the evil one has lived in, and performing the good he
has neglected. An hypocrite may go a great way, both in humiliation and in
reformation, and yet he will never go far enough. Let us consider what he
can do, and wherein he gives himself leave to fail. An hypocrite then may
come to be very sorry for some sin or sins that he has committed, An
hypocrite may confess some sins to God with great sorrow.
and that so, as to weep for it with some plenty of bitter tears, and also
he may come to confess his sin or sins, not alone to men in some cases,
but in some cases also to God in secret. Exodus: 9.17. and 10.16.
And thus Pharaoh once or twice acknowledged to Moses, that he had sinned: no
doubt with great sorrow for the present time, that he had so long continued
obstinate. So did Saul with tears confess to David, 1. Sam. 14.17. and 26.21.
O my son David, I have sinned, and thou art more righteous than I. So Judas
came with extremity of grief in his heart (and no doubt also in his face)
mainely crying out of himself, and saying, Matthew. 27.4.
I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. Yea, you know that Ahab did put on
sackcloth, and went softly, and fasted for his sin, and that so as God did
note it in him, and forbear him for it somewhat; which he would not have done,
if he had not seen him inwardly sorrowful for it, and if he had not even
secretly confessed it unto him. 1. Kings 21.27.
So far may a dissembler go (for the best of these was but a dissembler) in
being humbled. But yet he does much differ from the humiliation of the true
godly man in these things. The hypocrites confession and sorrow, reaches alone
to some grosser sins, not to the lesser corruptions, as that of the true
hearted does. Psalm. 51.5. Psalm. 19.12: Romans 7.13.14.
First, the hypocrite is sorry for some one or two gross external faults,
that are more than ordinarily notorious and foul, as is to be seen in Judas
and Ahab, and Saul; murder, shedding innocent blood, and seeking to slay the
innocent. These crimes (you see) touched these dissemblers: but you never heard
an hypocrite crying out as David; In sin was I conceived; and again, Lord,
who can know his errors? purge me from secret faults: nor with the Apostle,
vexed with the law of his members, drawing him captive to sin, and crossing
the law of the spirit within him. The corruptions of the heart, the secret and
unknown, and esteemed little disorders of heart and life, especially (the
fountain of all mischiefs) the filthy stinking guzzle of Original sin, the
hypocrite laments not, bewaileth not, confesses not with sorrow and anguish of
heart to God or man; but alone if he fall into some gross notable crime, he
is much troubled and grieved for it, and sometimes very sorrowful in
confessing it. But the Christian man can find out more hidden corruptions, and
acknowledge and bewail them, and feel the burden of less grievous crimes,
yea of things by the most, esteemed no sins; and for them can shame and
blame, and condemn himself before God. So the one washes his heart (as I
said before), the other his hands only, The hypocrites sorrow and confession
comes but by fits, the true Christians is ordinary and usual.
at the best.

Again, the confession of the hypocrite and his sorrow comes but by fits and
starts, sometimes, now and then, once or twice, and use it not. Seldom have
you Pharaoh and Saul saying, We have sinned, they are not often in this tune.
It is a rare and unusual thing, to see Ahab going softly, to hear him sighing
for his sin. For indeed it arises not from any such ground in them, as may
make it lasting or perpetual; namely, a true hatred of sin, or love of God:
but alone from a fearful expectation of punishment, or a wearines of crosses
and afflictions. But now the true Christian is very constant in his confessing,
and (at least) striving to lament sin. It is his usual and constant course,
to blame himself before God for his daily and particular transgressions: and
he is not well almost any day, unless he do take some time, to accuse and
judge himself before his Maker. For indeed he walks with God, and seeks
to approve his heart unto him, and therefore cannot but be frequent in laying
open his heart unto him, and pouring out his soul before him. His heart will
often so smite him, as to drive him into Gods presence, and make him say, O
Lord, I have sinned greatly, and done exceeding foolishly: but Lord do away
the sins of thy servant. Yea, he never almost commits any sin, which he
knows to be a sin, but he will confess it, taking daily notice of his
daily slips, that he may the better confess them. So the sorrow and confession
of hypocrites is in a quaume, when the good mood comes upon them; as a dry
hole that is full of water upon a great shower: but the confessing and mourning
of the true Christian is daily constant, perpetual, in a settled and usual
course; as the running of water in a fluent stream, that has issue from some
living Fountain, or Wellhead.

Again, The hypocrites confession and grief is by force put upon them, the
true Christians by themselves willingly labored for.
the sorrow and confession of hypocrites is likely put upon them by a kind of
violence, they be even forced to it by some accident, so pressing them for the
time, that they can neither will nor choose, as the common saying has. This is
evident in the forenamed examples. What made Ahab walk in sackcloth with a
soft pace? but because he was threatened, the ruin of all his household, and
the utter subversion of all his posterity: a tidings that could scarce choose,
but make the heart of any Grandfather to ache and melt within him. When did
Pharaoh say, The Lord is righteous, I and my people are sinners? but when the
plague lay so heavy upon him, and stuck so close unto him, that he knew not
which way in the world to turn himself. And what made Saul break forth with
tears, and say, I have sinned? but that David had then even gone beyond all
his expectations quite and clean, and had utterly overcome him with kindness,
by requiting his evil with good. So Judas confessed not his treason, till the
very sparks of hell fire were all on a light flame within his soul; I mean,
till the hideousness of a bitter and exasperated conscience did even furiously
pursue him, and drive him to this too-late and bootelesse remedy. So the
confession of hypocrites is wrested and extorted from them, even as that of a
traitor by the torture of the rack; and his grief for his finne is a
compelled grief, as that of a slave under the whip: but the true godly man,
and faithful servant of Christ, does voluntarily, and of his own accord bring
himself before the Lord in humble and sorrowful confessions (though no such
violence be offered unto him), even out of a kindly work of grace, moving and
inclining him still to desire to be at one with God. The child of God does
even long to be sorrowful for his sins; and when no cross, affliction, or
tentation lies upon him, nor no other means of working him to grief is used;
then he takes pains to rend his own heart, and out of a good will to God,
and in a kind of comfortable and sweet sense of reconciliation with him, does
acknowledge his wickedness. In very truth Gods child sometimes (having almost
killed himself with a presumptuous sin) is put to roaring and crying, through
the weight of Gods hand, lying heavy upon him day and night (as David says of
himself), Psalm. 32.3.
before he can come to confess his sin against himself. But this is a rare
case with a Christian heart, that it should need compulsion, to bring it down
in confession before God: 1. Chron. 21.8
usually he does (as David after the numbering of the people) through the
smiting of his own heart, betake himself unto the Lord, and say, O Lord, I
have done exce^eding foolishly: Matthew. 26.75.
and as Peter after his denial of his Master, before any cross, before any
force offered, out of his own tenderness of conscience, go forth by and by,
and weep bitterly. Neither yet is Gods child so insensible of a cross, but
that his afflictions do make him look unto his sins, and bestow those
tears in lamenting them, which the power of nature has stirred up. And it is
an happy effect of his chastisements, that they increase his godly sorrow, and
so help to take away his sins; but yet he does not only mourn then: he does
labor, even in prosperity to mourn for sin, and to make use of Gods
kindness in bestowing benefits, to become a means of humbling him, and making
him grieve; and in a word, godly sorrow is a content unto him, and nothing does
him more good, than that he can kindly bewail his sins, and mourn over
Jesus Christ. A stinging cross, a bitter tentation, an earnest exhortation,
and the power of a good Sermon, may draw an hypocrite to tears: but a godly
man without any of these things, will set himself to mourn, and lament, and
most willingly (out of the love he bears to God, whom his sins have
offended) will even turn his joy into sorrow, and his laughter into tears.
Thus you see the difference of hypocritical humiliation from that, that is
upright.

Reformation is another part of repentance, and here we will show, how much the
hypocrite may reach unto, An hypocrite may amend his life very much by the
means of the Word preached.
and wherein he is defective. An hypocrite may reform diverse things that are
amiss in him, and that at the preaching of the Word, and by means of the
exhortations which he hears in a Sermon: but herein he fails, that in some
one or other thing, he must be held excused. He brooks not the generality of
that little large word (all), you kill him when you press upon him that
universal exhortation, Ezech. 18.
Cast away from you all your transgressions. O no! this he cannot do: some one
or two faults are (as it were) darlings unto him; his soul is in love with
them, and he must be dispensed with, he cannot leave them. In any thing else
he will be ruled by God: but in such a thing he must needs crave pardon,
though it be a sin; he hopes it is not so great, but that he may be borne
withal therein: for alack he cannot live unless he do it, or so forth. The
hypocrite has evermore some hand or foot that he will not cut off; some eye
that he will not pull out, and fling from him; some dearly beloved sin, some
most precious evil, some most sweet or gainefull offense, that he cannot tell
which way in the world to forgo; and therefore loves not to hear of amending
it, would not be reproved for it, would not be called upon to forsake it,
would not think of it, but would turn away his thoughts from it, and would
feign have his conscience also forbear to urge him in that matter. The
hypocrite still likes some one sin, so that he would not hear of it; the
true Christian would mend all, and desires to hear most of those he can least
reform. Psalm. 119.6.
He keeps some one or other wickedness under his tongue, as a most dainty
morsel, which he cannot find in his heart to spit out. But now the true godly
man desires, and purposes in all things to please God; he has respect (as
David speaks) to all Gods commandments, without picking or choosing: he takes
the whole Law as it lies before him, and frames his will to bow and bend
which way soever God will have it: whatsoever thing he knows to be a duty,
that he resolves to do, without any further excepting or cauilling; and
whatsoever he knows to be a sin, that he determines to cast from him, what
ever it be, and what ever may follow thereupon. He knows that God is a
Sovereign commander, and that his will must be followed in one thing, as well
as another, James 2.10.
and that he which keeps the whole Law besides, failing (yet wittingly) in
one point, is guilty of all. Wherefore he does not dare to give himself a
license, of departing from the known way of Gods Law in any thing. Indeed a
good man finds some sins harder to him to leave than others, and some
duties harder than others to perform: but yet his purpose, determination,
resolution, is to be found obedient to God in those things also; and he does
most earnestly strive against his own corruptions there, where he finds them
most apt, to be opposite to Gods Word; and takes most pains to make himself
straight, there where he finds himself most crooked: whereas the hypocrite
tolerates some evil in himself, and takes liberty so to transgress, making
some shift or other to daube up his conscience, and to secure himself from the
checks thereof. Thus Judas would never leave purloyning and licking his fingers
(as the prouer be has it) after once the bag was committed to his custody.
The true heart allows no one known sin whatsoever; the hypocrite evermore
allows (at least) some one sin, that he either knows, or suspects to be
sin. Satan has always some peculiar, or exempt place in his heart and life,
where he may reign without control, and whether the jurisdiction of Gods
Word may not be suffered to extend.

And yet sometimes also the hypocrite will seem to make a proffer of pulling
his neck out of Satan's yoke, The hypocrite for a little will make an offer to
amend his best beloved sin.
by promising to leave, and beginning (for a spirt) to make as if he would
leave his most beloved sin. but quickly return to follow it with greedines;
the Christian never returns again to an allowed practice of it.
So Simon Magus for a little while began to desist from following his
sorceries: and Pharaoh said once or twice, that he would let the people go:
and twice Saul promised David fair, that he would surcease to trouble him any
further. But this mood holds not long, he quickly returns to his old
wallow, and laps up (like an unclean curre) his filthy vomit, which he had
formerly disgorged. I do not mean, that he is overtaken only to do the same
fault again, once or twice, or oftener (for that may befall the true Christian
also), but he proceeds to allow himself in doing of it, to go on in it, and
follow it with greediness; excusing it, or hardening himself in it, at least
coming to this pass, that he cannot leave it, that it is not possible; and
therefore it is in vain for him to strive about an impossible matter, and so
he returns to make a trade of his sin, for all his good promises and offers
of reformation; as we see in Simon, in Pharaoh, in Saul, and in others. But
the true hearted having once set in, to cast off his beloved sin, does never
again return to allow it, and to wallow in it. He may fall again, perhaps
more then once or twice (and these relapses are very dangerous, and very
troublesome): but he will never step back to a resolution of continuing so to
sin, and of thinking that he cannot choose, and there is no remedy; but still
he arises out of the mire, renews his confession, renews his purpose of
amendment, sets in afresh to bewail his faults, and brings himself again to
a firm purpose of sinning no more, and in that purpose holds himself so long,
till at length (it may be after many foiles) he attaineth strength to offend no
more grossly in that matter, whatsoever it may be. Thus his faith becomes his
victory, and so he prevails against sin, and keeps himself, that the
wicked one does not touch him, and that he commits none iniquity. And so
much of this third point, concerning the agreement of the repentance of the
hypocrite and the true hearted, as also their differences. It remains to
speak in the like manner of their likeness and unlikeness, in the matter of
good life. I know that the leading of a good life, might well be referred to a
branch of the second part of repentance, viz. reformation: but I desire to make
it a distinct head of duties, for the more full and distinct handling of it in
this respect, for which I have now undertaken to speak of it.

CHAP. IX. Showing how the good conversation of the hypocrite differs from the
good conversation of the upright.
A Good conversation consists in freedom from sinful practices, An
hypocrite may be very free from reproachful crimes.
and care of doing the things commanded by God. The hypocrite in both these may
have attained a large commendation before men: it may fall out; that he shall
live all his whole life long, without the committing of any such sin, as
should cause him to inherit reproach in the world: what actions are grossly
wicked, and palpably shameful before men, of those the false hearted may
perhaps be much more free than the sincere Christian. So the Pharisie (which
yet was not justified before God, and therefore was void of vprightnes), could
make his boasts before God, that he was neither whoremonger, nor extortioner,
nor drunkard (and doubtless he might have said), nor curser, nor swearer, nor
murderer. This brag may seem to prefer him before David; and before Lot, and
before Noah; for never an one of them at his last end, was able to affirm so
much of himself. Paul also, when he was a Pharisie, and a notable hypocrite
yet (as concerning the Law) did live without rebuke, as himself afterward
(when he had no lust to tell untruths in his own behalf) affirms of
himself. An hypocrite in his freedom from gross sins, boasts himself and
disdaineth others, the true hearted humbles himself and pitties others. Luke
18.11.
But the difference betwixt the true and false in this point, stands in two
things. First, the hypocrite in this innocence of his, is proud of himself,
exalting himself with cracks and vants upon every little occasion, and
insulting over others, that are not alike innocent, with a plain contempt and
disdain of them. Yea, when he compares the grosser sinners with himself, he
does it not alone with scorn of them, but sometimes also with a kind of
bitterness. Thus our Savior brings in the Pharisie, crowing over the poor
Publican, because himself was not like him, and thanking God (that is put in
for form sake) that he was no such manner of man, as this Publican. And you
know, how bitter the Pharisees were against the poor sinners; even, so that
they would not endure to be touched by them, or once to sit at meat with
them. All this arises from the blindness of the hypocrite, who (not having
ever been discovered unto himself, nor perceiving the sinfulness and
foulness of his own nature) imagines, that no more evil abides within,
than shows it self without; and that his wickedness of heart is no greater,
than that which breaks forth in act: so foolishly taking to himself the
praise of Gods restraint, as if a man should commend the carcass for not
stinking, when it was imbalmed. Now the true Christian in his immunitie from
such like palpable evils (if it fall out that the Lord have pleased so to
restrain him, for often it is otherwise with him), yet knowing the loathsome
foulness of his own heart, and being well acquainted with the bottomless
quagmire of his own original corruption, is still humble and base in his own
eyes: for though he have not committed so foul abominations; yet no thanks
unto himself, but to the goodness of God in restraining; for he of himself is
even as bad by nature, and should have done as bad (he knows), if the Lord had
in like manner given him over to himself. Hence it comes also, that he does
find his heart affected, as with just zeal against gross sinners, so with a
pitiful and remorsefull disposition toward them, whom he perceives to be no
whit more wicked than himself should be, if the Lord did not preserve him. But
if the true Christian have either before his calling, lived in, or after his
calling, slipped into some gross wickedness (as Paul was a persecuter before
his conversion; David committed murder after) than is he for his whole life
time after, much abashed in the remembrance of it, and made exceeding vile in
his own eyes. Thus the Publican durst scarce advance his eyes to heaven, but
with a countenace replenished with tokens of grief and shame, smote himself
on the breast, and begged mercy. And so the Apostle is very much in vilifying
himself (notwithstanding the abundant labors of his Apostleship) for his
former bloody (though ignorant) persecution.

Secondly, the hypocrite (though perhaps he be not defiled with the grossest
and foulest acts of evil, yet) makes no bones of evils of the same kind, in
smaller degrees, but commits them freely without check of conscience, or any
remorse of humiliation for them afterward. Some hypocrites are forward in
professing religion some go but the common pace.
This is manifest by the Pharisees misinterpreting of the Law, to serve their
turns this way: they condemned murder, but allowed revenge: they blamed
forswearing, or perjury, smaller oaths they take none heed unto; they forbad
adultery, but took no care to cut off the hand, and pull out the eye (that
is, to mortify the wantonness and impuritie of their senses); as our Savior
shows in that place they should have done. Doubtless the course of their
lives was answerable to their interpretation of the Law; and their lives were
as crooked, as they would make the ruler to seem. Contrarily, the true
Christian (though sometimes he may be overcome in tentation to commit some
gross sin, yet) is usually careful to resist all the degrees of sin, even
the very beginnings; and the first risings thereof in heart, as our Saviors
more narrow interpreting of the Law (declaring the scantling of a godly man's
endeauours above the Pharisees) does manifestly convince. He looks to the
motions and desires of his heart, and suffers not the lesser evils to go
unobserved, and unlamented. So the difference is manifest in the first part of
a good life, freedom from sin.

Now in the second-part, care of well-doing, we will tracke the dissembler, The
hypocrite often excels in civil righteousness and bounty, etc.
and take him halting. First, he does oftentimes excel in civil
righteousness, and abound in works of bounty and mercy; Who more liberal in
great doles than the Pharisees? yea, have not many Heathen men (and an hypocrite
may surely attain as much good as an infidel) been famous for diverse moral
virtues; and by name, most exact observation of justice in their dealings? yet
here the defiance is not hard to find out, if a man could look into the heart
of him that is hollow at heart. The hypocrite in his deeds of mercy, etc.
aithem at applause; the true Christian rejects such fancies.
First, in regard of the end of doing good this way, the hypocrit does serve
himself in vaineglory, seeking the credit and applause of men, and to be
commended in the world; and therefore for the most part he is careless of
doing such good deeds, if there be no witness present, nor no likelihood of
their being known abroad. Mat. 23.5.
This our Savior notes and taxes in the Pharisees, who did all things to be
seen of men, and even cherished in themselves those fond and foolish conceits
and desires of being so commended, so respected, so well thought of, and so
full of glory, for their good deeds: but the true Christian is earnest to
withdraw his heart from listening unto the worlds plaudit, he labors to
approve himself unto God; and for the thoughts of worldly esteem, he is ready
to fall out with himself, for making account of such foame of men's mouths. He
can say of himself in other things, as well as Paul of himself in one thing,
that he seeks not to be commended, he does not go a wooing for credit. So
they shoot both with one arrow, but aim at a far different mark; and this
difference is plain enough to be discerned.

Again, The hypocrite will deal well with a friend. and one that is not a
foe; but the true Christian with his presently professed foes.
the hypocrite will show kindness and mercy, and charity to his friends; or
such as have never done him any great matter of wrong; or if they have made him
amends, and repaired the breaches of amity by some proportionable submission
or benefit. But for his enemy that hates him, that persisteth to wrong him,
that for the present seeks to do him hurt, he cannot find in his heart to
do him good, and scarce to practice righteousness, not at all kindness and
mercy to such an one: yea, with the Pharisie, such is his model and square of
living, that he will love his quiet neighbor, but hate his troublesome enemy
as Christ does tax them, for perverting the meaning of the Law. The
true-hearted Christian stands far otherwise affected; he remembers, Matthew.
5.43.
that God did love him when he was an enemy; and therefore also for his sake
he will never leave pressing himself, till he have brought his heart to love
his enemy, and to do good to them, that do evil to him; and not alone to
deal squarely, but lovingly, kindly, mercifully, and (if need be) bountifully
with his bitterest and most causeless adversaries. If his enemy hunger, he
feeds his enemy; if his enemy thirst, he gives drink to his enemy; if his
enemy be fallen, he lifts him up; if wronged, he defends him; and so doing good
there, where nature and reason is most auerse from doing good; he shows
himself perfect, as his heavenly Father is perfect, as our Savior Christ
exhorts. Thus the extent of a sincere man's goodness does distinguish it from
the hypocrites, and (in one word) in such cases, and to such persons as he does
not, nor cannot, expect reward from men; yet the true Christian will execute
mercy and judgment. The hypocrite ever fails, where humaue motives fail.
And so for works of mercy and justice, we have showed what ods betwixt the
sincere and guilefull; there are also exercises of piety and religion, wherein
the hypocrite is often very forward. Let it not seem out of place that I here
speak, what I forgot before. The hypocrite makes no bones of the smaller
degrees of evil; the true Christian strives against the smallest degrees.
Math. 5.
For of the close and gross hypocrites, there are two kinds that must be
distinguished each from other, because their differences are remarkable. There
are cold hypocrites that are carried forward in the vessel of the time, and
love not to ouerrunne the common pace, in matters of religion (as your ordinary
civil man, who yet is a very hypocrite, even in that which he does attain
unto) others be more forward and fervent, and carry then selves with a show of
more life, in matters of religion: such was Paul before his calling, such were
the Pharisees in their times, such were Ananias and Saphira. Now these latter
sort of hypocrites do not alone (as the former) abound in works of mercy and
justice, An hypocrite may be very forward in duties of religion.
but also in duties of religion and piety; they love preaching, and praying,
and take delight in the company of men renowned for piety; they have a very
green blade of being forward in Gods service, to the keeping of prayer in
their families, and accustoming to repeat Sermons, and other like commendable
acts of devotion. The thorny and stony ground you know, did yield some more
than common shows of goodness. And the wicked Simon conuersed with Philip:
yea, the sinful Jews were as abundant in sacrifices and fat beasts, as their
godly forefathers. Paul was zealous of the Law, and there were many very
forward Preachers in Paul's time also, whom a man would have thought fervent,
for the spreading abroad of the Gospel; yet they did it not sincerely. And did
not the Pharisie keep his weekly fasts, and other like observations? yea, and
did not Iehu also profess (speaking as he thought in his heart), that he was
zealous for the Lord? Mark therefore the difference, which stands in two
things. First, in the end, The hypocrite in all duties of religion serves
himself either in vaineglory, or superstition, or licentiousness; the true
Christian aims at God in his services. Galat. 4.17.
then in the matter of their works of piety, they stand far asunder one from
the other. For the hypocrite, he does always serve himself either in
vaineglory, or in superstition, or in both. So the false teachers in Galatia,
were zealous over the Galathians; but it was with an evil zeal (as Paul
taxes them), seeking to ingrosse the people to themselves, and endeavoring to
exclude Paul, that they might wholly be admired. And did not the flaunting
fellows at Corinth plainly preach themselves, as being covetous of applause,
and followers? And so Diotrephes loved to be had in principal account in the
Church; he desired to be reputed the only man, (which is the loving of
first-hood, 2. John.
as the Apostle calls it). The hypocrite (if he be a Preacher) does labor (as
with child of a longing desire) to be counted the best, or one of the best
Preachers in the country; if he be only a private man, he desires to be
esteemed one of the forwardest professors, and pleases himself well in such
fancies; yea, he has a sensible edge, and a kind of kore against those, that
stand betwixt him and this reputation. Neither can he well away with such, as
bear away the credit and applause from him: as you may perceive plainly in
Diotrephes, and in the Pharisees; so his religiousnesse has a tacke of the
same fault, that his civil righteousness has. But the true-hearted Christian
serves God in humility of spirit, not heeding what men deem of him, further
than their want of respecting him, will be an impediment to his doing of good.
1. These. 2.6.
He seeks not praise of men, neither of you nor others, as Paul says to his
Thessalonians. Wherefore he does not things of contention, whetting himself
on, and putting an edge upon himself, with a hope and desire of doing better
than such an one, or putting down such an one; but purely (out of a longing
desire to glorify God, sets himself to do the best he can, rejoicing with
his whole heart, to see the well-doing of others; yea, glad at the soul, to see
them far exceed himself, and wishing (with Paul) that all men were like
him, yea, beyond him in all graces, And if contentious, vainglorious,
emulatory conceits arise within him, he knits his brows against them, with as
true heat of anger against himself, as Moses had once against Joshua, when
he chode him sharply, saying; Do thou envy for my sake? Numb. 11.29.
But happily it may fall out, that the hypocrite will be driven from serving
himself in this vainglorious fashion; yet then he looks to himself with
a more sinister eye, if more may be: for he becomes a servant to his own heart
superstitiously, as those great sacrificers in the Prophet, Micah 6, 6, 7.
that would feign come before God with thousands of Rams, and with Rivers of
Oil; yea, that would give their children for their sins, the fruit of their
body for the faults of their souls, refusing no cost nor hardness, to earne
pardon, and deserve remission, or make satisfaction, or redeem to themselves
an hope of liberty to sin in some other kind. They would pay. GOD for their
evil deeds, with such good deeds; and (after the custom of men) cut scores
with him; and therefore they do not likely (that are so disposed) content
themselves with enjoined services, but seek some device of their own, or some
other sect master, whereby they have great hope to win God unto them. Now the
true Christian, he is of a far other mind, he cotuits all dung, and all
dross; yea, he reputeth all loss, so that he may get Christ, upon him he
relyeth, to him he cleaves, and never dreams of other merits, than those
that he finds in him (for he renounceth himself) being the true
circumcision, that puts no confidence in the flesh. And hence it is, that he
does not dare to tolerate himself the more in any sin, because of his
devotion and zealousnesse in other points. So the scope of the sound and hollow
is opposite; the ones eye looks heauen-ward, the others is bent still to
himself.

The matter also wherein their devotions show themselves, will manifest whence
they come: from truth, The hypocrite most forward in public services, that
others may know of; the Christian in secret, that none ca^ know of, but
himself.
or from guile. For the hypocrite, his greatest devotion (unless it be when
superstition (like as a bree does the poor beast) does prick him forward) is
in duties that may be, and are done with a witness: as for those that are
private, or rather secret, he is key-cold in them, at least usually, neither in
truth, does he trouble his Closet often with private meditations and prayers.
Hence it is, that our Savior correcting the mis-intended devotion of the
Pharisees, does confine them to their Closet, where God alone beholds and
hears: intimating, that they had little lust to pray in secret, where God
that saw in secret should be their sole rewarder. So you may know if you
dissemble yea or no. The dissembling man can preach well to others, he cannot
digest what himself has cooked, and preach it to himself in his privy
meditations. He can pray when others stand by, but most times (unless he be
whipped forward by a cross for a fit) he is tongue tied, and dumb-stricken in
his chamber. So he loves to hear Sermons; and to repeat them in company; but
he loves not to get alone, and concoct the Sermon in his own meditation,
considering and remembering what he has heard, and how it concerns himself.
But now, the true Christian is rather more vehement in private than in public
prayers, and can much rather omit the calling upon God with others, than those
secret and inward communications with God, wherein he may freely power his
whole soul forth unto the Lord: and he satisfies not himself, in having
heard the Sermon, unless he have chewed the cud, and considered if those
things were so, and examined himself by that rule. He is constant also in
private services, as well as public, and the most secret, as well as those
that must have companions.

Moreover, for the matter, or rather manner of their performing these duties of
piety. The hypocrite rests himself satisfied in the act formally done, the
true Christian is not well, unless he find the inward power of it.
The hypocrite does rest himself satisfied in the formality of religion, in
the external act, in a good and formal fashion discharged, not greatly
heeding the power of religion in his soul, and the secret disposition of his
heart. If he have framed a good prayer, in fit words, and uttered it in
convenient gestures, he is well apaide, and hopes the service shall be
accepted, though he had not any working of fervor in his heart, any life, any
feeling, any true touch of the things which his tongue did utter. If he have
said good words with a good intent, all is well; though his affections had not
the impression of the matter of his words settled in them. So, if he hear the
Word with decent intention, and can carry away a good part of it, to speak of
afterward, if occasion serve, it is well, he is herein satisfied and
contented, though his soul has not been stirred with the power of the Word.
Even as the false-hearted Jews esteemed themselves to have abundantly
satisfied the Law, if they did tie the sacrifices with cords to the Altar,
though their souls were nothing affected with the spiritual things, that
those external types did represent. But the upright soul is much displeased
with himself and his services, unless he feel the power of godliness in
them. Hence it is, that he is very sensible of deadness, and calls much
(with David) for quickening, and unless he find the efficacy and fruit of
good exercises in his heart, he is much disquieted, and displeased with
himself, and cannot tell how to be satisfied with having so served God: for
he looks to God that searches the heart, and therefore it cannot give him
content, if he have not found his worship hearty. And so do the true and
false Christians devotions differ for end, matter, and manner.

Now there is a third thing considerable in the point of good living, An
hypocrite is often precise in petty matters, and so is also the true christian
sometimes above that he should.
wherein they must be compared together. The hypocrite is often very strict in
matters of ceremony, and in such small points that concern Gods worship; and
in other petty matters also: so a Pharisie would not go into the Judgment
hall, to be defiled against the Passover for any thing. He would not neglect
to pay tithe-mint for a world, you see him straining at a Gnat. And diverse
times it falls out also, that the true-hearted Christian (out of scrupulous
mis-taking, and an ouer-tendernesse of conscience, not sufficiently tempered
with exactness of judgment, or out of a long custom of being of such a
judgment, and much conuersing with men of such opinion, is even more strict
than he needs, and depriueth himself of his lawful liberty of doing or
forbearing, what he might either do or forbear. The hypocrite censorious in
his strictness: the Christian gentle to others that differ from him.
But there are two manifest differences in this matter: the hypocrite is as
censorious as strict, as large in condemning others, that jumpe not with him in
judgment and practice, as narrow in straightning himself about such matters.
He is bitter, sharp, tarte in his censures of them, that are differently
minded, neither can hold peace with them, nor suffer himself to maintain any
good conceit of them, but conceiueth that they make conscience of nothing,
because their consciences be not of his own last. So the Pharisees could not
brook Christ and his Apostles, for not washing: and the hypocritical false
teachers, even made a very rend in the Church, about abolished ceremonies of
the Law. But the true Christian in cases of such difference, holds the bond of
Peace in the unity of the Spirit, not judging, nor despising others, but
charitably referring them to their own master, to whom they stand or fall: he
that eats, not condemning him that eats not; he that eats not, not
censuring him that eats; but both lovingly bearing with each other, because
they both give thanks, and seek to bring glory to one master. The hypocrite
will almost allow no man the name of a Christian, at least, the esteem and
affection due to one, if he concur not with his judgment: the true-hearted
is ever charitable to the contrary side in such diversities.

Again, The hypocrite is not suitable and regular in his strictness, but the
true Christian is.
the hypocrite is not suitable to himself in his strictness; for he is large
conscienced enough in other matters, and can swallow a Cammell with the same
throat, which did even keckle at a Gnat: if a greater and more apparent fault
be more interlarded with profit, it goes down glibly enough, although these
little lean morsells do stick in the passage. Such well oiled faults, though
of a larger quantity, either he cares not to see, or amend, so that you would
as much wonder at the greatness of his swallow in some things (especially
where pleasure and profit plead the case), as seem strange at the too too
much straightness of it, in other cases; and marvel either how he should be
so Eagle-eyed, as to see so small a matter in one kind; or else so
beetle-eyed, as not to see so plain a thing in another. But the upright heart
is like himself in his strictness, and equal and proportionable in his
making conscience of things. He is more troubled in greater matters, than in
lesser; and his conscience will check him, and order him with more or less
vehemence, and earnestness in things; according as the things he does, or does
not, are of more or less weight and moment. And even as straight as he is in
some things, so straight will he likewise show himself in other things of the
like degree. And thus you have (as near as I was able to gather it out of
Scripture) the true and manifest difference betwixt the sincere and guilefull
in these particular graces. Yet still let me be bold to put you in
remembrance, of what I spoke at first, and that seasonably in this conclusion
of the whole discourse, viz. that because the most uprightly minded is not
without some plain admixture of guile: therefore many of the effects and
signs of guile, will begin to work and show themselves in him also; but so
that he does observe, lament, resist and oppose the same, and continue to
control his own heart for them, till by degrees he have gotten the better of
them. And so he cannot be called an hypocrite, though he have much hypocrisy
in him: contrarily, the hollow hearted (though he be clean overrun with
these effects of false-hood, yet) neglects to observe them, or is not much
troubled at them, when he finds them; and therefore he must take his name from
the vice of hypocrisy, because it bears sway, and exercises dominion over
him. And thus now have we explained the point in hand, and so made way for the
uses, which we are to gather from it.

CHAP. X. Comtaining the first use of the point belonging indifferently to all
sorts of men.
FIrst then, let all men learn hence, not to satisfy themselves, with being
branches in the Vine, but consider seriously, whether they be of the good, or
of the bad branches. Seeing there are, and always have been, and ever will be
in the Churches, dissemblere, as well as sincere Christians: Every man out of a
godly jealousy over himself, must examine what himself is.
it behooves therefore, that every man, out of an holy jealousy over himself,
and a godly fear of ulnesse of himself, do often and seriously try and
examine what he is, and not pass sentence of himself one way nor other, till
by touchstone of the Scripture, he has made proof of himself. In other
cases we would all easily condescend to such an exhortation. Were it most
certain, that within this quarter of an hour, an hundred or two of this
Congregation must leave this present life, how would every one fear, lest the
lot of death might fall upon himself? and how careful would each one be, if
it were possible to come unto the knowledge of the matter, whether himself
should be amongst the living or the dead. Brethren, it is certain, that in the
Church of God, there be diverse hypocrites which must be damned: this our
Savior teaches here, and we have delivered you in his name. Can it therefore
but be needful for every one amongst you, to make a diligent inquiry into
his own estate? and that so much the rather, because this very willingness to
search into ones self, Willingness to search, a sign of truth; the the
contrary, of falsehood,
is a good sign of truth, and the contrary of false-hood. The hypocrite of
the closer sort, is only therefore an hypocrite, because he will not endure
the pains of discovering his own hypocrisy. An hypocrite in the hearing of
such a point as this, can soon see cause enough in his conceit, to think
hardly of another man. Sure, if this be so (says he within himself), such a
man must needs be in hard case, for he can be no better than an hypocrite: but
for himself, he lets pass all such thoughts concerning himself, and
feeds himself still with his former strong, and long continued conceit, of
being a good Christian, what ever men think of him. But the true Christian,
upon hearing of such things (because he has had some acquaintance with the
guilefulnesse of his own spirit) is therefore apt to be timorous of himself,
and thinks to this effect within himself: Alas, what is mine estate, these
things come hard upon me! I fear, I fear much, lest all be not well within
me! And so searching, he finds hollownesse; finding, bewaileth it; bewailing,
confesses it; confessing, reformeth it; and reforming, is not overcome by it.
Wherefore again and again I beseech you, let every man and woman consider
diligently of himself; let him try and prove his estate by the notes which I
have formerly set down, in as much plainness and perspicuitie as I could.
Say thou that hear the Word of God this day, in which thou art taught, that
the true Vine has branches on it that be not true, as well as those that be
true; what do thou deem of thy self? Art thou an vpright-hearted man, or a
dissembler? Again, I demand of thee, what a kind of Christian thou accountest
thy self? In name and show, and profession, thou art one of Christ's members;
but art thou so indeed and truth, or art thou not? Thine answer will like
enough be this; That thou hopest thou art a true Christian. I say unto thee
therefore, that it may fall out, thou could not so much as say, thou did
hope so, if thou did not answer rashly, and without all deliberation,
because thou art an errand gross hypocrite, that do know thy self (if thou
would confess it), but merely to counterfeit some outward show of
goodness; whereas in thy secret conversation, and the unobserved parts of thy
life, thou followest and likest wickedness well euough. And if it be so,
suffer not thine heart to beguile thee any longer, and lay no claim to the
name of a true Christian, which thy self do well enough perceive, to be
altogether vnbecomming one of thy carriage. Come now, and grow to take notice
of that monstrous gross guile, which thou can not but feel within thy
self, Some do think themselves upright, yet at end prove false.
if thou will but lay thine hand upon it. But if thou boast not so grossly,
and so palpably hypocritical, but that it may be possible for thee to say
deliberately, that thou hopest thou art a true Christian; yet I wish thee to
take great heed, that thine hopes be not ill grounded: for many a man thinks
and hops, that he is upright, which in the end proves himself otherwise,
and loses all his fair hopes; and so is fulfilled upon him that the
Scripture affirms: the expectation of the wicked shall perish. But willt thou
know indeed what to say of thy self? then lay the line to thine own soul,
and apply thy self to the rules formerly set down. Say then; Where find
thou most faults? at home or abroad? in thine own heart, Where do thou find
most faults?
or in the ways of other men? And what faults do most disquiet and trouble
thee, and make thee most inward work and heaviness? thine own, or those of
other men? If thine own, in all likelihood all is well with thee: if other
men's; lo here, the carping vain of an hypocrite; lay thine hand upon it, and
feel it with shame and sorrow, and say to thy self; O now! the pulse of my
soul beats hollow: and hereafter (till thou have turned thine edge another
way) take not thy self for other than thou art, an hypocrite. If thou feel
this busy meddling humor, and lamentest it, thou art not overcome of
hypocrisy: but if it carry thee away, and thou satisfiest thy self in it, and
think thou have cause so to do, and resistest it not: I condemn thee for a
rank dissembler. But tell me yet further; Art thou confidene or fearful of
thy self?
how stand thou affected toward thy self? art thou bold, confident,
aduentrous, dreaming that (thou trowest) all the world shall not draw thee to
commit such a sin, and bragging that thou art one of these dissemblers? Or
art thou fearful of thy self, scarce daring to trust thy self, and often
almost ready to tremble for fear, lest thou should be beguiled in thy
self? If it be with thee in this latter fashion, I say unto thee, blessed is
he that fears always with such a fear, as makes him examine, and pray, and
seek for strength from heaven against his corruptions: but if otherwise, it is
certain, this foole-hardinesse comes from nothing, but thy not knowing of
thine own weakness; therefore I can pronounce thee no better than an
hypocrite. And tell me yet again: do times, company, places, make such a
change in thee, that what evil thou will not do in one place or company;
that, thou will do in another? and what good thou do in some places and
times, Does company, place, etc. change thee, yea or no?
that thou carest not to perform in others? I say then, thou have cause to
esteem thy self a double minded man: but if thy resolution be, to be still the
same, and thy strife not to alter, and so in conclusion, thou art thy self,
though Satan may trouble thee by such disaduantages; I say then thou may
justly repute thy self true hearted. Yea, if perceiving such inclinations to
change and vary with time and place, thou see and bewail this folly, and
strive against it; thou may be true for all that: but if thou extenuate and
excuse this varying, and think with thy self, that no man can choose; so
casting the blame upon others, and not thy self: I assure thee again, that
thou art but hollow. But proceed we in this examination. Is all or thy chief
care of the outside, and so that thou neither do nor speak evil, it seems
not much material to thee what thou think; and if thou can refrain from
being externally naught, thou little heedest or carest for the naughtiness of
thine hidden man? Is thy care most of the actions, or of the inward motions
also?
I affirm against thee then, that thou art but a whited tomb. But if thou have
a wakefull and suspicious eye upon thine own soul, and find great cumber
to keep it in order, seeing and abhorring the lewdness of it, and being much
troubled within thy self for it, thou may be sure, that thou art true: for
doubtless he is good indeed, that is good within, and that strives to remove
away the sinfulness of his soul. But let us go a little more particularly to
work. Thou have good knowledge of the Word of God; and what of that? Therefore
thou concludest, that thou art a good Christian. I answer, thou collectest
amiss, for this may befall a Judas and a Balaam. Does thy knowledge make thee
big a little in thine own eyes?
But what ensues upon this knowledge of thine? does it heave thee, and make
thee lift up thy self with disdain of others, as of silly fellows? and what
should thou care, what they say or think? then assure thy self, that for
all thy great knowledge, thou art but a proud Pharisie, and a vile hypocrite:
but does thy knowledge serve to discover to thee thine own vileness? So that
by growing in knowledge, thou growest in contempt, and dis-estceming of thy
self, as seeing more and more thine own wants; and therefore more respecting
others, who (though perhaps they know less yet) know what they do know, in a
better manner? Then art thou true-hearted.

Again, thou know very much; Does profit, etc. so hang in thy light, that
thou art willing to know some truths, or no?
but yet something thy credit, profit and pleasure hang so in thy light, that
thou can not know, but even against the inward offers of thy soul to
perceive) remouest it out of the eye of thy mind, and art not willing to
trouble thy self with thinking of such matters, nor can not be made to
understand: Know then, that this winking and blinking proves thee false at
heart. But if thou find thy self willingly disposed to acknowledge those
truths, that have gone most against thee, and most cross thy lusts, and which
thy flesh is least desirous to see; thou may be of good comfort, in
assurance of uprightness.

Moreourer, thou beleeuest the Word of GOD; Do thon root the word in thine
heart, by much musing on it?
so do the Devils also: but tell me; Have thou roeted the truth in thy
soul, by much pondering upon it, and building thy faith on Gods authority? if
yea; thou shall stand in the stormy day: if not; thou shall soon be cast
down, and prove thy self to have had none, but a rotten foundation.

Also, thou beleeuest in Jesus Christ, trusting to be saved by his only
merits: Do thou lay the law to thy soul, as well as the Gospel?
so many believed on him, which yet he regarded not: But do thou believe the
Law, as well as the Gospel? and humble thy self by that sower doctrine, as
well as cheer up thy self with those sweet words? then much good may thy
comforts do thee; otherwise, they be false and windy, and shall not be able to
sustain thy soul.

Do thou as well take care, to press thy self to performance of the
conditions required in the promises, Look thou to perform the conditions as
well as to enjoy the things, promised?
as to make thy self persuaded, that the promises shall be performed to thee?
this is soundness: but if not, it is mere deceit, and thy faith at last shall
prove it self to have been but fancy.

I go on forward to examine thee farther: Thou have often been very sorry for
thy faults, and with grief confessed them in secret: well; but Ahab did as
much. What faults co^fessest thou?
Only tell; What faults confessest thou? only the grosser acts of evil? such
sorrow and confession are unsound: the motions, thoughts, desires, privy
inclinations, and smallest degrees of sin; that is hearty confession. Only
by starts and fits, Confessest thou daily, or by fits?
now and then, after the coming of some peril or reproach, or that some good
Sermon has wakened thee, as Ahab after the Prophets threats? Here is no truth:
but if constantly, day by day, in a settled course; this is sound, rejoice in it.

And when confessest thou? Only when fear of heart and heavy crosses compel
thee: Voluntarily, or by compulsio^
or voluntarily of thine own accord, without such dragging (though perhaps
more earnestly, when the Lord does please to quicken thy pace)? if in the
former manner, false; if in the latter, true is thy confession.

Again, thou have mended many faults. Is there not some or other fault thou
have no great will to see or amend?
But is there not some one or other thing, which thou have no mind to amend?
which thou think thou need not, or can not mend? which thou do not,
by daily calling upon God, and traveling with thine own heart, strive to
amend? If there be any such exempt place for sin in thy life, I pronounce
thee an hypocrite. But if thou have given God the full possession of thy soul
and life, desiring and striving for nothing more, than wholly to banish and
expel, and cast out Satan, I pronounce thee a true Christian.

Thou art free from gross and shameful sins: Do thou despise those that
are greater sinners than thy self?
But art thou conceited of thy self for this, and despisest others? thou art
but a Pharisie: or art thou in such freedom, lowly and mean in thine own
eyes? It is a good sign of truth.

Thou will not murder: Do thou take leave in little sins, so that thou for
be are the greater?
but thou will revenge some other way, as by railing, or doing some shrewd
turn; this is falsehood: but if thou labor to forbear the least evils, as
well as the greater in all kinds, and do not bear thy self out in the
lesser, because of thy leaving the greater; it is a good proof of sound
goodness.

Thou dealest justly with men, and do many deeds of charity: But when do
thou these things? In secret, Do thou good in secret?
when none can take notice? or only then when there is a possibility of
having witnesses? and why do thou them? chiefly (and in a manner only) to
please God? or out of desire of winning credit? If the latter, false and
guilefull be these good deeds: if the former, true and upright.

And can thou bring thine heart to deal lovingly and mercifully with him, To
thine enemy?
that has wronged thee, yea or no? If not; I see not how thou exceedest a
dissembler: if yea; triumph, for now thou art perfect, as thine heavenly Father
is perfect. Thou art zealous in preaching, praying, hearing, conferring. Art
zealous in private devotions?
But tell me moreover; Art thou zealous, and as zealous in secret praying, as
in public? In private meditations, as in public devotions? Then well is it
with thee: if not, that that is open, may be hollow.

And say: Do thou not affect to be accounted a forward man?
Do thou not feed thy self in a conceit, of being counted a notable
Preacher, a very forward man? and have thou not a kind of keenenesse against
those, that seem by their brightness to hinder this repute of thee? If so;
thou art manifestly unsound (if thou keep these thoughts warm within thee):
but if thou do abhor these thoughts, laboring not to regard applause, but
even to delight thy self, and bless God for others going beyond thee; it is
an excellent proof of truth.

Yea, Does the bare doing content thee, or no?
what regard have thou of thine heart and affections in these acts of denotion?
Does the bare doing of the work content thee? it is stark naught then: Or do
thou look to thy spirit, taking no comfort, unless thou find the inward
power of these exercises? then it is excellent, and that is evident truth.

Further, thou art more than ordinarily strict and precise in diverse matters,
which the world accounts light and small matters, it is well But how stand
thou disposed to them that are not of thy judgment? Can thou not afford
them a good word, that do differ in small things?
Can thou not away with them? Can thou scarce afford them a good word? but
art still ready to account them dissemblers, and make a great question,
whether they may be accounted sincere, yea or no? Be afraid of thy self; it is
very likely, that thy self art not yet sincere. Nay, if thou go forward in
this rash and harsh censuring, not judging and condemning thy self, for so
judging and condemning others, without all doubt thou art but hollow: but if
thou hold fast the bond of love and peace, to those that are otherwise minded
then thy self; and love them dearly for the graces sake which thou see in
them, it is a good sign that conscionablenesse (and not guilefulnesse) has
framed thee to such strictness of life.

And for thy self, Art as precise in matters, in which thy purse is interested
as other things?
how stand thou affected in other matters? as strict? as careful? as much
troubled, with as small matters, in other things that concern thee? and
wherein thy purse and profit are interessed? It is a good testimony of thy
soundness: but if thou can devour (with some excuse or other) far greater
matters in other kinds, thy conscience not greatly disturbing thee, because
thou flappest it in the mouth with some sorry shift and pretense: this is a
shameful trick of a dissembler.

If thy preciseness be not general (in all matters as well as one) and
regular (more in the more weighty), Art thou most strict in matters of most
moment?
thou may be a strait laced hypocrite, as well as a tender-conscienced
Christian. O brethren, that you would often, very often commune thus with your
selves: gage your own souls, and by much questioning with your selves, make
your selves known unto your selves, and not continue always strangers to your
own bosoms. Without searching, Ask and answer these questions, that thou
may know thy self.
the true-hearted shall want the comfort of truth; and the hypocrite be out of
all possibility, to come out of his hypocrisy: but this examination will be
exceeding beneficial for the increase of sincerity, or reformation of guile.
See therefore that you redeem time, and bestow pains to practice it. I know
the flesh will be backward to this work, man's heart loves not to be rifled up.
A sore leg or hand shrinkes back, The flesh and the devil will hinder this
examination, because it is profitable.
when it should be searched. The devil also will find twenty devices to
interrupt you, in keeping this assise over your own hearts: he loves not to
have men understand their own estate; he would feign have them go blundring
through the world, and let things happen as they may for their souls. But let
your natural backwardness to this in quiry, and Satan's sensible opposing it,
be sufficient proofs unto you, of its needfulnesse and profit both. Were it
not a great help to the subduing of the flesh, the flesh would not be
repugnant unto it: were it not a means of chasing out Satan, Satan would never
withdraw you from it. But be jealous over your selves, fear much, suspect
much, enquire much, and prevent the evil of security, and the growth of
hypocrisy. We must not always be in suspense of our selves, but beware of too
much haste in determining.
I do not wish you always to stand in suspense of your selves, and still to
be doubtful, whether you be true Christians or dissemblers: it is no part of
my meaning, to drive you unto this uncomfortable uncertainty. But I wish you
not to make too much haste, to think your selves certain, for fear your
certainety should prove but a certain delusion. When thou have again, and
again, and again tried thy self by the things formerly delivered (or any
other that thy self can conceive of, or others of better understanding in
these matters can help thee unto), then thou may boldly hold fast (if thou
find cause to hold) this conclusion; I am sure I am not a withering branch.
But if thou be too willing to think well of thy self, and wilt speedily
resolve (to save the labor and trouble of inquiring and narrow trying), that
thou know thou art upright; then assure thy self, that despair at length
will shake thee out of this deluded thought, if damnation do not ouer-whelme
thee in the midst of it. But in very deed brethren, Much searching hinders
not, but surthers our assurance.
much searching is no hinderance to much assurance of ones own estate, but
rather a great furtherer of it. For though all be not hypocrites, yet all have
much hypocrisy remaining in them, and in often considering of their estates,
they shall by little and little, purge out the relics of that vice, which
will not be thrown out all at once; and so shall grow in good and sound
assurance of their own estate. I request you therefore, with as much
earnestness as the matter requires, to take heed of over easy belecuing your
own good opinions of your selves.

What the proverb prescribes to be done unto others, if thou would not be
cousoned of thy goods, that do thou to thy self, that thou may not beguile
thy self of thy salvation; Try before thou trustest. The most of those that
live in the bosom of the Church, are ignorant of the natural guilefulnesse of
their own hearts. They conceive not how subject they are to that notable trick
of folly that wise Solomon speaks of, saying; The foolish believes every
thing: especially every good word that his own selfe-flattering heart will
buzze into his ears. But the wisdom of the wise, is, to understand his way,
he will have good footing and ground, for his good opinion of himself, or
else he will not rest upon them. Wherefore take heed of being deceived with
that deceit, which Solomon calls, the folly of fools: even to take pains to
beguile your selves, in resting upon a lie, in a matter of this maine
consequence. We see and wonder, that many men will not be dissuaded from
accounting themselves true Christians, though every man that has an eye, may
see, that nothing is Christian in them but the outside, and not all that
neither. If they make the least semblance of pietic; if they be not as bad as
the worst of all the limbs of Satan; if they can find in themselves the least
shadow of any thing, that may be called virtuous; they lay fast hold upon
their own fancies, and will not consider, that it is the folly of fools to
deceive themselves. O that we could drive you out of this folly! O that we
could bring you to see (that that all confess, but in their own cases, few or
none seem to consider) that in the Church, I say in the Church, I say again
in the truest and purest Church upon the earth, there be not alone some, but
many hypocrites; that you might not satisfy your selves with such simple
allegations; for the proof of your being good Christians, as the most are wont
to do: but that by looking narrowly, and digging deeply, and painefully
diuing into the bottom of your souls, you may at last know your selves with
an infallible and sure understanding, not to be hypocrites, but true hearted.
And this is one use for all men, that all should try themselves what they be.

CHAP. XI. Containing the second use for those that are found out to be
hypocrites.
AN other use is for those, The hypocrite must cease to think well of himself.
which by this trial shall be found guilty; let them no longer maintain a
good opinion of themselves, but take themselves for what they be, who^
examination has found guilty; let Confession therefore prepare him for pardon
and amendment: for certainly these diseases of the soul will never be healed,
until they be seen and acknowledged; neither will God ever pardon them, till
the man in whom they rule, begin to see, and to confess them. If I did require
an open confession, of all the dissemblers amongst you (namely, that they
should now before GOD and this Congregation, open their mouths against
themselves, and entreat all men to take notice, that hitherto they have but
sought to cosen the world and themselves, not being indeed the men they have
been, and would have been taken for); if I say we did exact such an open and
public confession, tending to pull blushing into their faces before men, yet
it ought not to seem much to any man, to yield himself to the bearing of his
due reproach. For why; what traitor or fellon, taken in his felony or treason
by a few, would not willingly yield to confess the same in the face of the
Country, at the general Assizes, if he were sure to be forgiven? But Brethren,
the confession which we demand of you, and wherewith the Lord will (in this
case) be satisfied, is not open and public to the world-ward (that your credit
should be impeached by it, and your good names blemished); but it is private
and secret to Godward, tending alone to heal the soul and name both, and to
prevent the vengeance of God, which can not otherwise be prevented. Now in
thine heart, anon in thy closet, thy doors (as Christ says) being shut to
thee, fall down before the face of him that sees in secret, But must confesle
to God in secret, that he has been an hypocrite.
and if the forenamed trial have found thee to be an hypocrite, tell the GOD
of heaven what thou have found by thy felfe: say unto him, O Lord, it goes
against my flesh to see and acknowledge (but alas it is to no purpose to
hold my peace, and by hiding to increase) my guile! Wherefore Lord I confess
unto thee, I even freely confess unto thee, that hitherto I have been no
better than a painted Sepulcher, full of rottenness. I have been more
troubled at other men's faults against me, than mine against thee: and I have
allowed my self in this preposterous earnestnes, and thought I had cause to be
so. I have bin ventrous, confident, and apt to presume of my self, and yet
have never lamented this carnal confidence. I have given my self leave to do
the evil in secret, which I would not for a world have done publicly, and
yet have taken no care to lament it, because I thought, Pish, it is no matter,
no man shall ever know it. I have given free scope to the foul motions of mine
heart, and taken no care to control and oppose the looseness and
licentiousness of wicked imaginations. My knowledge has made me proud, and in
some things I have refused to know, and yet I neither bewailed my pride, nor my
witting blindness. I have taken no care to ponder on thy word, and settle it
deeply in my soul: and yet have not seen mine own folly, in being careless
to cover this seed with earth. I have mis-applied thy gracious promises in
Christ, rather imboldening my self in evil by them, then using them to the
purging of mine heart and life: and yet I have not lamented before thee this my
presumptuousnesse. I have confessed my faults, but alack seldom, and when a
cross has compelled me, not else. I have amended some things: but alas some
thing alone, this or this (name thou the particular to God), I could never
bring my self to be willing to amend: or if I have been willing for a passion,
that willingness has held but a little time, and yet I have flattered my
self with vain shifts, and have not abhorred this my guile. I have indeed
forborne reproachful sins; but evils of less grossness I have boldly
committed, and never been troubled with them. Vainglory has stained my
deeds of righteousness, and I have not seen and bewailed it. I could not
bring mine heart to do good against evil, nor seriously blame my self for
this reuengefullnesse, but been ready to think, it was more than any man alive
could be able to do. I have sought the praise of men, in acts of thy service,
and it has not been bitter to my soul to have thus mis-intended thine
ordinances. I have been utterly careless of secret services, when I have
seemed forward in public, and yet been well enough contented with that
carelessness. I have been well enough pleased with the bare outside of
religious duties, and taken no pains to find the life of them within me. I
have contented my self with lippe-praying, and eare-hearing, and not been
abased in my self for want of fervent praying, and powerful hearing. I have
been censorious against those that have not been as strict as my self, in
matters of ceremony; and could scarce abide them, that could abide those petty
things, which I have disliked; and yet I never lamented, but rather applauded
my self in this bitterness: and I my self have been very careless of
greater things, when profit pleaded for them, that have seemed so very strict
in forms and shadows, and external rites: and yet I pleased my self well
enough in this largeness of conscience. O Lord, thy Word has found me out,
thy Word has discovered unto me the secrets of mine heart: it has judged me,
it has condemned me, I desire to give glory to thee, and no longer to hide my
sins, this sin, this vpholder of all sins, this damnable hypocrisy. I
see it has ruled in me, and I (for want of care) have never yet perceived it:
but now I perceive it, and now I confess it, O Lord, to thee that know it
already, to thee from whom it cannot be hidden. I humbly acknowledge, I have
all this while been but an hypocrite.

Brethren, will ye thus plead guilty, A man shall be loath thus to confess
his hypocrisy.
if you be guilty before the Lord? I know it is marvelous hard, to bring the
guilty soul to plain confession: self-love reigns in our hearts naturally,
and that can hardly endure to speak any evil against it self, though upon
never so just cause. He that has long fed himself, and made himself (if not
peaceable, yet) secure, with telling himself he was a good Christian; will be
very loath now (perhaps after many years abiding in this false opinion) to
acknowledge himself to have been deceived. We see it is very hard to draw men
out of those errors, wherein they have been long trained up. Every man has
been even trained up in a conceit, that he was a good Christian. It is conceit
has long possessed him, and this error has become a very prejudice within
him, he has ever taken it for granted, and been angry that it should be once
called into question. It is therefore no wonder, if men find themselves loath
to recant their own good conceits of themselves, and to go from all that they
have formerly esteemed undeniable. But for all this, But he must for all that,
confess.
I pray you be persuaded, to see your selves to have been dissemblers, if you
have been such, for all your unnatural unwillingness. The thief indeed has
cause (as he thinks) to be impudent in denying himself to have committed
felony (though he know full well, that he has committed it), because
confession is required of him, as an help to his conviction, and so to his
condemning. But the Lord of heaven does not desire thee to confess thy self
to have been but an hypocrite, because he wants other means to convict thee,
or because he may the more easily proceed to condemn thee: For that is the
only way to get it pardoned.
nay, therefore only he would have thee confess, that thou may be capable
of pardon; because it is an ouer-ruled case in heaven, and a thing peremptorily
concluded of by the Divine justice, that no sinner shall ever be pardoned, till
he deal plainly, and freely confess, that he is such a sinner as he is. Thy
confession is called for, only to sit thee for pardon, not to urge against
thee to any worse purpose. Wherefore forbear no longer, wink no longer, be
ignorant of thy self no longer, hide thy guile no longer, but in thy very
soul now, in the thoughts of it, and hereafter in more words, twixt God and
thy self in secret, say unto the Lord, and deny not, but acknowledge: O Lord,
I see plainly, that yet I have been but an bypocrite.

Brethren, And if he do it not, he is no whit safer.
ignorance of ones ill estate cannot help it. Is a man one jot the better, if
he be an hypocrite, because he refuses to acknowledge it? Shall he escape
better, because he can make himself blind, and not see it? Doubtless the
Lord will discover the secrets of every soul at the last day, and at the day
of death; to every man's soul first, and after to all the world: and then a man
shall be discovered to himself fearfully and horribly, without all hope,
without all possibility of being pardoned. Suffer the Word of God (wherein he
comes to exercise judgment in a merciful manner) to draw you to a plain and
saving acknowledgement, that you may not be forced by the last sentence, to see
and feel your hypocrisy, when there will be neither leisure nor means to
redress it. Now thou may be helped, now thou may be changed, from an
hypocrite to a true Christian, from a dissembler to soundness of spirit. Now
therefore, whilst upon confession, mercy and healing may be procured, bring
thy soul to it, and suffer the Word of God to overrule all thine
unwillingness, and fall to a free confession, and (as I have often said) tell
the God of heaven: O Lord, It is true, too true, too plain, I cannot deny it,
unless I will deny it wilfully, and against my conscience, I am but an
hypocrite as yet. Brethren, we therefore labor about this point so much,
because we do well know the necessity of it. If we cannot attain thus much
from you, But shall for ever remain so.
you will always remain hypocrites, and the Word of God (through your
opposing it) will prove but a means of hardening you in your hypocrisy: but
if we draw you to acknowledgement, it will not be impossible to direct you to
amendment. I know that your hearts may possibly hold off from confession, by
thinking to this effect; That if you have been but hypocrites all this while,
it will never be better with you, and you shall never attain to be upright.
But this is a false suggestion of Satan. If you will not see your selves to
have but dissembled, you shall in very deed never be better, but rather worse
and worse, and more and more sold under the power of hypocrisy: Only by
confessing and lamenting he may be made true.
but if you will see it, and lament it before God, and oppose it, by striving
to cast out the beloved sin, and to step that one step, which hitherto you
have not stepped, of falling out with that one sin whatsoever, which hitherto
you have harbored, and constant praying against that one fault, which hitherto
you have been content to wink at, and let pass with a privilege of, Seen
and allowed; you shall be true, you shall be upright, you shall be sincere, and
of fruitless and barren, become fruitful and profitable branches. A man may
weep out hypocrisy, as well as other vices; confessing and lamenting guile, will
surely free a man from the power of guile, and he shall cease to be an
hypocrite, that will now begin, and hereafter daily continue, to see,
acknowledge, and bewail his hypocrisy before the Lord, who sees and hates it,
where it is not confessed: sees and pities it, where it is.

CHAP. XII. Containing a third use for them that be upright.
But now some (I doubt not) in this trial, The true Christian must enjoy the
comfort of his truth.
will be found to have no guile; that is, no predominant hypocrisy in their
spirits. There be in the Churches true-hearted Christians, good ground, sheep,
and good corn: and those amongst you, that in trying do find your selves
such; and by this infallible proof, can clear it to your selves, because you
have often heretofore found out, discovered and bewailed those effects of
hypocrisy, which have been delivered; do you (I pray you) enjoy the comfort
of your uprightness, and let God that wrought it, have the glory.
Notwithstanding his fearfulness.
The good Christian is almost as fearful to settle himself in a good opinion
of himself, as the false unwilling to be driven from it. But there is no
reason wherefore the innocent should be condemned. A man may be wrongful and
injurious to God and to himself, in being over fearful to confess the good
work of God in himself. Christ has living members in his body: if thou be
one of them, acknowledge it, and be glad of it, that thou may with all due
care proceed in the ways of godliness, now that thou know, thou have set
in, to some purpose. If Satan cannot keep a man from truth, yet he will
endeavor to hinder him, from taking the comfort of it: And Satan's tentations.
but let not his lies beguile thee any longer. Say unto him; I find mine own
faults more burdensome to me than others; I find my self careful of mine
inward man, as well as of mine outward; I find my self humbled, even by my
freedom from gross sins: and if at any time any fruit of hypocrisy do
show it self (as alack too too often it does), I make haste to bring it
before God, and there I condemn it, there I humble my self for it: wherefore
I am sure I am true-hearted; O Lord, I bless thy name that have made me true,
and I pray thee make me more and more true. Surely beloved, it will be a great
hinderance to your thankfulness, if you do not labor against those cauils,
by which Satan would feign cover your comforts from your eyes. He will tell
thee of thy censoriousnesse; of thy falling again, and again, and again,
into such a fault, perhaps gross; of thy deadness in private exercises of
religion; and of thy many vainglorious fancies, and of thy much
selfe-conceitednesse, and many other things; and he will labor to make thee
think, that it is not possible that heart should have any truth, in which so
many fruits of hypocrisy may be found. Thou must answer him, that thou
confessest thy self, to be very full of these effects of dissimulation; and
that therefore also thou acknowledgest the root from which they grow, to be
too too strong and big within thee. But thou may say withal; I have been
taught, and I know it is true, that not the man in whom hypocrisy is, but he
in whom it rules, must be called an hypocrite: and for thy self, though it
abide in thee, yet thou know it reigns not, because thou fightest against
it, and against the evil brood of it, with sighs and groans, with confession
and grief, with requests and prayers, and with daily renewed supplications.
Say unto thy self; I know, and God knows, that my censoriousnesse, my
dullness in private duties, mine often carelesnes of mine heart, and looseness
of the inward man, my vaine-gloriousnesse, my slipping again and again into
the same sin, and other fruits of dissembling within me; that these, and all
these are too rife: but withal, that they are felt, that they are marked, that
they are confessed, that they are lamented, and that they do daily drive me
to my knees, and make me come unto God, with humble entreaty for mercy through
his only Son; and therefore I am sure, that hypocrisy reigns not, but
that truth prevails, and therefore I am a true Christian, and so I will take
my self to be, and will with all my soul praise him, that has made me such;
continuing still to strive to grow in sincerity and truth, that when these
graces are become stronger, they may become also more comfortable unto me. O
all ye, whose feeble spirits are shaken with fear, and to whom nothing is
more troublesome than this thought, that sure you be but hypocrites; and yet
you do bitterly lament the effects of hypocrisy in your selves, and desire
nothing in all the world so much, as to be found upright with your God: I pray
you confirm your souls in peace, and accept the consolation that the Lord
does offer you. Take your portion of comfort, be known to your selves to be
what you are, understand and see how great things God has done for you, in
creating a right spirit in you. Do no longer join with Satan, in belying your
selves, as you have a ready too much and often done, to the great hinderance of
your souls. Weak Christians apt to accuse themselves too much.
Your custom has been, whenever your corruptions have been any thing
strongly wrought upon, when any bad motion has been violent, especially if
your passions in any kind have broken forth to some actual evil; then to
fall upon your selves with grievous accusations, and to take part with the
devil, in slaundring your selves; then you have cried out, and exclaymed
against your selves, and said; Sure I am but an hypocrite and a dissembler,
that have yet still within me such evil thoughts, am still disquieted with
such passions, and still drawn to such wicked deeds. But I say unto you, this
is no true inference: as the hypocrite in a fit confesses his sin, and is
sorry for it, but yet returns again to follow it; so the true hearted in a
fit does commit sin, but again returns to abhor it, and to renew his
covenant with God of amending it. As the hollow heart, is good in a passion; so
the true hearted may be bad in a passion: but look to the course of thy life,
to the settled purpose of thy soul, to the established desires of thy mind, and
so long as there is a constant striving against all sin by spiritual
weapons, so long thou art good before God, and for Gods sake, and must take thy
self to be upright. The true Christian shall never gain any thing, by calling
himself an hypocrite, But this gets them nothing.
to see his hypocrisy, to lament it, to shame himself before God for it; this
shall much advantage his soul: but to deny the work of Gods grace in him, and
to rank himself amongst dissemblers from whom he always differs as much, as
a man that is sick of any sickness, from him that is dead of that sickness);
this does no good to him, but interrupts his prayers, hinders his humiliation,
estrangeth him from God, and turns godly sorrow for his sin, into desperate
sorrow for the punishment of sin. Remember therefore that there be true
Christians in the Church, who yet are not free from manifold weaknesses, and
grievous corruptions; and having by proof and trial discerned thine own
estate, hold fast that assurance, which thine examination has yielded, and
call not thy self an hypocrite, though hypocrisy show it self in thee, so
long as thou remainest constant in observing and oppugning it.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein are handled the uses of this point in regard of others.
AND these be the uses of this point, which every man must make for himself:
now two things more follow, in regard of other men, with whom we live. For
seeing Christ's body has in it some sound members, some rotten (I mean his
visible body), therefore must we be wary, in not trusting all that carry an
appearance of goodness, and far from condemning all as hypocrites, because
some prove so. First then, let the plain words of Christ in this text,
advertise us to put away simple and foolish credulity, in taking all for that
they seem; and putting our selves into the hands of a man, so soon as ever
any good things appear in him. We must not be lightly credulous.
Let us rather use all good discretion, and be reserved from men, until by
long experience, we have gotten very good assurance of their sincerity. Our
Savior has made himself a pattern to us of this prudent wariness, as well
as of all other graces: for many believed in him, John 3. vlt.
as John tells us, with whom he trusted not himself, because he knew what was
in man. We cannot tell particularly, as he could, what is in the hearts of all
those, whose countenance is framed to goodness: but yet this we know in
general, that much hollownesse is in all, and that many are altogether hollow
and guilefull; wherefore till long continuance in goodness, till the evident
demonstration of truth, and the clear shining of virtue, in the much and often
denying of themselves, have verified and approved the soundnes of men's hearts;
But hold our selves in such terms, that men may not hurt us if they would.
we must hold our selves in such terms with them, that they may not have
power to hurt us (through our ouer-speedy opennesse toward them), even though
they should afterward grow so naught, as to desire our hurt. I mean not, that
any man should be bold to conclude against his brother, sure he but
dissembleth, and I will not trust him. Nay, we should fear to conceive so
almost of any man: for even a true Christian may give shrewd signs sometimes
of hollownesse: but my meaning is, that we should think and hope the best, and
be well persuaded of every man, whose outside gives us cause of a good
opinion; but yet so, as still to remember, that we are not able to search the
heart, and that guile and hollownesse may go very far, and therefore not to
adventure too far upon them, in hope that they be such, as will never deceive
us. Thou know not, that such a man is a dissembler, therefore think well of
him. Thou know that there is a possibility he may be a dissembler, therefore
come not within his danger; give him no such advantage, through laying open thy
self unto him, that if he should prove guilefull, thou might be hurt by
him. Credulity is the fault of honest hearts; because they be single
themselves, they look to find all like themselves: but Christ's words should
give us warning, to try before we trust. If any man say, that this retiredness
will cut off the practice and exercise of all Christian communion betwixt the
members of Christ's body: I answer, Which will nothing hinder the communion of
Saints.
he says amiss that so speaks; a man may do many (and almost any) office
of Christian charity, to those with whom he lives, and yet hold himself in
such even terms with them, that though they should prove false brethren, yet
he shall not receive any hurt by them. There be many acts of godly society,
which may be practiced without any peril, especially in the peaceable times of
the Church, and these (nothing hinders, but that) we may indifferently
exercise toward all: but if at any time some storms arise, we must beware
before whom, and toward whom, we carry our selves so, that they may hurt us,
if they list. Take heed whom thou trustest with thy goods, whom with thy name,
whom with thy safety, and to whom thou so far ingagest thy self, that he
may (if he will) deceive thee, betray thee, molest thee. There be some so true
hearted, that the world shall sooner remove out of its place, then that they
will prove false. There be others, that will quickly change their hue, and be
foes, in stead of their shows of brotherly love. Pray to God to give thee
understanding, to walk wisely toward them that are within, as well as toward
them that are without.

And if any man desire to receive information of the surest notes of truth,
Notes by which we may best discern of another man's integrity
that are discernable to others, and in others, let him mark these two things
well. The more humble any man is, the less forward to put forth himself, and
to show himself, and the more he can deny himself, and show himself loving
and pitiful toward those, that yet seem far from goodness; the more
soundness and truth do lodge in his bosom: but he that is apt to set out
himself, and cannot brook another, that goes not so far as himself: that
man do thou suspect, and from him be thou reserved. Humility and meekness
in ones carriage, and a patient waiting for them, that are not yet escaped out
of Satan's toils, are (me thinks) the surest and clearest means of
discovering the truth of another man. For hypocrisy in spite of it self,
will show it self proud and censorious, and bitter: but truth, even when it
intends no such matter, will show it self humble and lowly, and
gentle-minded, considering it self how bad once it was, and how much
hereafter it may be overtaken.

To conclude then; some be false brethren: Trust the^ least that are most
desirous to be trusted, and angry if they be not trusted.
wherefore trust not all too far, that carry themselves for a time, as if a
man might trust them; and trust them least, that seem most desirous to be
trusted. Again, do not condemn all of falsehood, because a number discover
their guilt daily. When many of those that seemed leaders of the Army of
Christians, fall off from their good beginnings, and cast away the very shows
of goodness, turning openly profane or worldly, and perhaps also bitter
against those, that seem to be such, as themselves once seemed. Dislike not
piety for their sakes that prove dissemblers.
Let no man take offense at these stumbling blocks: let no man hence
entertain a thought of dislike against Piety and Religion, nor an hard
conceit of those, that yet continue in good courses. Such terrible examples
should make us fear our selves, and fly to heaven for divine sustentation,
they should not make us reject the love of godliness, and account all rotten
branches, because some are so. Has not Christ told us beforehand, that so it
will be, that when we find it so to be, we may not be offended, as he tells
his Disciples in another case. The foolish worldling stumbleth exceedingly at
the slips, faults, and imperfections of Gods true-hearted children; and because
he sees faults in them, that bear before them a forwardness in religion, he
condemns them all for gross dissemblers, and cannot away with these
smooth-faced hypocrites. But if at any time some prove rank hypocrites, he
takes that as a warrant for his tongue to out-lash against all, saying, that
surely the best of them is no better. But how could they be so foolish, but
that they delight in folly, and are glad to make themselves obstinate in evil;
and to confirm their inbred hatred of piety, by turning all occurrents to
that purpose? were it not (I say) for this malicious blindness of theirs, how
could they be so foolish, as not to have learned of our Saviors most plain
words, that in him there will be fruitless branches, that must be cut off,
and cast out, as well as fruitful, that will continue and increase in
fruitfulness? Would any but a very block, or a blind man, stumble at a
block, that is plainly showed unto him, and warning has often been given
him, that it will surely be cast in his way? would any but a man void of all
understanding, abhor all the Apostles, because Judas turned traitor? I pray
you therefore, so many of you as shall live to see such miserable examples,
that you draw good, and not evil conclusions from the falls, reuolts, and
backslidings of other men, and of hypocrites. Say thou, I am sure Christ has
good sheep, as well as goats; and though such and such have manifested their
guilefulnesse, by forsaking the former paths of righteousness, wherein they
appeared to walk; yet I will not be hardly conceited of any body else, for
their sakes. In this case the proverb ought to be hearkened unto, that tells
us, Every Horse must carry his own burden. In truth, he that stands so
slenderly affected, either to goodness and piety it self, or to the servants
and followers of so noble a misstresse, as piety is; that because of the
wickedness, and out-strayings, and final reuolts of some of those, that
seemed once to attend upon her, and to be admitted into her train; therefore
he cares not for piety it self, nor will ever think well of any of those,
that wear here cloth hereafter; he (I say) that stands so slenderly affected
to Wisdom and her retinue, shall be sure, never to want occasion of
imboldening himself in sin, and of being more and more estranged from that,
the entertaining of which, is the only way to make him happy. Yea verily, he
whom the backsliding of seeming Christians, does drive to so much madness, as
that he can turn so lamentable a spectacle to no better a purpose, then to
triumph and exult over all, and bark against al, and vpbrade all with such
evil examples: discovers himself plainly not to hate the sin of the
back-slider which he lately fell into, but the very shows of goodness
wherein once he walked, and from which he is feign. In a word, he that scorns
piety and religion, and those that follow after it, because diverse turn
tail, and prove notably wicked at end, shows himself plainly to be void of
all religion, and all piety. When the true servants of God do see and hear
such tidings, it grieueth their souls, it makes them mourn in secret, and
pray in secret, and fall a fresh to examine and try themselves, lest they also
should be in like manner overtaken. But he that fleereth, and iesteth, and
exulteth, and scorneth, and casts the dung of one, in the face of others, and
would feign blemish all religiousnesse, by the stains and faults of those that
once seemed religious: has nothing in him but malice and bitterness, and the
very spirit of the devil. Beware therefore of making thy self appear stark
naught, by so stumbling at the breaking out of some other man's long hidden
naughtiness.

CHAP. XIIII. Showing that fruitfulness is the true distictniue note of those
that profess to be Christians.
AND so much be spoken of the distribution of branches into two kinds: We
proceed now to consider the difference of the branches: for in that they be
branches they both concur: but herein they differ manifestly, that the one
is, the other is not fruitful. Observe then from these words of our Savior,
another point, that fruitfulness is the true note of difference betwixt the
true Christian, and the hypocrite. As a man differs from a beast by reason; a
beast from a plant; by sense; a plant from a stone, by life or vegetation; so a
good Christian from an hypocrite, by fruitfulness. This is the most plain,
sure, sensible, infallible, and (as they call it) the very specifical mark of
distinction, betwixt the sound professor and the false, that the one bears
fruit, the other does not bear fruit in the Vine. Where the holy ordinances of
God have such power, as to work obedience in the whole couersation, this is
fruitefulnesse, and here is truth: where they do not bring forth this effect,
this is fruitlesnesse, and here is guile. In a word, all true Christians are
fruitful, and none but they: all dissemblers are fruitless, and none but
they. This point is abundantly confirmed in the parable of the sower, in which
of four grounds, one alone was good, and that fruitful; as for the bad
grounds, the first did not bear so much as a blade; Mat. 13.1. etc.
the other two did indeed put out a little greenenes, but it was like the corn
upon the house top, which withers or ever it be ripe, and of which the mower
fills not his lap; only the good ground did requite the labor of the
husbandman with a liberal harvest of some thirty, some sixty, some hundred
fold. So in the words of the Apostle, Heb. 6.7.8.
the ground that brings forth fruit meet for the dresser, is blessed, but
that that brings forth briars and thorns, is near unto cursing, whose end
is burning. Mat. 7.24.
And in more plain terms our Savior says, that he which hears his words
and does them (this is fruitfulness) does build upon a rock (this is an
effect of truth): but he that hears and does them not (that is, to be
unfruitful), does build upon the sand; that is, is but an hypocrite, and shall
have his building tumbling down.

The truth of this point will further appear, if we consider the causes and
effects of fruitfulness. The causes of it, are the sactifying Spirit of God
dwelling in the soul; and the Word of God, received into an honest heart. No
man brings forth fruit, but he upon whom the holy Ghost has come down, to
beget him again, and to make him a new creature in Christ Jesus: for a tree
must first live, before it bear; and no man is unfruitful, but because he is
destitute of the work of Gods spirit, so forming him into a new creature,
because he has neglected or resisted it. Now it is certain, that whosoever
has the spirit of sanctification in him, is a true Christian; he that has it
not, is none. Wherefore from ones being fruitful, or not fruitful, it may be
infallibly concluded, whether he be true or hollow. Again, no man brings
forth the fruit of good living, until the word of God have entered into his
heart, and taken deep root in the very bottom of his soul: and contrarily,
where this fruit does not show it self, there the Word of God did never enter
into the soul, neither was soundly rooted therein; and it is doubtless, that
if GODS Word have copious dwelling in us, we be true Christians; if not, we be
but dissemblers. Wherefore the bearing, or not bearing of fruit, is a sound
proof of truth, or want of truth. Again, look we to the effects of
fruitfulness, or its absence, and it will undeniably appear, that these two
do best distinguish betwixt the sincere and hollow hearted: for the ground
that brings fruit, must obtain a blessing. The reward of a good life here,
is eternal life hereafter: but the end of the ground that bears not fruit,
is cursing and burning; and euill-led life, shall end in death eternal. Now
none can be saved but the true Christian; and no Christian is damned, but the
false: wherefore from this point, the most essential and formal difference of
Christians (the branches in Christ) must be taken.

CHAP. XV. Showing what this fruitfulness is.
SO we have proved the point in hand. It is needful that we do soundly
explain it also, that it may be truly useful unto us. For this explication,
What fruitfulness is.
one thing alone is necessary, namely, to declare plainly, what fruitefulnesse
is. Concerning which, we say in general, In general, a godly life.
that fruitefulnesse is the same thing which the Apostle means, when he
tells us, 2. Tim. 3.12.
of living godly in Christ Jesus: and again, of having our conversation as
beseems the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Philip. 1.27.
Not the doing of an action now and than, good and commendable (for the matter
of it), as giving alms, laboring in ones calling, dealing justly, or the
like, is to be called fruitefulnesse: but the leading of a godly course of
life, and of an holy conversation. But more particularly, that you may be
thoroughly informed in this point. Fruitefulnesse must be set forth unto you, in
the matter, motive, end, and properties thereof; any of which four, if it be
wanting, the rest are also wanting indeed, though an appearance of them may be
present, In special.
and the true nature of fruitfulness is not to be found.

For the first of these, The matter of fruitfulness.
the matter of fruitfulness is, A desire and endeavor, to know and to do the
whole will of God, revealed in his Word. Every word that we have used in this
description, would be marked and considerd of. A desire.
First, I call it a desire, a firm and steadfast bending of the will and
inclination of the heart, to the thing desired. For a good man must be
measured, and is by God accepted, more according to the desires of his heart,
and the earnest propension and moving of his soul, than according to the
effect thereof. In action he comes far short of what he should: in the desire,
purpose, carnest and sound inclination of his soul, he does reach after the
perfection required of him by God, and for this cause, is accepted and
accounted in Christ, as if he were perfect. He would be void of al sin, he
would be rich in every good work, he would have every thing within him, and
every thing that comes from him, perfectly conformable to the will of God, and
acceptable to his Majesty. In the depth of his soul these hearty wishes are
found continually working; Psalm 119.5 10.32.57.93.106 173.40.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! O let me not wander from
thy commandments: I will run the way of thy commandments: I have said, that
I will keep thy words: I will never forget thy precepts: I have sworn and
will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. I have chosen the
way of truth. I long for thy precepts: and many such like. This is the
disposition of his will, these the determinations, resolutions, conclusions of
his soul; thus he says to, and within himself, that doubtless he will
depart from the paths of wickedness, and that he will walk in the ways of
righteousness: and thus is he busied in renewing and establishing the purposes
of his soul, to walk with his God. And though he find no means to perform
according to his desire, yet still his desire stands to the law of the Lord.

And this desire being a true and settled desire, And endeavor.
must needs be seconded with endeavor. It is not a poor, faint, sluggish,
wishing and woulding, by which a man (as it were betwixt sleeping and waking)
does think, twere well if I did, and sure I will, and I would if I could, as a
sluggard lies stretched in his bed, and faintly wishes, O that I could arise!
It is not (I say) such a feeble, powerless, auert, desire, as this (which is
but (as one would say) the tenth part of the consent of the will, to the thing
willed): but it is a desire so mighty, and effectual, as does bring forth an
endeavor. It makes a man put forth himself, to essect the thing desired. He
wishes to obey, as a resolute soldier wishes victory, so as he will fight
for it, and draw his weapon, and meet his enemy in the face, and hazard limme
and life, and give and receive blows, and leave nothing undone, that his wit
serves him to think of, for the atchieuement of victory. A coward also would
feign divide the spoil, and feed himself with the fatness of a good booty:
but his wishes do not dispearce themselves into his hands and legs, nor
stir up his spirits and his limbs to be entering battle, and to join hand
to hand with the foe: so a good man's desire of obedience, sets his head, and
heart, and hand on work, to the attainement of obedience. He thinks; Ah that
I could be good according to Gods commandment! And further he thinks; What
may I do to get power against such a sin? to attain strength to do such
duties? And when he sees what is to be done, he sets about it, he calls upon
himself, he calls upon God, he urges his own heart, he entreates the Lord
Jesus for help, he blames himself, he condemns himself, he inforceth upon
himself the remembrance of Gods commandments, Gods judgments, Psalm. 25 9.48.
Gods promises, and as David says, he lifts up his hands to the Law of God
which he has loved. He is busy in laboring to obey, and a man that lives
with him, may even perceive in him, and he, in himself, a strift this way. For
in truth as there is a great difference betwixt lusting to be rich, and
laboring for wealth: so betwixt a bare lusting to be good, and endeavoring
after goodness. The sluggard would be content to take wealth, if he could
find it under his foot, or if with little ado he could entreat it to fall
into his lap; yea, sometimes when he wants money, or clothes, or food, and
is pinched with need, he has a kind of angry eagerness after it, and he
would as leife as his life, have so good a living as his neighbor has: but
he cannot shake off sleep in a cold morning, he can endure no sweates: he
can endure no sweat, he loves not to rise betimes, and set to work, he cannot
travel, he cannot take pains. Not so the good husband; for he thinks of his
business, whither he may go, what he may do, what times he must observe for
the getting of a shilling; and accordingly takes those times, dispatcheth those
businesses, and goes to such places; and neither heat, nor cold, nor wet, nor
dry, nor night, nor darkness shall hinder him, but he will go forward with
those things, which are requisite for his thriuing. Even so the foolish man
sometimes, could find in his heart to leave such a sin, and to do such good
duties. O it were very well if he had such virtues, and were rid of such vices!
and what a good turn had he, if he could do, as such and such: and in a
twinge of his conscience, or in a fit, when he is told of heaven, he could be
content to leap out of his skin to get heaven, and to get out of hell: but
after his fit is over, he cannot away with this confessing of his sins in
secret, with this rending of his soul, with this earnest contending with God,
and with this crossing of his own nature, and fighting against the lusts of
his flesh, even with this laboring for the righteousness of God above all
things. But the Christian stands otherwise affected, he museth of the way and
means of getting grace, he thinks seriously what is to be done, for the
beating down of such a vice, and building up of such a virtue: he beats
upon his own heart, all such reasons as he can bring, to fix his will in a
resolution of doing good, leaving evil; he takes pains with calling hard
upon God; takes pains in checking and controling, in provoking and stirring up
himself; in laboring to lament and bewail, to hate and detest his sin; and
to work in himself earnest sorrow, and sound grief for sin; and thinks
not much, even to weary and toil himself in these spiritual labors. He
plowes his heart, he sowes in the Word, be seeks for showers of grace, he
weeds his heart, he breaks the clods of his heart. Thus he sets himself to
task, and is a right husbandman in his own soul.

Further, the thing about which his desires and endeauours are conversant,
About the will of God.
is the will of God revealed in his Word: not the will of men, not the secret
and hidden will of GOD, nor a supposed imaginary will of God; but that
selfsame will of God, which is delivered unto him in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles: for so says David, His delight is in the Law of God.
Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 119.105.
And again, Thy word is a Lantern to my feet, and a light to my paths. He
looks to that which is revealed, and desires to be wise, according to that
which is written, and not above it: his desires and labors are limited by the
manifestation of Gods will.

In things tendered to the thoughts of his mind, he demands how it is
written? Revealed in Scriptures.
and how do I read? so far (and no further) stooping, and yielding, as he
finds divine authority, with Prophetical and Apostolical testimony, to call
for yeeldance. I have walked in thy truth, Psalm. 26.3.
says David. He knows, that what the Lord has commended to his Church, by
those principal Pastors of his Church, the Prophets and Apostles, that is
Gods truth; and therefore he subdues his reason and affections unto it. But if
any man will bring any thing to him, and press it as necessary to salvation,
which has not the stamp of divine inspiration; he knows not how to submit
his conscience to such baseness, as to yield it self to any other, than the
royal sovereignty of the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; like a right good
subject, and withal noble and ingenuous: that as he cannot be induced to
withdraw his neck from his Princes yoke, so can he by no means endure the
burden of an usurpers Scepter; and therefore he had rather die with the
honorable liberty of a subject of the Lord, than live a slave, inthralled to
the tyranny of an usurping creature.

Now this will of God he strives both to know, Both to know and do the same.
and also to do. Not to know alone, nor to do alone, but to know and do
both: even to do out of know ledge, is the mark that his endeavors aim at.
An hypocrite separates these two things; he would know, but regards not to
practice; he admits GODS Word into his head willingly, and with applause in
most things; but into his heart, and into his life he does not admit it.
Neither does he therefore study to understand, that he may be ruled by the
light he has gotten, but alone, that he may make himself a teacher of
others, or a carper at others, and a well applauded discourser before others.
He has lame feet, though he have a seeing eye, and never cares to go, where
he sees his duty leads him. Thus the forward dissembler; and quite
contrarily, the ordinary formal man, he seems to be all for doing, and
doing, little caring to know or understand; as if a man should talk of
dispatching his work in the dark without a candle, doubtless this work
would be but bunglingly performed: but the Christian desires to rectify his
life by knowledge, to guide his feet by his eye, and his eye by the lantern
of the Word, that so he may neither have a fruitless knowledge, nor a blind
practice, but may attain the blessing that our Savior pronounces, saying;
Now you know these things, John 13.17.
happy are ye if you do them. And this is the matter of a good life, a settled
will and endeavor to know, and do the will of God, set down in Scriptures.

Let us acquaint you with the moving cause thereof, The motive of
fruitfulness is love to God. John 14.15.
which must be the love of God in Christ, according as our Savior himself
assures us, saying; If ye love me keep my commandments. In like manner the
Apostle telling us, that faith must work by love; 2. Cor. 5.14, 15
and saying of himself, that the love of God constrained him to preach the
Gospel: for thus did he judge, that seeing one died for all, therefore all were
dead; and that he dyed for all, that they which live, should hereafter live,
not to themselves, but to him that dyed for them. The holy Ghost at what time
it incorporateth the Christian into Christ's body, and makes him a true branch
of this Vine, does ground in his soul a settled and firm persuasion, of the
unspeakable love of God unto him, in Christ his Mcdiatour. And though he have
not always a sense of this love, yet the persuasion of it, does always take
such deep root in him, that it evidently shows it self, in drawing his
soul to be one with God, making his heart still to hang toward him, and to
be affected with great good will unto him. Now love is an affection, that
tends to unite the things loved; and because there can be none union betwixt
the Creature and the Creator, unless the Creature do even resign and yield up
his will to Gods will, to be carried, moved, and guided by it: hence it is,
that the soul loving God, must needs subject its will unto him; and therefore
be careful to know and do his will, because it is his will, that he should so
endeavor to know and do. And so is the Christian heart allured forward to
obedience: for we love God, because he loved us first, 1. John 4.19.
faith the Apostle; and then must our love needs bring forth this obedience.
And this thing is of so absolute necessity, in the point of good living, that
without it, no seeming goodness can be acceptable unto GOD. 1. Cor. 13.2.
For so we have the Apostle plainly affirming unto us, that though a man give
his body to be burned; and though he give all his substance to the poor, yet
if he have not love, all is of no worth or reckoning. Whatsoever therefore does
not arise out of his fountain, and grow from this root, it is not to be
called fruit, unless you will mean rotten and worm caten fruit. And we may
say assuredly, that unless the thing inducing us to the care of knowing and
doing Gods will, be a dear and hearty affection which we bear in our souls
to him, out of a persuasion that we have, of the great and tender compassion
that he bare unto us in Christ, and an apprehension of the infinite riches of
his grace and wisdom, showed in his Son; our endeavor is not accepted,
neither can be called holy. But the people of GOD, do find themselves so
linked and tied unto God, in regard of that, his most wise, gracious, and
favorable dealing with them in his son, and those insinite excellencies,
which from the sight of this goodness, they begin to discern in him; that out
of the sweet and gentle motions of this love, they are fully resolved to obey
him. Thus there is a joint operation of faith, and love in their obedience, it
being utterly impossible, that the creature should love God, but out of some
true persuasion of Gods love to him. Wherefore how godly or good soever any
man's life be, in show and appearance; if the maine motive to that goodness be
the love of men alone, or the love of himself, or any such like, and not the
love of God, springing from an inward, and grounded apprehension of Gods grace
toward him, in the face of Christ; it is not to be called Goodness indeed,
neither is so in Gods account. Let us instance in one or two particulars. A man
meeting with a miserable person, is liberal toward him with money for his
relief. The thing that induced him thereto, was the entreaty of the party, or
a kind of natural compassion, or the labor of some friend: but he never
considered, that God (who so infinitely loved him, as to make his only Son
poor, that he might be made rich) has required such duties of love and
bounty at his hands, toward his brethren for his sake; neither did provoke and
stir up himself to exercise this bounty, with lifting up his mind to Gods
commandment and good pleasure, and to the goodness and kindness of God
toward him (to whom it were a shame of all shames for him to deny so small a
matter, as the bestowing of a little pittance of his own wealth at his
appointment). This almes-deed, this act of liberality, is not a fruit of
piety; it is not a fruit of Faith, it is not a fruit of Christianity, it is not
in him, and to him a good deed, or an act of obodience to the Lord: but
another meeting with the like person, is pronoked by the forenamed meditations,
to help and comfort him, and by the stirring of such thoughts in his mind,
has his heart inclined to give him what he needs: or if the sodainenesse of
their meeting, or some other like occasion, cause, that he has not these
thoughts presently stirring in his mind, yet they have been in him often
before, to beget in him an habit of liberality: this now is a fruit of grace,
this is to bring forth fruit in Christ, this is a true good work, and such as
God himself accepts, and accounts good. So in going to Church to hear the
Word, or to receive the Sacraments, in laboring in a man's calling, in doing of
justice, and in all other particular points of goodness; if we be not moved to
these by love to God, in obedience to his Commandment, out of faith to his
gradious promises in Christ, but by considerations taken merely from our
selves, whether in regard of the present life, or that that is to come, we
cannot say, that we be fruitful branches, neither do we indeed serve God in
such duties: but when our mind does lift it self up to God, and by the
consideration of his good will and pleasure, does stir up it self to do
good, because we know, he would have it to be done; whom we so love, that we
cannot but desire, that his will should be satis fied and accomplished (for he
that loves any person, does also carefully bind himself, to fulfill his will
whom he loves; unless his will be to have that done, which would be for his
own hurt, which can never befall the Lord of heaven, because of his perfect
and infinite wisdom): when (I say) our minds do thus stir up themselves to
do good, or avoid evil, then do we truly serve God, and this is such
obedience, as God does take pleasure in, as it were in grapes of good taste,
that grow upon the Vine of his own planting.

Furthermore, The end of fruitfulness, is Gods glory.
the end of our doing Gods will, must be Gods glory, or (which is all one) that
we may please him; for in seeking to please him, we glorify him: and these
two things are always coincident. 1. Cor. 10.31.
So the Apostle directs, saying; Whatsoener you do, Ephesians. 1.12.
let all be done to the glory of God. And again, That we may be to the praise
of his glory. And again, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
You have received of us, how ye ought to walk and to please God. The maine
scope and drift you see, of all our actions must be this, that we may do that
which is good in Gods fight, and so content and satisfy him, and witness our
high and honorable esteem of him, and testify our acknowledgement of his
infinite and incomparable excellencies. The principal thing that must stand
before our eyes, alluring and inuiting us to the aforenamed care, of doing and
knowing the will of God, must be this, that we may honor and please our
Maker. Not to please men, not to win favor, credit, wealth in the world;
nay, nor to get eternal happiness to our selves: none of all these (I say) must
be the chief scope of our obedience, but that we may bring some honor to
him, to whose honor all his creatures ought, in reason, to addict themselves,
and that we might content him, whose content all things should seek to work,
because all things are from him: for the Lord takes pleasure in those that
fear him; he desires that the sinner should turn and live; he wishes, O
that my people would hearken! their prayers be as incense in his sight; their
obedience, a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor; and their Almes-deede, an
offering, with which he is well pleased: and by doing of these things, and
avoiding the contrary, is the Lord highly honored, in that hereby he is
acknowledged to be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and we do make
profession of our esteeming him, the Sovereign Lord and Commander of our
selves, and of all creatures. And this is the very white (as it were), at which
all our obedience must be leuelled. Not but that there are inferior ends,
respecting our selves, and our own good, whereupon we may look, and by which
we may be moved to do good: but the chief thing of all, and that which must
sway us most of all, must be this, that God may be pleased and honored by us.
A man may lawfully purpose, to gratify a friend in some good deeds, to procure
some temporal benefit to himself by other good deeds; and in all to further
and work out his own salvation. But the maine and chief end, the utmost, the
vpshot of all the rest; that, that his mind must look to, in, and above all
the rest, and make more care of than all the rest, and which must be of such
power, that it would draw him to obedience; though all the rest were absent:
this supreme and most potent end, must be the forenamed things, the pleasing
and glorifying of God. Even as a good servant, in doing his service to his
Master, hops and purposes to do himself good, by being capable of his
Masters bounty, and receiving liberal wages from him, whom he knows to be so
good, that he will not deal niggardly with any of his faithful servants: but
the special thing he aims at, is, that he may advantage his Master, and
please and content him, by doing his business: for he that does chiefly aim
at wages (in so much I mean, that were not that wages an attractiue, he would
not do the service which he does) cannot indeed be said so much to serve his
master, as himself. So the servants of God may, and do aim at their own
eternal welfare, and at the obtaining of the blessings of GOD which he has
promised: but there is an higher thing, and a further matter, at which they
look more directly, and whereto they bend their thoughts more specially, and
that is the pleasing and magnifying of him their Lord and Master, whom they
know to be so abundant in goodness, that he is ready to bestow such
happiness upon his servants. So our Savior; Father, glorify thy Son, John
17.1.
that thy Son may also glorify thee. Lo, the first thing he looked at, was
the glory of his Father; and his own glory was respected by him none
otherwise, than as a fruit, or means of the glory which his Father should have
by him: for so that is truly called the principal end, which of it self,
though all the rest were set aside, would allure a man to do a thing, although
he may perhaps the rather also work, by the coming betwixt of some other
inferior and subordinate end: as the chief end of a trades-mans going to the
fair or market, is to buy and sell, though he may perhaps the more readily go
to meet some friend there; for his business would draw him thither, though
his friend should not happily come thither. So ought the glory of God to carry
so great a sway in our souls, that in regard of it chiefly, we do as we do
in a godly conversation; standing so resolved, that we would carry our selves
in that holy manner, even simply for the glory sake of GOD, though our selves
should not attain happiness thereby, although now that he has pleased
inseparably to conioyne our felicity and his own glory, we do so much the
rather, and so much the more willingly and thankefully perform such obedience
unto him. But as for those worldly and base ends of credit, gain, and the
like, we should even quite and clean neglect them; unless it be so far
forth alone, as they be referrable to that highest end, in that we may be the
better able to attain that by means of them. This is in very truth to deny
our selves, and not to live to our selves, but to live to him: and so we ought
(as it were) to forget our selves, and to sequester our thoughts from our
selves, sending them up swiftly and plentifully to him, who is infinitely
better than our selves, and than all creatures: for what more reasonable, and
equal, and convenient, than that his glory should be preferred above all
things, in whom, and from whom all things have their being and continuance.
And these be the causes of fruitfulness, the matter, motive and end.

It must further be known by two properties, namely generality and constancy.
The properties of fruitfulnesle are
The godly man's care of knowing and of doing, must reach to the whole revealed
will of GOD: Generality. Psalm. 119.6.
as David says; I shall not be confounded, whilst I have respect to all thy
commandments. And the Prophet says; Cast away all your transoressions: for
God is an absolute Sovereign, and his will is a supreme will, that must guide
us in each thing, one as well as another. It suffices not to yield unto him in
a few things, nor in all things, except one; but universally in all things,
without any exception, must we submit our selves to him, in the desire and
endeavor of our souls. A good man may be ignorant of many things that God
reuealeth, but he must be willing and ready to know his whole will. He may
likewise come short of doing many things which he knows; but he must
purpose, labor and strive to do all things, that so he may show himself a
true and absolute inferior to the Lord. For God cannot in any thing be
deceived, or command amiss in any matter. For men, it is lawful to deny
subjection to them in many things, because they may mistake and err in many
things, and because their power and authority is limited: but GODS will is
without all restraint and limitation to be yielded unto, because he has a full
and perfect sovereignty over us. And indeed no man is moved by the love of
God, or aymeth at his glory in any thing, unless he be universally obedient;
so that is but a counterfeit obedience, which is not general. Here is no place
left for picking or choosing, neither may we lawfully refuse his commandment
in any particular, but must say, as once the Israelites did; Whatsoever the
Lord our God commands, Deuteronomy. 5.27.
that will we do. There is no sin forbidden by GOD, but our resolution must
be to leave it; no duty commanded, but our resolution must be to do it: and
when in any point we fail, we must even condemn and chide our selves for
failing: laboring still after perfection, and praying for more and more
strength to obey; and it must be our greatest burden, and continual grief,
that we cannot attain to fullness of knowledge and obedience.

Again, Constancy.
constancy must accompany our obedience; we must not walk in this way for a
spirt, a little, now and then, and afterward give over: but we must proceed in
a settled course, without any giving over, or desisting. A good man follows
goodness, as a Tradesman does his trade; he is at it, to day, and to morrow,
and the third day, and all the days of his life: as David says, I will keep
them to the end. Psalm 119.33.112.
And again, I have inclined mine heart to perfor me thy statutes always, even
to the end. And, Psalm. 1.2.
Blessed is the man, whose meditation is in the Law of God day and night. The
most painful labourer has now and then a fit at play, and sometimes he
meets with an holy day: but usually (though not still with the like intention
of pains, yet in a settled course) he is found in doing his work and business.
So a Christian man is not always a like earnest; yea, sometimes he makes
indeed an holy day, or a loytering idle day (for which he does well shent
himself afterward), but yet usually and in a steadfast course he follows
after goodness, and is still still applying this great and necessary work of
a godly life: for God who has appointed him this task, does not allow him any
discontinuance. And this is fruitfulnes, or a good life, when a man, out of a
persuasion of Gods tender love unto him in Jesus Christ, does intertaine in his
soul such an carnest and hearty love unto God, as makes him careful to
please and honor him, by continual striving to know what is his good, holy
and acceptable will, and framing himself in all things to do what he bids,
(leave the contrary), without any final surceasing: so that though he slack
his pace now and then, and some dulnes do creep upon him, yet he quickens
himself, and sets to it again, resolving never to give over quite, so long as
life lasts. This is to live as beseems the Gospel of Christ; this is to
hear the Word of God, and do it; this is to walk in the truth of God; this
is obedience, better than all sacrifices. And so have we sufficiently
explicated the point: we must now make some use of it.

CHAP. XVI. Containing the first use.
ANd first we must call upon every soul to make a true trial of himself,
whether he be fruitful yea or no. The Word of God must judge us all at the
last day: let us therefore judge our selves by it in the mean, that we may the
better hold out, Every man must try whether he be fruitful yea or no.
in that final and terrible judgment. If we hear not Gods word in such sort,
as thus to apply it to our own souls; our hearing is but loss of time and
pains, and will but make our reckoning heavier at the end. Weigh your selves in
these balances, and touch your selves at this touch stone. Man's heart is very
prone to beguile it self, and to be beguiled by Satan: searching it by the
word of God, is the surest means to save it from the danger of being beguiled.
Some men mistaking fruitfulnes, esteem themselves fruitful, when they be
nothing less: others again, for want of sound information in the matter,
condemn themselves as unfruitful, when indeed they be fruitful. Before we
either affirm or deny, it is needful for us to prove our selves impartially,
that our affirmations may not puff us up with counterfeit and windy comforts;
our denialls cast us down with harmefull and unnecessary deiectednesse. Tell
me then (that come from GOD) or rather, tell the Lord that comes by me, to
inquire of thy self, concerning thy self. Art thou a fruitful branch in
Christ, yea or not? That thou art a branch, a Christian in name and profession,
it is yielded; thy coming hither seems to affirm so much. But say: Art thou
a fruitful branch, or not? Make not ouergreat haste to answer this question
either way, but deliberate well of the point, and call to mind what has been
formerly spoken, concerning this fruitfulness, and accordingly answer for, or
against thy self: say in truth, and without dissembling, which way go the
greatest number of thy thoughts, and to what end are the chiefest cogitations
of thy mind-directed? Aim they at this? Busy they themselves about this? To
please the living God, the Author of thy life, by knowing and doing his most
righteous will? Art thou careful and desirous to become acquainted with thy
duty? To that purpose giving thy self to hear, and read the Word of God, and
perform all such good exercises, as thou have means to perform, that thou
may know it? Art thou likewise careful and desirous, when thou have found
it out, to put it in practice also, and that not in some things alone, but
without exception in all things? Does thy soul thirst after Gods statutes?
Does thine heart often, daily, continually raise up it self with such hearty
wishes? O that I could understand what I might do to please God! O that I
could hold my feet fast in his precepts! Do thou make it the chief
business of thy life, to keep thy self unspotted of the world, and be found
plentiful in all the good works that the Law of God requires? Do thou muse
of this? ponder of this? and fix the strongest of the desires of thy soul on
this? still recalling thine heart, and turning thy self again to these
desires and wishes, when thou find them wandering to by-matters? Can thy
soul witness for thee before God, that thou do put forth thy self after
thy strength, and labor to gather more strength to get understanding of Gods
will? and that thou vrgest and inforcest thy self, to the constant obeying of
it? rejoicing and praising God, when in some measure thou can do it? and
when thou failest grieuing and afflicting thy self, condemning and blaming thy
carelessness and weakness: and arming thy self still and still against all
such hindrances, as thou meetest withal? find thou thy self carried
forward this way with the wings of that love of God, which is inkindled in thy
breast, toward him the God of thy salvation, and that with an earnest intention
to please him, and show thy self regardfull of his greatness? It boots not
at all to lie and feign and dissemble: but true and plain dealing is
necessary, when thou have to deal with him that searches the heart, and
demands of thee these things, not because himself is ignorant of them, but
because he would not have thee remain ignorant to thy own destruction.
Wherefore consider advisedly, and answer truly; Can thine heart say in Gods
hearing, that these things are found in thee? or that they are not found?
Doubtless brethren, it is as possible for us to tell, and that certainly and
infallibly, whether we follow the trade of godliness, as any other manual
trade or occupation. He that tills the ground, he that tends cattle, he
that is a Smith, or a Carpenter, or the like; I say, every one of these can
tell, that he follows such a Calling: one can say; Mine hand is often at the
Plow, and I am still about the husbanding of my ground, I am thinking of
sowing, of reaping, of soiling, and such like; another can say, I am still
attending my cattle, I follow my sheep, I fodder them, I dress them;
another, I am conversant in building houses, and my thoughts, and my hands, are
taken up in framing, and preparing timber, or stone for that purpose.
Doubtless it is as plain, whether a man follow godliness, as whether he follow
any of these vocations. A man may if he will, know whether he be taken up with
thoughts and desires of pleasing God, of avoiding sin, of subdoing his
corruptions, of planting and watring grace, of doing his duty, which he has
learned out of Gods word, or whether he be a stranger to these things, and
whether he do them constantly, or by starts; and whether he be heedfull in all
things, or spare himself in some thing, and whether he study to please God in
these things, or look wholly or chiefly to himself: these things are not
performed so secretly and vndiscernably, but that he which performs them,
may easily find and feel, that he does perform them. Wherefore be not
ignorant of thy self, for want of in quiring into thy self; and for want of a
due consideration of thy life, do not mistake thy life, whether it be a
fruitful life in Christ Jesus, or else idle and unprofitable. And if any man
find not this general endeavor to please God, it is not the giving of now and
then an alms or a piece of money to the poor; it is not the reading of now
and then a Chapter, or coming to hear a Sermon, or doing here and there some
good and commendable work, that can entitle him to the name of a fruitful
branch. And if any man do find in himself this universal stable endeavor to
glorify and please God, in the knowing and doing of his whole will; it is not
the failing and coming short of his desires, it is not the being ignorant, or
mistaking of many things, it is not the slipping into many sins and faults
(though sometimes too too gross and palpable) that can dispossess him of this
name, and make him to be accounted no fruitful branch. It is very needful,
and withal, possible and easy for thee to know what thou art: therefore be
entreated to consider of it seriously and unfeignedly, and not to mistake
through heedlesnesse or wilfulness.

CHAP. XVII. Containing the second use.
AND in the next place, The unfruitful must see their vnfruitfulnesle and their
danger by reason of it.
for those that are found in this trial unfruitful, let them not hide it from
themselves, let them not deceive themselves, but let them see and consesse it,
and withal see and feel their unhappiness in regard of it: for in Gods name
we must deal plainly with them, and assure them, that (whatsoever hitherto,
either they have thought of themselves, or others have thought of them) they be
no better than very plain hypocrites. For all their hanging upon the Vine, for
all their flourishing greenenesse of profession, for all their fair and
pleasant leaves, of coming to Church, delighting to hear Sermons, loving some
good men, commending Preachers, speaking against profaneness and common
abuses, dealing truly with men, and such like; for all these I say (and an
hundred more things which they trust upon, if an hundredth more there be of the
like kind), they be but dissemblers, guilefull persons, goats in sheep
skins, painted tombs, rotten-hearted persons, and very rank hypocrites.
Brethren, I pray you conceive not, that we delight in disgracing men, in
terrifying their consciences, in discouraging their hearts, in making their
states and themselves appear evil, if they were not so. Alack what good
shall we get by your discomfort or disgrace! what benefit will your misery
bring unto us? Nay verily, we have no pleasure (yea, we have much grief) in
pronouncing against men, that they be hypocrites. But we must needs speak
the truth, that God has put into our mouths, and that with all plainness,
and with all earnestnes, and with all authority: yea, so much the plainer, and
more earnest must we be in this matter, by how much we do better understand,
both the needfulnes of discovering to the hypocrit his hypocrisy, and withal
the difficulty of making him perceive it, though it be discovered. For you know
in how many places, the Scripture tells us of such, as in seeing, see not,
which must needs be verified in this matter, as well as in any other. An
hypocrite is exceeding loath to count himself an hypocrite: an harlot will
scarce call her self a harlot; a thief will scarce give to himself the name
of thief? how much less will those that sin in dissembling, take to
themselves their own names? Out of the natural love of our selves, which does
inordinately possess us; and out of some common notion that every man has, of
the vileness of many sins; it comes to pass, that most sinners are
unwilling to entitle themselves by their sins. But of all others the
dissembler (the principal piece and business of whose occupation it is, to
hide that which is evil, out of sight) will be most backward to thrattle his
hypocrisy (as it were) by laying his hand upon the throat of it, and drawing
himself to a round confession, in plain terms saying, In very deed I am but
an hypocrite. A man that has been thought by himself and others, to be worth
many thousands, is very unwilling to acknowledge himself a bankerout, and it
sounds as terrible as death in his ears to say, I have cast up my reckonings,
and find my self not worth a groat: even so a man that has long been taken
for a good Christan, is very backward to see and confess, that all his
Christianity was in forms, and that he is not the man he was taken for but
an errand dissembler. For why, the heart of man is loath either to perceive
himself so wretched, as he cannot but confess himself to be, in case he be
but an hypocrite, or else to take the pains, which he must needs take, to
make his estate better: for doubtless it cannot but prove a painful piece of
work to weed out a vice so deeply settled, and so far ouer-spreading. But
brethren, until hypocrisy be plainly discerned, it can never be reformed;
neither this, nor any other vice will cuer be conquered, if it be not espied.
He shall for ever remain an hypocrite, that being so, will not confess
himself so to be. For when a man is ignorant of his unhappiness, he will
never set himself with all diligence to redress it; and certainly sin will
never be overcome, without striving against it. This and this alone, is the
true cause of our earnest plainness in this matter. We would show you your
disease, that you might in time seek remedy, and not perish by it. We would
lay open your sores, that you might procure a plaster, and not be destroyed
for want of healing. And therefore returning again to the matter we were
about, we do now certify every person amongst you, in whom that universal
care of knowing, and accomplishing the whole will of God in each point of it,
and that out of the love he bears to him, and for the honor and glory of his
holy name (that he I say in whom this care) is not to be found, though he have
lived never so honestly, to the world: though he come to the Church never so
duly; though he have bin constant in frequenting Sermons; though he have been
very kind to the Ministers of Gods Word; though he have prayed many times
with great feeling; though he have fits of great sorrow for diverse sins;
though he repeat Sermons, and pray in his family; though he have obtained
great credit amongst godly men, and go in the name of a most worthy Christian;
yet for all this (and more than this, if more may be, without the forenamed
general endeavor) is but a flat hypocrite, a rank dissembler, a cousener of
the world, a beguiler of himself, a whited sepulcher, a picture of a
Christian, and not a Christian indeed. This is thy case, whatsoever thou have
heretofore deemed; this, and none other, is thy condition, if thou be
destitute of that fruitfulness, which has been plainly described unto thee.
Open thine eyes now, and see thy wretchedness; now suffer thy soul to be
wrought upon, and begin to seele thy misery, that thou may be capable of
help.

CHAP. XVIII. Containing the third use.
THirdly, We must labor to be fruitful.
let all men be now exhorted to get this fruitfulness, by which they may
approve themselves to be the true members of JESUS CHRIST. Men do many times
delight to norish in their Orchyards, trees that bear no fruit, only for the
comfort of their shade in hot seasons. It is not so with God, he likes not any
tree that can do nothing else but yield a shadow: if you will find favor in
his sight, you must be trees of righteousness, you must be trees that yield
some good fruit, and be not wholly barren. Learn I beseech you not to satisfy
your selves with shows, with formalities, with bare leaves; but show your
faith by the fruits, and let the grapes and figgs, that may be gathered of
you, testify for you before God, and your own consciences, that you be trees
of Gods own planting. Content not your selves with a form of religion;
applaude not your selves in your hearing and receiving, in your talking and
seeming, and your outward good dealing: but, O let your lives, your whole
lives, and the tenor of all your whole conversation be vniformerly,
constantly, and in all things conformeable to the doctrine, and example of our
Lord Jesus Christ; walk as he has walked, and has commanded you to walk.
Let me urge upon you the words of John Baptist to the Pharisees (men that went
for as devout holy and religious persons in their times, till Christ the
heart-searcher came to deal with them, as any of you likely can be taken now);
begin not, says he, to say with your selves, we have Abraham to our father,
but bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life. Satisfy not your selves, in
having Abraham for your father, I mean in the external formalities of
religion, but look to the course of your lives, and see that it be such, as
may beseem repentance. Why will you loose your labor? why will you die, O
house of Israel! why will you rest your selves in that, that will not profit?
Labor now to lead a godly conversation in Christ Jesus; let the common
stream and current of your actions, favor of the holiness of that Word of
God, which you say you believe, and of the virtues of that Lord Jesus Christ,
in whom you say you place your confidence. Assure your selves, you shall never
attain the benefits of Christ's death and resurrection, unless you show forth
the power of both in your lives: that is to say, unless the serious
consideration of the love and goodness of God, showed in these two; and of the
hatefulness and filthiness of sin, manifested in the former of them, do
leave so deep an impression in your souls that here-hence you grow both
resolute and able (in some degree) to cast away all the former lusts of your
ignorance, and now to turn your feet into the paths of righteousness, to
fight against all the corrupt lusts of your hearts, to labor to forbear all
wicked actions, to endeavor to plant in your souls all virtues, and to be
abundant in religious, merciful, just, temperate, and all other godly actions,
that you may show forth the virtues of him, that has translated you from
darkness to light, and be holy in all good conversation, even as he is holy.
Urge and press your selves therefore to this fruitfulness, and make the
constant carriage of your whole man, inward and outward even depose for you,
that yon are truly ingraffed into the true vine. This fruitfulness shall arise
for you in the day of tentation, as it did for Job and enable you to stand for
your uprightness against all accusations of men and devils, and against all
fears and doubtings of your own hearts. When a man is cast into the furnace
ot adversity, then will the leaves be blown off (as in the winter they be
from trees) and then if the grapes of a good conversation do not lie by him,
to witness that he was a true branch in Christ's body, nothing will remain for
him but horror and amazement, and a fearful expectation of vengeance to
befall him for all his shows. Be you therefore prepared for the day of trial,
which will surely come upon all the inhabitants of the earth. Strive to be
fruitful: stir up your selves to consider seriously of the Lords infinite
bounty in Christ: show to your selves the sweetness and goodness of the divine
Majesty, in that work so admirable and inconceiueably gracious. Provoke your
selves to make high account of him, and to love him with the most vehement and
fervent of all love: that your hearts being knit-vnto him, and set upon him,
you may even for his sake set your selves to know the good, and the evil, that
pleases and displeases him, to shun the last, and embrace the first. Urge
your selves not to dally with-him, not to offer him a parcel of obedience, an
halting goodness, but enlarge your desires and endeavors to the knowing and
keeping of his whole will in all things. Let none objection, none inclination
of flesh and blood, make you to give way to the sinfulness of your hearts in
any thing, but still continue and persist to fight against the sins, which
you cannot wholly subdue, and to mortify that by the spirit, whereof you
cannot quite be rid. Provoke and annimate your selves to the doing of these
things: say within your selves, O that I could do so; Iong for grace and
strength so to do, and call upon thy self to be more and more careful of
bearing fruit in this Vine.

The Vine it self is a most sappy and iuyeefull Vine, abundantly stored with
that heavenly verdure and moisture, that may serve to make the branches
fruitful. The husbandman is no way defective, either in skill or pains; he
is neither ignorant, nor heedlesse of any thing, that may further the branches
in their fruitfulness. There is no want either on Gods part, or on Christ's
part, but all on ours. No man is unfruitful, but for lack of will and care to
be so. I pray you be not wanting to your selves, but strive to be fruitful:
for in this Vine, every branch might be fruitful, if he were not either
wilful, or slothful, or both. But that mine exhortation may not be
bootelesse, I shall direct you how you may do to be fruitful, and declare
those things unto you, by the doing of which you shall be sure to attain power
to live holily: and these directions shall be both so few, that you may
remember them; and so easy, that you shall not need to complain of
difficulty in performance.

The means therefore to become fruitful, The means of becoming fruitful.
are these: First, a man must see and lament his former unfruitfulness, freely
confessing, that of himself he is dry and barren, and utterly unable to bring
forth fruit. Whosoever would live godlily, 1. To see and lament former
unfruitfulness
must with sorrow observe and confess, that his life has been far short of
that godliness, which he should and might have obtained, and that in him as
of himself, there remains no power to make himself godly, and to make his
conversation holy for the time to come. Yea, this must be a means of making
him heavy in heart, and base and vile in his own eyes, as that he has been
fruitless; so that he shall remain fruitless still, unless he have a
supernatural work of Gods Spirit, to make him fruitful. And for want of this
sense and acknowledgement of their own wants, it comes to pass, that most men
still remain, and still will remain unfruitful. They think they do already
live a godly life; they think they can turn themselves when they lust to a
godly life; they are over highly conceited of their own sufficiency, and they
dream they have gone further than they have. But would you not be fruitless
and barren for hereafter? see then (with sorrow) that you have been so (at
least in some measure) heretofore, and know, that it must not be a power
dwelling in your selves, which must make you better, but a borrowed power,
derived from above.

And when you have bin drawn to this acknowledgement, then give your selves
with all diligence, 2. Attend to the word read and preached.
to attend unto the Word of God, both read and preached; be attentive (I say)
to the Scriptures, both in reading and hearing them: for this is that good
seed, which if it be not received, no fruit can grow; if it be, there is a
possibility of being fruitful. Remember that the Lord has appointed, to derive
the graces of his Spirit into your hearts, by means of his Word; and that he
has appointed men (as instruments and fellow laborers) to make you, of evil,
good, and of good, better; and therefore you must submir your selves unto the
will of God, and give your minds to an heedefull attendance upon his
ordinance. But remember, that we do not require your bare bodily presence at
the Church, and in the ordinances of God: a man may be present in body, and
absent in mind; and this his presence shall but provoke God against him,
because it is but a direct mocking of God. Yea, you must bring your souls to
the Church, as well as your bodies; and mark, and hearken, and observe, and
consider what is spoken to you in Gods name. A man must come to the Word of
God, as to the Word of God; knowing it to be Gods power to his salvation, and a
means that God has appointed by the commandments, reproves, exhortations,
comforts thereof, to plant and water all graces in him, to beat down his
sins, to build up his new man, and to translate him into the image of Jesus
Christ. Most people that come to the Word, for want of esteeming it as an
institution of God for so happy a purpose, have no care at all of themselves in
hearing, never look to their thoughts, never incline their ears, never
listen, never heed what is spoken. They sit there (it may be) quietly and
stilly for their position of body, but are shaken up and down in their souls,
with a world of idle or evil imaginations, which stop out all that, that
should be conueighed into their minds to do them good: so they give Satan
leave to fill up their minds with vanity, that there may be no room for the
grace of God. To such hearers we can promise no blessing: but it is the
attentive marking and observing the Word (out of a good opinion of it, and an
honorable esteem, as a saving instrument appointed of God to make men holy)
which we prescribe unto you as a means of changing your barrenness into
fruitfulness; by the lips of his faithful servants, will Jesus Christ drop
virtue into the hearts of those, that come to seek it there. But

Thirdly, 3. Meditate upon it after. wards.
after hearing and reading, you must meditate and consider of that which you
have heard, you must apply it to your selves, you must try your selves by it,
you must duly consider, whether you perform the things which it declares unto
you, yea or no; and if you have been failing, provoke your selves to more
carfulness; you must urge your selves to give credit unto the promises and
threats, and to say within your selves, this good or evil, shall surely be
performed unto me accordingly. And so mighty is the Word of God, that if it be
thus hidden in the heart, it shall surely purge the heart, and make it good; if
it be ingraffed in the soul, it is able to save the soul; if it be covered
with earth, it will bring forth a crop; neither is any branch so barren and
unfruitful, but by thus applying the Word to it self in private meditation,
it shall by little and little be made fruitful. But many men do want the
power of the Word, because they content themselves barely to read or hear the
Word; or if they mark it a little for the present, they esteeme-that
sufficient, never taking care to go alone, and lay it fast unto their own
hearts. Take knowledge (I pray you brethren) of the true cause, why the Word of
God does not profit the most of your souls: you come hither to hear it,
perhaps also you gine some reasonable heed to it, and can remember what was
spoken, and can talk of it a little, if occasion serve: but the world with its
businesses or delights, does so bewiteh and beguile you, that you can find
neither heart nor time, neither will nor leisure to call again to mind, the
things that you have heard; and to ask your selves, Do I this duty? am I
guilty of this sin? does not this reproof pertain to me? have I any part in
this promise? and accordingly to strive with your own hearts to be either
humbled or comforted, and so to resolve on amendment and reformation according
to the Word. This is the cause that we have so too too many fruitless hearers.
Hence it is, that so much is taught, so little practiced. How long will you
continue to neglect this most saving and most profitable exercise, of binding
the Word on the tables of your hearts, and of incorporating it into your
souls, and being Gods instruments, to ingraue it in your own minds, by
meditating on it, and by busying your cogitations upon it afterward, as a
thing that much concerns you? How often have you been told, that much hearing
without meditation, will breed nothing but a swimming knowledge? that it will
not beget holiness? that it will not renew the soul? but that hearing
seconded with meditation, will quicken and will sanctify? I pray you take
notice of this fault, and amend it. Redeem time, as to come and hearken to the
voice of God speaking to thee; so likewise to get alone afterward, and apply
it to thy self in thy serious meditations. Certainly if we did thus declare
our high esteem of Gods Word, and make it appear, that our souls did account
of it, as of a thing most precious and healthful to our souls, the Lord of
heaven would not fail to give his blessing, and to make it mighty, to the
working of a godly conversation in us, and it should bring forth the fruit of
good living.

But lastly, Lastly, pray to God to make us, frui. full by his Spirit.
you must also join with your meditating (which he that meditateth cannot but
do; he that meditates not, can hardly do in any earnestness) constant prayer
unto God for his holy Spirit, to write his Law in your inward parts, to engraue
it in the fleshly tables of your hearts, and to move and incline your wills to
obedience, that so you may become the Epistle of God, ministered by men. For
fruitfulness is a supernatural effect: it comes not from any power inherent
in man's soul, or arising from his own will: but it is an effect of the spirit
of life and grace, which is sent from Christ the Vine, as it were sap, into the
several branches, that do suck and draw it from him in his ordinances, and
by name, by faithful, and earnest, and continual requesting it at his hands.
You must therefore make conscience to call upon God, for the good work of his
spirit, to help you to live holily, to make you assured of his love, fervent
in love to him, zealous of his glory, and constant in walking in his laws. And
in particular, you must daily beg of him to strengthen you, for the performance
of such and such duties, and leaving of such and such sins, as from time to
time the Word of God which you hear, does call vpou you to leave or to
perform. God will be entreated for all good things, and he has bound
himself not to deny the requests of all that call on him. Matthew. 7.8.
Every one that seeks, finds: O comfortable and large promise! answering
all objections, and able to stay up the soul against all discouragements.
Never any man was so wicked and sinful, but if he would come to the Lord, and
earnestly beseech him for his name sake, to change his heart and life, and
continue constant in following this suite, the Lord did surely hearken unto
him, and make him godly. You cannot be good of your selves, but you may (if you
will not wink) see your own badnesse, and your own impotency. You may (if
you will not harden your own hearts, and make your selves careless of your
own souls) cry and call to God to make you good, and importune him with
perpetual supplications, to bow and incline your hearts to keep his precepts,
to open your eyes to see, and your hearts to entertayne his holy Law; that you
may convert, and he may heal you. This I say you may do, if you do not make
your selves wilful and obstinate, by contemning the exhortations of Gods Word,
and even stopping your ears against it, and by wilful turning your hearts
after other matters. I have showed you now, how the barren may become fertile,
how the dry may be filled with sap, and how the lives of them may be made godly
and Christian, which are yet far from godliness and Christianity. See your
barrenness; and to attentive hearing, join diligent meditating on the Word
you hear; and constant prayer unto GOD for the strength of his Spirit, to make
his Word effectual, and to give you grace to obey it; then shall you surely be
made branches bringing forth fruit; for then do you abide in Christ, and his
word abides in you, and that our Savior himself does after wards prescribe
as an infallible way to bring forth much fruit.

CHAP. XIX. Containing the fourth use.
But now it is time that we turn our selves unto the fruitful branches, The
sruitfull must be comforted therein.
to divide unto them that comfort, which GOD has allotted unto them, and which
this text affords, and they stand in need of. For all those therefore that do
bring forth fruit in Christ, in such sort as has bin showed, we have much good
to speak, and joyful tidings to deliver. We are to assure and secure them,
against all the fears of their own hearts, against all the cauils of Satan,
and false censures of the wicked world, that they be not hypocrites, but
true-hearted, and sincere Christians. Whosoever amongst you finds, that in
his soul, the consideration of Gods infinite goodness through his only Son,
has had such a powerful working, that it has even knit his heart sast unto
the author of so great kindness; and made him even say and swear within
himself, that he would surely keep his righteous judgments; and made him
constant in taking all pains to mortify his corruptions, and to do his duty
in every thing, according to the divine direction: so that there is no one
thing so comfortable to him, as when he can carry himself in some good manner,
as beseems the Gospel of Christ; and nothing does more humble and abase him,
than when he fails of this holy walking; and if it were demanded of his very
soul, what in all the world he most heartily desires and would fainest attain
in all his life? his heart would make this answer for him, that it is to please
God, to get acquaintance with his duty, and to accomplish it accordingly: this
he wishes, this he longs for, this he coueteth more, than all wealth or
greatness, or other gailded toy, that the world has to give him. I say now in
Gods name to every such person (and require him in Gods name to give credit
unto my words, because they are infallibly grounded on Gods Word) that he ought
to be of good comfort, that he is a true Christian, and no dissembler, and that
for such an one he ought to take himfelfe, notwithstanding all the blemishes,
errors, ignorances, imperfections; and it may be also sometimes gross
out-strayings of his life. Brethren, the true-hearted had need to be made to
understand their truth, as well as the false-hearted their falsehood. For as
the latter out of his selfe-liking disposition is ready to flatter himself
with sweet words; so the former, out of his acquaintance with his own
guilesulnes, and the sight of his own badnesse and unworthiness, is ready to
threaten himself ouersharpely, and to charge himself eagerly (though
wrongfully) that he is but an hypocrite. But now ye servants of God, consider
that it is a fault to molest your selves with causeless accusations of your
selves, or to be ignorant of the unspeakable favor that God has showed you,
or to deny the blessed work of his good Spirit in you. Yea you are bound in
conscience to acknowledge your own true-heartednes, and with hearty thanks unto
God, and much chearefulnes in your selves, to approve your selves to him, and
to your own consciences. I confess, that it is far more dangerous to hope
then to fear without a cause: but yet the inconveniences of these false
seares, are also very many and very great. When a man that is upright. does not
account himself so to be, he is unable to think comfortably of dying, and
leaving this World; he is backward to prayer; he can hardly give thanks for any
thing; he cannot long for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; he cannot so
much delight himself in the contemplation of heaven; he cannot be so patient
in affliction: he cannot be so abundant in godly speeches, to the edification
of others, as else he might be. These fears therefore (though by God they be
made profitable for the beating down of pride, and for the ferretting out of
the relics of guile that remain in us) are yet (unless they be seasonably
opposed and removed) very noisome and hurtful, and (like an East wind, cold and
dry) do bite and nip the branches, and cause the grapes to grow, but few, and
little, upon them. Wherefore you must be given to understand, that fruitfulness
may well stand with the having many weaknesses, sins and corruptions; though
not with the allowing, excusing, maintaining, extenuating, denying, and wilful
winking at any. Thou have manifold corruptions in thee, much pride,
vainglory, worldliness, lust, passion, reuengefulnesse, and twenty other
like. But tell me; Do thou see and feel these corruptions? Do thou
constantly observe the motions and risings of them with grief, dislike,
detestation, and judging of thy self for them? Do thou make opposition to
them, by pressing on thine heart the promises, threats and precepts of the
Word? by consideration of the death and sufferings of Christ, by groans in thy
self, and by supplications unto God; and so keep them from usual breaking
forth in extremity and grossness? or if they do at any time break forth,
do thou arraigue thy self for them in Gods presence? not ceassing to wound
and pierce thine own heart, till thou find it wrought to a renewed loathing
of them? not ceassing to confess them to the Lord, and cry for his help, till
thou have renewed in thy self a firm purpose of no more returning unto them?
Do thou these things, I say, in all thy faults, weaknesses and wanderings?
then I affirm, that thou may be, and art fruitful, notwithstanding all
these faults; and I tell thee, for the comforting of thine heart, that these
things cannot bereave thee of the title and priuiledgeof a fruitful branch,
and an upright person. Again, thou art very defective in virtues of all
kinds, in faith, in meekness, in patience, in thankfulness, in
heauenly-mindednesse, and the rest: But do thou take notice of these thy
defects? Art thou grieved and ashamed of them? Do thou call upon God to make
a supply? and call on thy self to labor for an increase of them? Do thou
stir up thy self to grow in these graces? and not excuse, please, and
content thy self in thy wants; pretending that every man must have his faults,
and so have thou, thus slightly passing them over? then I assure thee again,
that for all thy wants thou art yet fruitful in Christ, and so undoubtedly a
true Christian. For to fruitfulnes is not required an actual knowing and doing
of all Gods will, but a laboring and striving to know and do the same, and
that constantly, out of love unto him, and for his glory. Wherefore if the love
of the Lord do so inflame thy soul, that thou resistest earnestly to all thy
corruptions; and if the intention and purpose of pleasing and honoring him,
do so constantly stand before thine eyes, as to make thee take continual
pains, to reform and amend thy self; I dare pronounce thee a fruitful
branch, and a sound-hearted Christian: and I do now require and enjoin thee,
to fall down before the Lord with hearty praises, for this so unspeakable
goodness of his, in ingraffing thee into the right Olive, and making thee a
living member of his Son the Head and Prince, in whom all fullness dwells.
Yea, I wish thee to rejoice, and to delight thy self in abundance of peace,
through the certain acknowledgement of thine happy estate that thou art not
alone in, but also of the Church, and truly partaker of the fatness and
verdure of the right Olive tree. To know a man's self fruitful in some degree,
will make him fruitful in an higher. The man that suspecteth himself to be
worse than nothin, goes fearfully and faintly about his business: but he that
is certain he has something of his own (though not so much as he would) is
cheerful and forward in following his calling. It does likewise even dampe
the courage of a good Christian, in following the trade of godliness, when he
is still causelessly accusing himself to have no truth, no sincerity, no
uprightness: but to know that he has truth indeed (and yet is far short of
perfection), this encourages him to go forward in striving after perfection.
The consolation that piety affords, is a principal furtherer of our good
proceedings in it; and therefore thou must take comfort in the truth of thy
beginnings, that thou may go forward with a liuelier pace, and greater
diligence. Consider here, how that our Savior does not name the bringing
forth of as much, and as fair fruit, as others, for the note of a good and
pleasing branch, but simply the bringing forth of fruit: and therefore if thou
be in any degree fruitful, though neither so much as thou would, or
should, or see others to be; yet there is just cause of receiving
comfort. Indeed the littleness of our fruit should humble us, but not
discourage us. It should stand before our eyes, to keep us from pride, not
from peace; to stop us from conceitednesse, not to hinder our comfort in God.
Satan that desires to make all things harmefull unto us, labors also to turn
the relics of sin (which remain in us), to the overmuch disquieting and
terrifying of our consciences, and to the shaking of our faith, and
interrupting the consolations we might enjoy in God: but let us not yield to
the subtlety and malice of Satan in this behalf. When thou see thy self
failing in the measure of fruit, observe this failing well, but turn it not
the worst way. Let it make thee charge thy self with too much negligence, not
with utter hollownesse; conclude from it, that thou art but weak and feeble,
not that thou art but an hypocrite and dlssembler. And now let all Gods people,
chiefly those that are full of doubts and fears, depart away confirmed and
established in comfort: let their spirits be at peace within them, and let them
feed of the fat and sweet portion, which the Lord has allowed them. The joy
of the Lord will be their strength; these comforts will ripen their fruits,
as the Sunne-beames do the fruits of the earth, and they shall with most east
and assurance grow better and better, when they find the comfort and benefit,
of being truly good already. So then conclude thou thus for thy self; every
fruitful branch is a true Christian, I am fruitful (though not of so large,
fair and ripe clusters as others, yet) of Grapes: my life is truly holy and
good (though not approaching so near to perfection as it should); and therefore
I will not doubt to esteem my self a true Christian, and to give the Lord the
glory and praise, and take to my self the comfort and peace of my sincerity.
And so we have spoken of the object of Gods Husbandry; the parts of which we
will hereafter entreat of at some convenient time, if God afford us life and
opportunity.

Deo Soli gloria.
FINIS.
GODS HVSBANDRY: THE SECOND PART.

TENDING CHIEFLY TO THE REFORMING OF AN HYPOcrite, and making him true- hearted.

AS IT WAS DELIVERED IN Certain Sermons, and is now published.

By WILLIAM WHATELY, Preacher of the Word of God in Banbury in Oxfordshire.

1. Cor. 4.5. The Lord will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
make manifest the counsels of the hearts.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Thomas Man, dwelling in
Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1622.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
I Make bold (good Reader) to present unto thy view, this second part of Gods
Husbandry, containing a few Sermons, which I preached upon the words of Christ,
in the fifteenth of Saint John's Gospel. My maine intention herein was, to
help the people of God, against that miserable sin of Hypocrisy, which in
the former Treatise I sought to discover. Doubtless all our pains, and all
our preaching, is little enough, and too little, to make men see, and reform
so perilous, and withal so subtle a vice. This is a disease of so dark a
working, as will hardly be discerned, until it be past cure. And though a man
be not so totally possessed and overcome by it, as that he deserve to be
called an Hypocrite, yet are the remainders of it (which abide in the most
sanctified hearts, as the Canaanites amongst the sons of Abraham) exceeding
troublesome, and exceeding noisome, calling for all diligence and labor to
expel them. It is the daughter of ignorance and self-love, the mother of
pride and selfe-conceitednesse, the sister of vainglory and contention. It
is, of all sins, one of the most hideous, because it damneth those, that
seem to themselves little less then free from all other sins. When the
whole army of vices is fled before the face of virtue, and seems to have
yielded a full victory, then does this vice (as it were by stratagems and
devices) undermine victorious virtue, and rob it of the victory which it seemed
to have gotten. It is the refuge and hiding place of all other faults: neither
can we further prevail against any corruption, then we prevail against this:
neither can any corruption further foil us, then this does lend it aid and
succor. This vice makes those things abominable in Gods sight, which to
menward seem praiseable, and causes that heaven does detest, what earth
applauds. It comes to Church with men, and poisons preaching, praying, hearing,
reading, receiving the Communion, and all the parts of Gods service. It is bold
to creep into the clozet also with some men, and does many times corrupt their
most retired devotions. It makes that the Lord accounts himself but mocked,
when men account themselves to have well worshipped him. It turns mercy,
justice, chastity, into vices after a sort, and causes that they be in true
judgment, but fair and gilded sins. It marreth in one word, all good things,
and changes the not committing of sin, into a sin, and the performing of
the most commendable duties, into very loathsome evil. A devout Hypocrite, is
little better then a profane Epicure, and a painted Sepulohre, is little
different from a very dunghill. Happy shall that man be, that is careful to
spy out the working of this crooked and deceitful vice in himself, and that
with earnestness, diligence, wariness, and constancy, does strive to chase it
out of his own heart. When the Ziphites, (wretched claw-backes as they were)
came to waken Saul's sleeping malice, by offering him their service to deliver
up David: the Story tells us, that he sent them back with this instruction, Go
and prepare yet, and know, and see his place, and where his haunt is, and who
has seen him there; for it is told me, that he deals very subtly. See
therefore, and take knowledge of all his lurking places, where he hides
himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty, and I will go with
you; and it shall come to pass, if he be in the Land, I will search him
throughout all the thousands of Judah. This was maliciously spoken by an
envious Prince, against his faithful subject and son. But well were it with
us, if we could all make use of his words, in the pursuit of our hidden guile,
and follow it as close as ever Saul did follow David, even to seek and search,
and spy out all its lurking places, and never cease seeking, till we have found
it, nor fighting, till we have vanquished it, as one of the most dangerous of
all our spiritual enemies, the very soul of the body of death, and that, that
gives life to all the rest. I beseech the living God for thee, Reader, that he
will please to sanctify, as other means, so these my weak endeavors, (if
thou please to make use of them) to help thee against this pestilent fault.
And I crave thy prayers for me also, that my self may be able to practice
what I have taught thee^, and that woeful thing befall me not, which Paul
speaks of, upon another occasion, that having preached to others, I my self
should be a reprobate. For this hateful and banefull vice, the worst of vices,
does sometimes step into the Pulpit also, and causes even Ministers to
condemn themselves in judging others, because they that judge, do the same
things; and because they lay heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, and
themselves resuse to touch them, that is to say, are very earnest exactors of
good duties, and very slow performers. But from this most mischievous
mischief, the good Lord vouchsafe to deliver me, and thee, and all his people:
with which prayer, because I cannot make a better, I commend thee, and my self
to God, and rest,

A well-willer to thy souls happiness, WILLIAM WHATELY.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Showing the order of the words and points to be handled. page 1
CHAP. II. Showing the certain destruction of Hypocrites, and the degrees and
means thereof. page 4 CHAP. III. Showing the reasons of the destruction of
Hypocrites. page 9 CHAP. III. Containing the first use of the point: viz. The
magnifying of Gods Justice. page 19 CHAP. IIII. Containing a second use of the
point: viz. A terror unto all dissemblers. page 27 CHAP. V. Containing the
third use: viz. An exhortation to the Hypocrite to come out of his hypocrisy.
page 37 CHAP. VI. Containing the second Doctrine: viz. That the best branches
have need of pruning. page 64 CHAP. VII. Containing the first use of the point,
for the refutation of two errors: viz. The merit of works, and the conceit of
perfection in this life. page 73 CHAP. VIII. Containing a second use of the
point, stirring up the servants of God to an holy longing for death. page 78
CHAP. IX. Containing the third use of the point: viz. An exhortation and
direction how to keep down our corruptions, whilst we live. page 84 CHAP. X.
Containing the fourth and last use of the point, viz. A consolation to the
people of God against their vnallowed sins. page 99 CHAP. XI. Containing the
third point of doctrine, that God will prune the fruitful branches: that is,
help true Christians against their corruptions. page 104 CHAP. XII. Showing
the means and manner of the Lords pruning. page 109 CHAP. XIII. The first use
of the point, to show their misery that are not pruned. page 120 CHAP. XIIII.
The second use of the point, to comfort them that are pruned. page 124 CHAP.
XV. Containing the third use of the point, to encourage the Saints in striving
against sin, because the Lord will help the^ in this labor, and they shall
surely prevail. page 129 CHAP. XVI. Containing the fourth point of doctrine,
that the people of God must increase in fruitfulness. page 132 CHAP. XVII.
Containing the first use of the last point: viz. A terror to them that grow
worse. page 137 CHAP. XVIII. Containing an exhortation to all true Christians
to increase in goodness, and directions for that purpose. page 143 CHAP. XIX.
Containing a comfort to them that have grown, and do grow in goodness. page
162
GODS HVSBANDRY, TENDING CHIEFLY TO THE REFORMING OF AN Hypocrite, and making
him true-hearted.
John 15.2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away; and
every branch that bears fruit, he purges, that it may bring forth more
fruit.


CHAP. I. Showing the order of the words and points to be handled.
COncerning the subject of Gods Husbandry, we have already spoken, namely, of
the branches of the Vine, in which we have considered, a distribution of them
into their several kinds, and a distinction of them by their special
differences of fruitless and fruitful. Let us now proceed to declare the
parts of Gods Husbandry, which are diverse, according to the diverse nature of
the branches. For the unfruitful branch, the hypocrite, he carries himself
toward it, as beseems a good husband; he cuts it off, that is to say, he
does by little and little separate him from Jesus Christ, and from the benefits
of Christ, with whom he seemed once to be united: Causing that he loses the
good things he seemed to have, and so by falling off from those appearances of
goodness which were in him, he discovers himself to have but
counterfeited, till, proceeding to greater sinfulness, at last eternal death
do ouerwhelme him. But for the fruitful branch, the vpright-hearted
Christian, the Lords dealing with him is far otherwise: he is alone purged
or pruned. The hypocrite is himself taken off from the Vine, the true
Christian has only something taken off from him, that he may very well spare,
being pared about to the remoouall of that, that by continuing upon him, would
have done him much hurt. You all know what the natural pruning is, viz. the
cutting off from the branches, such unprofitable and ouergrowing twists,
leaves, or the like, as do no way benefit the branch, but hurt it rather, in
causing the fruit thereof to be lesser and scanter then it might be. The thing
signified hereby, is the subduing of the corruptions of Gods servants, viz.
their pride, passion, self-love, earthly-mindednesse, voluptuousness, and the
like disorders, which if they were not mortified, they would run all out into
a fair show of profession, not at all fructifying in an holy conversation: but
when these corruptions are taken away by diverse needful means, as the Lord
himself knows the fittest means (for he is but an ill Vine-dresser, that
wants his pruning instruments, then is that end obtained, which God
intends) and then follows that effect wherein themselves rejoice, viz. they
bring forth more fruit. They become more rich in the work of the Lord, more
plentiful in all godliness and righteousness, and in all excellent services
to God and man. They do more good, they live more profitably and seruiceably,
and are every way more abundant in all the fruits of the Spirit, joy, peace,
love, righteousness, temperance, meekness, goodness, and the rest, then
ever else they would have been. And thus you may see, that in these words we
are led to speak of four most necessary points. The destruction of hypocrites
The corruptions of Gods true Saints, in that they need pruning. The help they
have against these corruptios by pruning. And the good they get by this
pruning, viz. growth in godliness: of which, whilst I do speak with as much
plainness and evidence as I can, let me crave you also to attend with all
diligence and reverence.

CHAP. II. Showing the certain destruction of hypocrites, and the degrees and
means thereof.
All hypocrites must be destroyed.
COme hither therefore, I pray you, in the first place, and behold the end of
the hypocrite; He is to be cut off. All false-hearted, guilefull, and hollow
professors of Christian Religion, that are not in truth, which they seem in
appearance, shall by degrees be surely brought to naught and destroyed. The
Lord will no more suffer such persons to remain in his Church undiscovered and
unconfounded, then a good husbandman will suffer dry and rotten branches to
remain upon the trees of his Orchard uncut off. So you have it in the other
Parables also, Matthew. 3.10.
The tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down and cast into the
fire, says John the Baptist, to the men that came to his Baptism. The house
that was built upon the sand, when the wind, rain, and tempest did beat upon
it, was quickly tumbled under foot, Matthew. 7.17.
and the fall thereof was great, says our Savior, in the conclusion of his
Sermon on the mount. The stony ground also withered away in the heat, and the
thorny was ouerrunne with thorns. The earth that drinks in the rain which
comes upon it, and brings forth no better fruit then thorns and briars, is
near unto cursing, whose end shall be burning, says the Author to the
Hebrews: And from him that has not, (meaning in truth) that shall be taken
away which he seemed to have, as our Savior tells us. Saint John does give us
examples of this ruin of dissemblers, saying of many in his time, They went
out from us, because they were not of us. Thus has the Lord been abundant in
discovering his intended vengeance against the counterfeit Christian.

That you may the better conceive of Gods Wisdom and Justice herein; we will
show you in what degrees, and by what instruments, the Lord does cut off these
dry branches. The degrees are likely these, and thus they follow one upon
another. First, whereas they had some works of common grace bestowed upon
them, as the inlightening of their minds, in some measure, to conceive divine
truths, the framing of their wills to a liking of exercises of piety, a
gladness to hear and speak of the Word, a gladness of the company of good
men, and the like; these works are (by Gods just Judgment, because they
refuse to make a good use of them, in turning all to the through changing of
their hearts, and reforming of their lives) even quite withdrawn from them;
and so there follows a sensible withering: they care not for the Word, they
care not for the company of the Saints, that once contented them, and Religion
seems nothing so goodly a thing unto them, as sometimes it did. Secondly,
whereas they had once the spirit of restraint bestowed upon them, to hold down
their corruptions, and to keep the badnesse of their hearts from showing it
self in extremity: the Lord does now please to remove these bars, so to
avenge himself upon their ingratitude and stubbornness, that did wink with
their eyes, and resist the offers of love made to them, and refuse to open the
door when he stood there and knocked, and to give them over into the hands of
their own evil natures, that they may break forth openly, and discover
themselves how rotten they were at heart, by running into some such vile
practice as carries them quite away, so that they never return again by
repentance, nor never show themselves to be soundly humbled for the same. Then
does he send the temptations of Satan, together with the affrightments or
allurements of the world, whereby they are so clean pule away from the show of
godliness, that at last, they grow professedly cold and careless in open
show, bearing before them an allowance of themselves, in such their
luke-warmenesse; yea, perhaps also they turn very enemies of that goodness
which they seemed to have; fall out with those persons that they seemed best to
love; brook least that company that seemed most to satisfy them, and become
bitter, harsh, sharp, violent, in speaking evil of those persons and things
that were once approved by them; and lastly, some miserable and fearful end
(wherein they are either swallowed up of horrible despair, or sold over to the
most stony hardness that may be) does rent them from the land of the living,
and send them down to hell. And so is fulfilled that of our Savior in the
sixth verse, The branches that abide not in him, are cast forth and wither,
and gathered, and cast into the fire and burnt. Now the means of cutting them
off, are many, even all things that do befall them: for all works together to
the ruin of them that sell themselves over into the hands of sin, as well as
for the good of them that work righteousness: but chiefly the Word of God it
self (a two-edged sword) because they will not yield unto it, that it might
cut off their corruptions from their souls, becomes a savor of death, a
weapon of vengeance, to cut off their souls from God: for by their often
resisting it, and much setting of their wits and consciences upon the tenters,
to shift and dally with it, they become blinder and blinder, and harder and
harder, till at length they be sold over unto utter blindness, and given
clean into the power of sin and Satan, from which they seemed once to be
redeemed. And thus was Judas cut off, as the Scriptures show us. He was first
a thief, allowing himself in his covetousness and purloyning, and not
heeding the checkes of his own heart, which, every man must needs know, would
be apt to be moving within him, being a person of so great knowledge as he
was, and after he proved a very devil, when he dipped his hands into the warm
and innocent blood of his heavenly Master, and well-knowne Savior. The Lord,
to punish his guile, in not opposing his covetousness and falsehood, put him
clean up into the hands of the devil, and his own both rage and lucre, till
Satan had possessed him, with a full purpose of turning on the Pharisees side,
(where he saw more likelihood of rising) and of making himself a fair way
into their favors, by selling his Master unto them for a little money. And
those reproves and warnings of our Savior Christ, which should have
withdrawn him from this revolt and treason, did nothing else through his
desperate wilfulness, but inrage, imbitter, and inuenome him; provoking him
more and more against his Master, till he was separated from the very show of
his former appearing goodness, and changed from being Christ's Apostle, to be
his apprehender: and a little after he was utterly cut off, and gathered and
thrown into the fire and burnt, when despair was sent against him in such
fierceness, that it drove him to hang himself, that is to say, to leap
quick into hell, his own place, as Peter calls it. So also was Achitophel,
the type of Judas, cut off, and so Amaziah, and Ioash, and Ananias, and
Saphira, and many more: and so also are all hypocrites sooner or later cut off,
being carried away, either with heresies, or schisms, or persecutions, or
worldliness, or voluptuousness, and at last with despair or hardness, with
some heavy hand of God likely, and damnation for the vp-shot.

CHAP. III. Showing the reasons of the destruction of hypocrites.
THus have you seen how sure it is that hypocrites must fearfully perish. Let
us consider, why it must needs fall out so hard with them. And the reasons
hereof are to be taken from God partly, and partly from themselves, and from
all other of Gods Saints. From God, Fom God, who
First, because he sees them. Secondly, because he hates them. Thirdly, because
he will gain glory by them. For the first of these, 1. Sees.
Though the hypocrite do cover himself over with such a thick cloudy as the
eyes of men are not able for the most part to pearce through it, and discern
him: yet the Lord of heaven does always see him, and see through him. His eyes
in every place behold the evil and the good: He tries the hearts, he
searches the reins, he spyeth into the deepest and darkest corners of every
soul. Hell and destruction are before the eyes of the Lord: how then should
the hearts of the sons of men be hidden from him? Nay doubtless, there is
neither darkness nor the shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may
hide themselves, but his eyes do observe, and his eyelids do ponder all
their paths. From men like himself, a man may make an easy shift to keep his
heart secret, yea, so is this vice given to cloaking and sculking, that from a
man's own self, he will make a shift to hide the odiousness of his inside,
and this filthy guilefulnesse of his own spirit; But after all the turning,
and shifting, and winding of mankind, that shall prove true at length (in
spite of all) which Paul affirms, viz. that God is not mocked. There is no
beguiling of that all-searching eye of our Maker. There is no possibility of
offering couzenage, and putting tricks upon the King of heaven. The Lord of all
the world is not subject to the weakness of earthly Princes, that often take
flatterers for friends, and fawning sycophants, for loyal subjects: but even
such as a man is in deed and truth, such does God esteem and take him for:
for he does not judge after the outward appearance, but judges righteous
judgment. A man may say of hypocrisy, as once Job in another sense said of
Wisdom: That it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the
Fowls of the air: but God understands the way thereof, and he knows the
place thereof: for he looks to the ends of the earth, and sees under the
whole heaven. Did not our Savior Christ know what was in man? and therefore
also refuse to trust himself, with those hollow-harted believers of his time?
Did not he give Judas his right name, when he carried himself most fairly and
commendably to the world-wards? even then, intitling him as he was worthy to be
entitled, a devil, when as yet, he remained disguized with the vizard of
Apostleship? Doubtless, as no wisdom, counsel, nor understanding can
prevail against the Lord, to disappoint him, (as Salomons Proverb affirms;)
So neither can any fraud, guile, or dissembling, prevail to beguile him. And
is it possible that his pure eyes should discover him, and his just and
almighty hand not be stretched out to destroy him? Nay verily: for as he sees
him, 2. Hates.
so he lothes him also, and lothes him in a very high degree, even as we do
loathe a rotten sepulcher for all its payntings: and as we would abhor a cup
full of filthy geere within, though the outside were never so cleanly washed,
and farely scowred: and as we could not but do him, that should bear great
outward semblance of friendship and goodwill unto us, when his heart did harbor
nothing but neglect of us, or malice against us. A false friend is always more
detestable unto a man, when once his falsehood is made known, then the most
violent, but professed enemy. Do you not think that David was as much or more
imbittered against Achitophel, then against the Philistim or Moabite, that ever
he fought with? The hypocrite, by seeming good, declares that he knows what is
good, and how it should be embraced: And by but seeming alone, he proves that
he has no love to that which he confesses to deserve love; and so sinning
against the light that is inkindled in him, must he not needs provoke the holy
eyes of the Divine Majesty against him? In truth, an hypocrite even of the
closer kind, does exceeding grossly abuse the Lord, and all his ordinances,
and exceeding hainously pervert his patience and kindness, and turn the
great mystery of our salvation, into a very fable, seeing that he is not good
in good earnest, but in Jest, as one might well call it: and how then can it be
otherwise, but that the wrath and indignation of God should burn against him
even unto hell? 3. Will glorify himself by the hypocrite.
seeing that in the last place he having fully purposed to glorify himself by
all his creatures, finds none other way left, of reaping honor from the
dissembler, but alone by magnifying his Justice in his overthrow. For he
neglects the offers of his love, and refuses to convert, and will not accept of
salvation upon those conditions, on which God would bestow it upon him. We
know all, that God has made all things for his own glory, in the clear
demonstration of his own unspeakable excellencies by them, and of this end he
can no more fail, or be disappointed, then be defective in wisdom and
goodness; which, because they be essential in him, he can no more come short of
perfection in them, then that he can cease to be himself. Now the hypocrite,
by the continuing such, does make himself utterly incapable of becoming an
active instrument to glorify the Lord, by performing that that is good in his
sight: for fruitful he will never be, his impotency arising always from
wilfulnes, or carelesnes, or both, seeing these twain cannot at all or very
hardly be separated one from the other: wherefore needs must he be made a
passive instrument of Gods honor, whether he will or no, serving to declare his
infinite justice in his due destruction, by being forced to suffer the deserved
punishment, which his grievous wickedness does challenge at the hands of his
righteousness. If it be objected, that God might convert the hypocrite if he
would: The answer is, By his omnipotent power he might, and so he migt the
devils too, and the very prince of the devils, Beelzebub himself. But we must
understand, that the Lord has set down a certain way and order of converting
men unto him, agreeable to the rules of his own unsearchable wisdom: even
such a way, as is in it self most plain, sure and infallible, if the
negligence and obstinacy of men do not hinder, and such a way, as is most
convenient to procure the greatest honor that may be unto him, in their
salvation, and that is, that man himself should become a working instrument
with God, to his own conversion and salvation. Which seeing the hypocrite will
not do, the Lord will never be so ouer-gracious unto him, as to bring him to
heaven by another way, but will even magnify himself in destroying him,
because he neglected to take the right course that was showed him, to do
himself good. So you see reasons enough on Gods part, why such branches should
be separated from the Vine. Consider we of themselves, and see if there be not
more then cause of handling them with such severity. First, they thrust away
salvation from themselves, From themselves whom. 1. They thrust away salvation
from them
Because they will not entertain, and yield unto the good motions of Gods Word
and Spirit, that do urge and press them to turn unto the Lord, and
therefore, what can be expected in reason, but that they should procure unto
themselves even sharp and swift damnation? For is it not most equal, that he
which will not receive salvation, when it is proffered unto him by God, should
utterly perish; as that he should be starued, and dye for hunger, which will
not receive food, when it is put into his hands? These men resist and oppugn
the Spirit of God, and will not accept of life upon such terms, as it may
stand with Gods Justice to bestow it upon them. If he would save them, and give
them leave to go on in their beloved sins too, O how glad they would be of
such a carnal way of coming to heaven! But if he will not give eternal life,
but unto those that are careful thoroughly to reform their hearts and lives,
they know not how to be at all that pains. Surely the matter standing thus
betwixt the Lord and their souls, it could not stand with his righteousness,
to preserve them from ruin. The dissembling Christian deals by God, as the
Disciples of Christ did deal by him in the sixth of John. When he told them of
eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, they said, This was an hard saying,
who could hear it? and so went back, and walked no more with him. So the
hypocrite, hearing of remission of sins, of life, of salvation, thinks they
be things very desirable, and out of a will to have a part in them, he will
go a great way with God: but when he hears of a general renouncing of all
sin, and of washing and clensing his heart, and that without this care there
is no salvation, he will not believe that the way to heaven is so narrow, he
shrinkes back at these exhortations, and thinks, the Lord is an hard Master,
and will go with him no further. So then, seeing the fruitless branch does
carelessly or obstinately let pass the opportunity of saving himself when it
is often offered unto him, what can be more righteous with God; then that he
should bring upon himself eternal destruction? Again, the hypocrite abuses
the richest of all Gods benefits, his Word, his Sacraments, his Gospel, the
blood of his Son, his tender of mercy, and the rest of those supernatural
things that he has to do with. He turns the grace of God into wantonness,
and like a very Swine, does tread under foot the most precious pearl of Gods
goodness in Christ; and must not an heavy vengeance therefore needs oppress
him? Meat, drink, apparel, wit, strength, health, these be worthy gifts of
God, and exceeding sinful is the abuse of them accounted in the sight of God,
as reason there is that it should; and very heavy have the punishments been,
that have lighted upon the abusers of such mercies. But these are common
favors, every days benefits; the outcasts of the world have them, as well as
those of Gods household. Only the Word of God, his holy Ordinances, the
knowledge of himself, and of his Son, and of his Kingdom, and the offers of
mercy to save them from hell; these are peculiar favors, highly-esteemed
kindnesses, specially bestowed upon those of his own family, with whom he
pleases to be in Covenant. Now the hypocrite abuses these, he peruerteth
these, he flatters himself in his sins for all these, and when God himself
does even as it were, come a wooing unto him, in all these ordinances, and
beseech him to be reconciled to receive himself for an husband, his Kingdom
for a dowry, and Heaven for a ioynture, he will none of the bargain, unless
he may have the liberty of inioying his sins besides. O how great an
indignity is here offered unto God? how shameful a repulse does the Lord
receive, and how undeserved a refusal? wherefore, by how much the mercies of
God, that the dissembler abuses, in continuing obstinate against them, are
greater, by so much must God, in justice, needs increase the sharpnes and
strength of his blows against his soul. 3. Do much harm in the Church.
Again, the hypocrite does procure a number of mischiefs in the vine where he
grows, which must needs occasion and hasten his cutting off. These discredit
Religion, and cause it to be ill spoken of; these being of Gods family in
show, do bring an ill name upon it, as once the spies did upon the land of
Canaan. They do grieve the hearts of the upright, and strengthen the hands of
other sinners, and fill their mouths with insultation. Their barrenness and
want of good fruit, does administer matter (unto those that are ready to
cavil) of casting reproaches upon the root on which they grow, and upon all
the branches that grow by them. Never did any professed enemy do so much hurt
to true Religion, and so much hinder the proceeding of true piety, as the
hypocrite has done. He is one of the chief stumbling blocks in the world;
and if a woe be denounced against him by whom offenses come, then the heauiest
of all woes must light upon him, from whose default the greatest of all
scandals do come. Do you not conceive what triumphing there was against
Christ, when his own Disciple had sold him for money? The dry branch is a
great impediment to the fruitfulness of the neighbor branches: and the
unfruitful Figtree does even keep the ground idle. He keeps many from
goodness that might have come unto it, but for his ill example: he
discourageth those that would have been more abundant in goodness, but for his
ill example. He makes those that are willing to sin, bold also to be more
outrageous in sinning, by his ill example. In a word, the Church of God did
never receive so great mischiefs, as from the false members of it. It is then
but need for the Lord to take a sharp and speedy course against them. Lastly,
4. Make themselves incapable of honoring God any other way.
you may conclude all the other evil they do, with putting your selves in
mind of the evil that they do unto themselves, by making themselves unfit to
bring glory unto God any other way, but in their punishment, as we said before.
They say of a Swine, that he never does good till he come to the knife: so may
we say of the Hypocrite, that he does not bring any honor to God, till he be
feign to honor him perforce, in suffering the strokes of his infinite Justice.
In his praying, in his receiving the Sacraments, in his laborious following his
calling, in his works of mercy he dishonors God, in all the actions of his
life he does wholly dishonor him, and would for ever, if he might be suffered,
continue to dishonor him, doing all these things hollowly and guilefully,
serving and seeking himself in them, and preferring himself the creature,
before the Lord his Creator. Does not he then compel the Lord to take such a
course with him, that he may no longer dishonor him, but may procure unto
him, though against any proper intention of his, the glory of being an hater of
sin, and a punisher of all unrighteousness: yea of being a searcher of
hearts, and a discouerer of the secrets of all men's souls? An unfruitful
branch is good for nothing but to be burnt: wherefore the Gardener does best to
make him a fire of it.

Because all Gods people do pray for their ruin, yea themselves also.
even from all the rest of Gods Saints, who with one mouth do continually sue
unto the Lord for their cutting off, they being principal hindrances of the
hallowing of Gods Name, proceeding of his Kingdom of grace, doing of his holy
will, and the sanctification also of his children: against all which
hindrances, the people of God are enjoined by our Savior, to make their
prayers. Indeed the Saints of God do not know, nor mention in their prayers,
the particular dissemblers that are in the Church: but the Lord that knows
them each in special, must needs be provoked against each, by the incessant
prayers of his Saints that are made against all. Yea the Hypocrites themselves,
when they do pray after their fashion, and according to their manner, though
not intending any such matter, nor heeding the scope and purport of their own
prayers, do yet pray even against themselves, after a sort deuoting
themselves, and crying unto God, to have his fury and vengeance dispatched
against them. So have you the point made strong: shall we also make it useful?
We will do so, and entreat you to attend, whilst we show you the uses that
are to be made of Gods severity against counterfeits.

CHAP. III. Containing the first use of the point: viz. the magnifying of Gods
Justice.
The ruin of Hypocrites must cause us to praise the Wisdom and Justice of
God.
in the due punishment of these most secret malefactors: as the keeper of the
Vine is praised for his good husbandry, in the seasonable cutting of the dry
and withered boughs of the Vine. For how should the Lord more clearly reveal
to the sons of men, his most exact wisdom, and strict righteousness, then
in finding out, and casting off these wicked offenders, for all their cunning
disguisement, and subtle dissimulation? Hereby he makes it apparent, that he
is so perfect in understanding and in righteousness, as there is no way of
finding favor with him, but by being good, and truly good, and by walking in
his ways, and being sound in the same. It will not serve the turn to be close
and retired, it cannot avail to be of smooth and fine carriage; all coloring,
all cloking is idle and bootlesse. It is not possible to escape his eye and
hand, but by casting away our sins in good earnest, and a true and hearty
obedience. Let the Hypocrite offer thousands of Rams, and rivers of oil; let
him not spare the fruit of his body, even his own sons and daughters, and
put himself to never so much cost and charges; all is one, God will not be
bribed by these gifts to tolerate his wickedness. Let him speak the Lord
never so fair in words, and make never so many and long prayers; let him carry
himself never so devoutly and religiously, and wear Gods cloth, as it were,
and call him Master, and Master, and tread in his Courts, and frequent his
House, still he loses his labor, God will not bear with him, nor spare him
for all this, so long as he has respect to iniquity in his heart, he shall
never be accepted.

Men are oftentimes partial to them of their own family, and will not deal
so rigorously with those that use them kindly, though they sin; but the Lord is
utterly void of all partiality, even to those that shroud themselves under his
elbow, as it were, and seem to be as good servants to him as may be, and give
him the sweetest words that they can invent. Oh how pure and searching are the
eyes of our God? how clearly does he show unto us, in the overthrow of
Hypocrites, the truth of that, that the Psalmist sings? His eyes behold, his
eyelids try the sons of men: but again, Evil shall not dwell with him, the
foolish shall not stand in his sight; and he hates all the workers of
iniquity. Look we therefore upon the ruin of Saul, Achitophel, Ioash,
Amaziah, Judas, Ananias, Saphira, and the rest of those whom the Scriptures do
tell us of; consider we also of the examples of our own time, wherein our
eyes may have seen the experience of the Lords sharpness against such as have
trod in the evil steps of these forenamed, not learning to avoid the ways of
mischief, wherein they have seen others to be overwhelmed before them; and in
all such accidents let us contemplate the righteousness, severity, wisdom
and providence of God, admiring his just government of his Church, that will
not be slack (according to his threatening long since) to make desolate the
congregation of Hypocrites: and learn we here-hence to establish a loving and
awful admiration of so great justice, mixed with so great wisdom.

It is a great fault to rob God of the glory of his glorious works, and not to
take notice of his excellent attributes, discovered unto us in the rare effects
thereof. The Lord desires to have us think and talk of these wonderful
works of his, and to implant in our own souls a cleerer knowledge, and a
deeper reverence of him, by means of them. For he knows, that nothing is more
beneficial to our souls, then if we do thus usefully behold the lifting up
of his high hand: wherefore we must not suffer our natural dullness to
prevail against us, and to turn away our thoughts from observing such
obseruable things: which yet in this particular case, we are most apt to do.
For I know not how it comes to pass in men, that whereas those of them that
are not extremely carnal and earthly-minded, can consider the works of his
goodness and mercy, with some admiration, wondering to find so great kindness
showed to creatures, that can so little either deserve or requite the same: yet
it is far otherwise in the works of his Justice: here a kind of
unjustifiable pity of the persons misery, stops our eyes from beholding the
beauty of Gods righteousness, and men are nothing apt to praise him for the
strict proceeding of his judgments against malefactors. Doubtless this is a
corruption in us worthy to be blamed.

We seldom praise God, for showing himself just against Hypocrites. Indeed if
in the practice of their malice against the Church, and the true members of it,
they fall down wounded, as often it falls out, here our interest makes us to
be somewhat glad, and we can find in our hearts to thank God, for that which
procured our own ease and safety: but if it fall otherwise, that the Lord
execute his vengeance against those whom himself sees worthy to be hated, we
not having any part in the quarrel, we do not make such executions a part of
the matter of our thanksgiving, as if we regarded Gods works nothing at all,
further then some benefit redounds therefrom unto our selves, or as if we
thought them worth nothing, further then they serve our own turns.

But now let us learn, that it is a necessary duty for us to praise the Lord,
for showing himself severe, as well as gentle, for exercising his rigor, as
well as his grace, and for making known his hatred of sin, as well as his
love of the righteous. Praise thou him, for that as he does favorably accept
the meanest endeavors of the true-hearted; so he will by no means be deceived,
by the glorious ostentation of hypocrites: praise him, for that as he will not
let a man, that in truth of charity does give a cup of cold water, to lose his
reward; so he will not respect him, that out of other respects, destitute of
charity, shall give all his goods to the poor. Praise him, that as he does
accept and requite the poor widows mite, that came from soundness of
devotion; so did he nothing heed nor affect the rich and pompous bounty of the
wealthier persons, that served their Idol of vainglory, in seeming to make
their offerings unto him Praise him, for that as he highly prizeth the
neglected and despised services of those that are sound in his precepts, so he
does count those things no better then abomination, that seem glorious in the
eyes of men, when they are done for sinister ends.

We do observe in Princes, as well their prudence and justice, in finding out,
and taking and executing the crafty offenders that live under their charge, as
in showing bounty, and liberality, and courtesy toward their better subjects.
If a King have declared himself to be so wholly devoted to right and equity,
that if his nearest favorites do things worthy of death, or bonds, he will
not spare them, and that no gifts nor bribes can purchase favor for those that
are bold to build their faultiness upon such hopes of impunity: how do the
present livers honor him, how do they applaud his uprightness, and give him
all the titles of honor that they can invent? yea, how do those that write
such histories, enlarge their words and discourses in his commendation, and
advance him to the skies, for the most hearty lover, and constant follower of
equity that might be? Why should not the King of Kings enjoy the praises of
the just and severe executions that he has done, and daily does upon the
hollow-hearted? Though men call themselves after his name, though they make
long prayers, though they profess great love, and fear of him, and make a
show of much devotion, though they preach him in the streets, and work
miracles in his name, and make as if they were the best affected to him and his
honor that can be; yet when he comes to them, and sees them destitute of a
true godly conversation, not soundly reformed in heart, not universally
obedient in life, not upright hearted, he makes no more ado, but cuts them off
by the sword of justice, and sweepes them away with the besome of destruction.
Why do we not extol the name of the Lord, in these works of his hand? why
do we not open our mouths to show forth his praise, and say with the
Psalmist, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments: and thou
have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes, for their deceit is
falsehood, and thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross: and my
flesh trembles for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy judgments: for thou
do judge the world with equity, and the people with righteousness. If a
Judge do behave himself discreetly, for the searching out of a matter, and
do clearly lay open a cunning pack of closely contrived villainy, all that
hear him, applaud him, and praise his prudence and great understanding, as
they did Salomons, in the difficult case of the two harlots, about the dead,
and living child. Now when the Lord does order matters with so great
discretion, as to bring to light the wickedness of the hypocrite, which he
with such exceeding cunningnesse of skill, and shifting and turning does strive
to hold under darkness, and to keep from the knowledge of men and Angels, yea
often of himself (and of God too, if he could go beyond the Lord) should not
the seeing and hearing of these most righteous judgments of the Lord, cause us
to break forth into his praises, and to honor and fear him as a Judge,
before whom it is to no purpose to double and to wind? Yea if a man encompassed
with deceitful and hollow meaning sycophants, who seek by all smoothness of
behavior to make him think well of them, and account them among the number of
his friends, shall yet with so happy an insight, discern their falsehood, as
that he do not at all suffer himself to rest upon them, or to be beguiled in
them: do not we commend such a man, for his wisdom and care, and wonder at
his prudence and circumspection? The Hypocrite is one of Gods flatterers, he
would feign win favor with God, by seeming and shows, and work himself into
Gods favor, by a smooth behavior of his outside: but it will not be, the Lord
looks into the bottom of his soul, perceiues all his tricks, plainly
finds that he does but flatter, and therefore quickly discardeth and punishes
him. Why do we not return unto him the glory of his deep and all-searching
wisdom, and magnify his name for his infiniteness in that excellent
property, whereof a drop or a shadow rather in a creature, does take us with
such approving and admiration, that we cannot choose but extol it? Know
therefore that from hell, as well as from heaven, we are to fetch matter of
thanksgiving, and by the damned as well as the saved, to grow acquainted with
Gods most holy properties, and to love, fear and honor him for them. Princes
and Judges are in great reputation for their wisdom and justice, as well as
for their mercy and bounty: and so must the Prince of princes, and the Judge of
Judges.

CHAP. IIII. Containing a second use of the point: viz. A terror unto all
dissemblers.
SEcondly, The miserable estate of dissemblers.
even cause their hearts to melt like wax within their bodies. And verily, were
not Hypocrisy always accompanied and attended on, yea fortified and
maintained by two naughty and desperate companions, unbelief, and hardness of
heart, it could not be but that the hearing of this point, that shows how
sharp God will be in taking vengeance upon the dissemblers, should cast them
down into such an extremity of amazement, as scarce any comfort would lift
them up again. Oh what tongue can express, what wit imagine the most extreme
wretchedness of all dissemblers? They lose all their good words, and all their
good prayers, and all their good hopes, and all their good deeds, (for so they
account them) and all their painful services. Though they appear most
excellent to men, and to themselves, and oftentimes perform things that win
them in the world honor, applause and admiration; yet are all these deeds like
so many worme-eaten nuts, or apples rotten at the core, even scorned and
rejected of the Lord; and after all this, their final and certain doom shall
be cutting off, and burning, even eternal damnation. Hearken and give ear,
all ye well painted Hypocrites. Let this terrible tidings be admitted into your
very souls, and if it may be, by maine force shake you out of your
hard-heartednesse and presumption. Not alone Pagans and Turks, not alone
Infidels and Jews, not alone Heretics and Schismatickes, not alone the open
swearer, drunkard, whoremonger, belly god and profane beast, in whose faces all
civil men are ready to spit shame and contempt, but even the unfruitful
branch also must be cut off. The Hypocrite must perish, the hollowhearted
professor of Christian Religion, (who is also in some, and in many things a
follower and practiser of that Religion) even he, I say, he that so much
magnifieth himself, and is so much magnified of others, he must pass into
hell. He that is very sorry for diverse faults, and mendeth diverse. He that
comes to Church forwardly, and gladly hears, and gladly practices many
things he hears. He that loves preaching, and Preachers, and will bid both
Ministers and godly men welcome to his house and table. He that can pray in
his family, and likes well to read in the Bible: he that can weep at a
Sermon, and be much moved at the reproves of sin: he that lives
unrebukable to the worldward, and fears not the face of any accuser: he
that is counted zealous for the Lord, and is hot against diverse disorders and
abuses of the times: he whom almost all men take to be in the way to heaven,
and that accounts himself even sure of coming into heaven, and cannot be
driven from thinking that he shall assuredly be saved, even this man, I say,
such a man as this, that does all these things, may be damned for all this; and
unless he do more then all this, must needs be damned. Oh hard speech will
some man say, and who can receive it I confess indeed, it is an hard speech
unto the dissembler whom it concerns, but not less true then hard; and
therefore all ye that be but Hypocrites, will ye not stand amazed at the
hearing of these tidings, and even tremble before the Lord, and before his
Word? You may perhaps desire to be informed more particularly who the men be,
that must be thus horribly and fearfully destroyed, even as a dream when a
man awaketh, and that notwithstanding their doing of all the forenamed good
things. I answer you out of that, that you have formerly heard, all that are
conceited of themselves, and despise others, turning the knowledge and
goodness they have, into matter of pride and lifting up themselves. All those
that never blinch at evil thoughts within, if their sins come no further
then to thought, and even please themselves in wicked imaginations which they
dare not act: all that are bold to sin in secret, and care not for it,
securely and sorrowlesly committing the same things in the dark, which they
would not for a world should be known unto the world. All that are bitter in
crying out against the sins of other men, and in aggravating the wrongs and
unkindness they have received: but have little enough to say against
themselves, and their own sins, and the injuries and unkindness that
themselves have proffered unto God. All that hate their enemies in their
hearts, and cannot abide to forgive and do good unto their wrongdoers: all
that hear much, and it may be also repeare it with others, but like unclean
beasts that chew not the cud, never care to muze and ponder upon it alone, and
to turn it into a prayer, and apply it unto themselves: all that have not the
dispositions of their hearts changed, and their affections set upon God, though
their outside seem never so much altered: all that allow themselves in any
known sin, extenuating it as little, and flattering, and excusing themselves,
and neglecting to take care of amendment, because they think that no man can
choose but do as bad as that comes unto. And in one word, all that see not,
feel not, lament not, resist not, and purge not away the guile and
deceitfulness of their own hearts. All, and each of those that are found
such, for all their many prayers, much hearing, fair blade, and good hopes,
shall sooner or later, by tentations, or afflictions, or allurements of
pleasure, profit, or credit, or fame, or other means, be drawn away from the
goodness they make show of, and at last be surely and irrecouerably damned. It
is in vain to flatter your selves, and say, you hope the matter is not so bad
as I would set it forth to be, and that God will be more merciful then so. Nay
brethren, the Lord will not be more merciful, then may stand with his justice
and truth, he should be unrighteous and unholy, if he should not cast into
hell fire any of those kinds of men to whom any of those things agree that I
have set down unto you. He should be untrue, and falsify his word, if he
should not bring damnation upon all, each of those that I have said. Princes
often threaten, merely to terrify, and pronounce harder sentences in public,
then they mean shall be executed, as they do with us in case of those that
are adjudged to be pressed to death. It is not so with the Judge of all the
world, not one tittle of a word more is to be found in his sentence, then shall
be felt in his execution: his blows shall be as terrible as his threats, and
his just menaces as exactly accomplished, as his most gracious promises: not
one tittle of the Word of God shall fail, (and therefore no part of the misery
denounced against Hypocrites) till all be fulfilled. Mark then, I pray you,
the precise and punctual dealing of our Lord in this place: he says
particularly, every branch, lo, every one, without any partiality and
exception: and (He) the God of heaven, that has a strong arm, and (no
question) a knife sharp enough for this business, and cutteth off, takes
quite away, utterly remoueth from the root, and all the benefits of the root,
even to his endless destruction, as it must needs be granted: for what but
damnation can betide him that is separated from Jesus the author of life, by
whose Name alone salvation is to be found? Wherefore take no more pains to
flatter thine own soul, and make thy self hope to speed better then thou
have heard; whosoever thou be whom the forenamed things have discovered to be
but a dissembler, thou shall surely have thy portion without, amongst the
searefull, and dogs, and inchanters, and thieves, and whoremongers, in that
fiery, and yet dark Lake, that is provided for the fairest Hypocrites, as well
as for the blacker, and more infamous sinner: there is no escaping, there is no
getting out; no one Hypocrite shall be able to shun the eye and hand of God,
he will pick out every one by himself, and every one shall be cut off, and
utterly destroyed; the Word shall prove an axe, affliction shall prove an axe,
prosperity shall prove an axe, and all Gods ordinances, and all that thou
do, and all that thou see and hear, and is done to thee, shall be but
in the nature of a sharp cutting knife, by little and little to take thee off
from Christ, and ripen thee for vengeance. In coming to Church, thou hastenest
toward hell; in preaching, thou speedest toward death; in giving alms, thou
runnest forwards to hell; in living as thou call it, justly, thou do but
step a step nearer to hell; all that thou do, and all that betideth thee,
helping to increase and further thy damnation. O miserable man, and beyond all
conceit wretched, unless thou will hear, and fear, and prepare thy self to
come out of this misery, by feeling it! Be thou cut off from the Vine, be thou
spiritually excommunicated from Christ; let thy sins be bound upon thee as a
bundle, and be thou bound over to the great Day of the vengeance of God
Almighty, what should we add to that that we have already spoken again and
again? The case of the Hypocrite, not alone the gross hypocrite, that knows
himself to be such, and cares not, but even of the close hypocrite, that takes
himself to be far better, is most wretched, hidious, and intolerable. O that
you could believe it! O that the deceitfulness of sin might not harden your
hearts, and that the effectual working of Satan might no longer blind your
eyes, but that you may see and feel your selves to be, if you be dissemblers,
and withal, to be so unhappy, and sure and certain of such an unhappy end! I
fear, brethren, lest in laboring thus mainly to affright the hypocrite out of
his guile, I may perhaps against my will and purpose, scar the trueharted out
of the present fruitio^ of their comfort; as if a shepherd set his dog upon a
Goat, feeding amongst a flock of sheep, all the sheep will run and be
afraid. But I hope. I have so plainly deciphered this child of hell, this
son of Satan, the Hypocrite, as that I hope none of Gods true Saints shall
catch any harm, by hearing them thus prosecuted with fears, and terrors, and
threats, from whom they may perceive themselves to be thus manifestly
differenced. I say, not every one, in whom much, and very much hypocrisy, (and
many very bad effects of very much hypocrisy) is to be found, shall be damned;
but every Hypocrite in whom this sin rules, and shows it self to beare-rule,
by not being seen and bewailed, and opposed, and the other notes before set
down; every such one, I say, and say it again, unless he become new, shall
surely be damned. But if the true-hearted, out of his weakness, shall be put
into some fear, by the hearing of this terror, (so that he do seasonably
return to enjoy comfort) it will do him good, and not harm, to be so
feared: for these causeless fears of the upright, proceed from the want of
uprightness, though not from the utter absence of it, and from the too much
hypocrisy, though not ouer-ruling hypocrisy that is in them. And so, if for a
while they be even almost out of conceit with themselves as with Hypocrites,
till these doubts have made them more bitterly to lament, and heartily to
confess, and mightily to fight against their hypocrisy, they shall receive
none other evil by having been so frighted, then the being purged from that,
that was the cause of their fears. And if through the smalnesse of the
quantity of truth and sincerity, they cannot so evidently perceive it at the
first, but that they see cause to become suspicious of themselves, the grieuing
for the want of truth, and laboring and praying for increase of it, which the
holy Ghost will work in them, by means of such suspicions; will be helpful
(though accidentally, as the besieging of a City to its fortification) to the
growth of their uprightness. But the truth is, that this aptness to fall into
jealousy of ones self, and when such terrors are delivered to fear, lest
they belong to him, and so framing ones self to be humbled, because so many
fruits of much hollownesse are seen in him as do minister matter to such
fear: this aptness, I say, to fear, is even as sure a sign of one that is
not an Hypocrite, as can be named. I would not wish a better proof of ones
not being dead, then to hear him complaining, that sure he is but a dead man:
neither can one likely find a truer note of one that is not dead in this sin
of hypocrisy, then when the work of the Word, in the reprehensions and
menaces thereof, does drive him to complaints and fears of his own
guilefulnesse, only so, that he be driven to prayer and confession hereby,
and so to seek strength against the mischief feared. But on the other side, a
worse, and more likely sign of a man wholly sold over into the hands of guile,
we can scarce meet with, then this, to be unmoved in the hearing of such
threats, to have no risings of fear, and doubt, and suspicion, nor no
troublesome conceits of his own estate: either such man is so abundantly and
extraordinarily sanctified, as that the ouer-euident proof of his
uprightness, does presently secure him from such thoughts, or else he is
wholly buried and bound hand and foot in the hollow grave of guile; and
therefore cannot feel it, because he is altogether under the power of it. For
this is the nature of these dark and hidden vices, they are ever the less
felt, by how much they do more strongly prevail, even as the pangs of death
are least troublesome, when they have quite overcome the strength of nature.
Wherefore, nothing fearing any danger that may come unto ye true hatred by this
earnestnes, let me yet once again settle unto those that be dissemblers, and
adjure and protest, and call Angels and men, and Christ and God, and their own
souls, and all things that are, to witness against them, that unless they
will open their eyes, and see themselves to be in a damnable estate, they shall
surely be damned. You may perhaps marvel that we should press the point so
hard: but the cause is, we know the Hypocrite to be the most noisome weed in
Gods garden, and feign would we make him see his danger, that he might escape
it. Yea, we know that hypocrisy does harden, and deadden the heart above all
other sins, and that nothing in the world is more difficult, then to make him
see and feel his peril, who will rather think any man, yea all men
Hypocrites, then himself, (although by this his ouer-aptnesse to think so
hardly of others, and hardness to be made conceive so hardly, though truly of
himself, he might, if he were not blind, discern himself to be as he is.)
But now if thou be such, and so proved by what has been formerly spoken,
how good soever thou have been to see to, and be still: how full soever of
knowledge, and of zeal, blazing outward: how glad soever to God, and hear
Sermons: how able soever to pray, and to repeat Sermons: how well soever
accounted of by others, and by thy self: and how strongly soever perfwaded,
and in that persuasion ioyed of thy being Gods child, and being saved: (as all
this may befall thee, and yet the former notes discover thee to be but hollow.)
I do now in Gods name adiudge thee, and preiudge thee, unless thou repent, to
cutting off, to burning, to eternal death, lo, here is the portion of thy cup:
At length Gods arm and axe shall fell thee, and grub thee up by the roots, if
thou were as tall as the Cedar of Lebanon, and as tough as the Oaks of Bashan,
and as strongly rooted, as the tree that grows near a rock.

CHAP. V. Containing the third use, viz. An exhortation to the Hypocrite to
come out of his hypocrisy.
Let the Hypocrite be careful to come out of hypocrisy.
which he has put into our mouths? Only, only, at least chiefly, if it may
be, to convert him, and to make him cease to be an Hypocrite. when he sees the
lamentable condition of such kind of men. It is your conversion which we wish,
O all ye that have been dissemblers; and your reformation, which we aim at,
which we are well assured, can never be effected, but by showing you the woe
which is coming upon you. Now therefore, seeing the case of counterfeit
Christians is so bad, so hard, so intolerably, so desperately, so ineuitably
wretched, but by turning; we beseech you suffer your selves to be wrought
upon, to be converted, to become true, and to receive the Spirit of
uprightness, which the Lord of heaven is now ready to power forth upon you. Be
it known unto thee, O thou that have been hither to but an Hypocrite, that thy
case is not altogether irrecouerable, but that thou may, if thou will not at
this time also refuse Gods gracious offer, be made sincere, and so be
received into grace. For brethren, be ye well assured of this truth, that when
the Lord of heaven sends his servants unto you, in his own name, to call upon
you to perform any good duty, tending to your own salvation, that then he is
also present in his ordinance, by the gracious cooperation of his good Spirit,
to enable you with strength from himself to perform that duty. For Gods
ordinances are not idle, neither shall his Word return in vain, but shall be
effectual for all for which he sends it, and he that desires not the death
of the sinner, but rather that he may turn and live, will effectually turn
him from his evil way, if he do not wilfully harden himself therein, and
even refuse to be converted. Be willing therefore to be made upright, that thou
may be so indeed, and be it for certain delivered unto thy soul, that thou
shall be made able to become such, if thou do not stiffen thy self in the
natural unwillingness of thy corrupted nature. I demand therefore of thee in
the same question that our Savior used to the sick man that lay at the Poole
of Bethesda, Will thou be made whole? If thou be willing, now the waters are
stirred, now the Spirit of God is come down in this ordinance, now thou may
be put into these waters, and now thou shall be made whole. If thine answer
be, that thou art willing, then I say unto thee, make it appear that thou art
so in very truth, and that thou do not only say thou art so: for many a man's
words and meaning are far distant each from other: many a man affirms with
loud voice, and open profession of speeches, that he is willing to receive
that grace which he is not willing to receive.

There is a faint motion of the will, which is rather an act of the
understanding convinced, that one should be willing to get a thing, the^ any
true and earnest working of the will toward that thing; and this kind of
willingness must men take for a true being willing. But herein they do much
deceive themselves; for a man may be enforced to acknowledge, that he ought
to be willing to get such or such a thing, and withal, find in himself some
slothful wishes to have the same, and yet be destitute of that steadfast and
fixed resolution of the will, which is indeed the motion of the will required
to be in us, if we will receive good from the Lord. But how shall it be made
manifest whether a man's willingness be settled or ouert, well grounded or
shallow? Surely he that indeed bends his will to any thing, will be contented
to devour the pains of seeking and striving after it, as he that would be
rich in good carriest will labor for riches. But he whose will is a little
weakly stird toward wealth, but yet does give it self over unto ease and
pleasure, after he has affirmed that he would be wealthy, shows, that his
will is not settled upon wealth, by taking his ease, and following his
pleasure, rather then that he will cross himself in these things to get
wealth. It is even so in things spiritual for this matter, as it is in things
temporal: he that weakly wishes to be upright, but has not his will
soundly carried after uprightness, after his seeming to be willing,
discovers his unwillingness, by refusing to do that by which he might be
made upright. But if thou would indeed be made sincere, as a sick man would
be made whole, thou must be content to take that physic, though troublesome
in working, which will purge out thy predominant hypocrisy, and beget
sincerity in the stead thereof.

Give me leave therefore to go forward in this business, and to show unto
you by what means the Hypocrite may prevail against his guile, Means by
which the Hypocrite may be made upright.
that hitherto has prevailed against him; and he that has had nothing but
shows, may be made sound and substantial. 1. To see and confess that he bath
been an Hypocrite hitherto.
In the first place then, he must see and confess himself to have bin
hitherto but an Hypocrite, and must suffer the Word of God to make him known
unto himself.

This is the first and hardest piece of this business, of which it may be
said, that he has half ended which has well begun, and without which it
shall be impossible ever to make any good and fruitful end in this matter. For
though the gross Hypocrite knows himself but to dissemble, yet (such is the
winding deceit of this vice, and so true is it that Solomon has said, The
counsels of the wicked are deceit,) that he will not be known to himself, of
that which he does know. For when I say, he must confess it, I mean not that
he must in a fit bare lie say so, or being forced by the power of his
conscience cry out, that so it is; but he must be willing, though against the
hair, and the heart too, to mind himself of it, to consider it seriously, to
fet the point down certainly within himself, and to affirm against himself
freely in his own soul, in secret, at the bar of his own conscience: Ah, I
am an Hypocrite, a Pharise, a dissembler, a dry branch. An inward, hearty,
secret, plain, free acknowledgement of ones guile, grounded upon diligent
enquiry, sound search, due conviction, and plain evidence, is the first thing
that must be done for the reforming of hypocrisy, without which it is not
possible to get the better of it. A man must set himself with all
seriousness, as in a matter of the greatest importance in the world, even that
whereupon his eternal estate does depend, to find out his own falsehood; and
having with some pains of seeking, perceived such and such notes of
ouer-ruling deceitfulness within him, must set down and cast out all
selfe-louing, and selfe-flattering fancies of former times, (whereby he was
better persuaded of himself, or at least did put off the thought and
remembrance of this matter) and say unto himself, Ah, now I have met with this
coozening deceiuer Hypocrisy, which has all this while beguiled me, and
tyrannized over me, unseen and undiscerned. Now I see by my carelessness of
pondring on Gods Word, which I hear and speak of, and yet not condemning my
self for such negligence: Now I see by mine uncontrolled censuring of others,
now I see, by my letting evil thoughts and secret sins pass away without
lamenting; by my excusing and lessening mine own faults, and making nothing of
that, that I am not willing to mend, and casting the fault still upon others,
rather then my self, that I am not sound at heart, yea, that I am stark
hollow and rotten at heart. This hunting out, and arraigning, and conuicting of
the sin we speak against, before the bar of a man's own heart; this must
needs be done, if ever we will subdue and ouermaster the same. And why? why I
say, O thou man or woman whosoever, should thou be unwilling to see and
confess thy guile within the walls of thine own soul, before the eyes of
God, that do already see it plain enough? This confession is not required of
thee, as an evidence to be produced against thee, for thy easier condemnation;
but as a necessary antecedent of thy pardon, which none can obtain from God,
unless he plead guilty: for it is an ouer-ruled case in heaven, and shall
never be altered or swarued from, No man shall be forgiven from Gods
Tribunal, but he that asks pardon; and no man can ask pardon, that does not
acknowledge guiltiness. I say then again unto thee, that thou should not
be unwilling to see and confess that which thou shall have none hurt by
confessing: yea, which in very truth it is utterly in vain to refuse to
confess; for deny it whilst thou will, from the eyes of God, the Husbandman,
and from the eyes of our Lord Jesus Christ, the root of this Vine, no denial,
no covering can hide it; when coloring and denying cannot keep the fault
secret, and plain acknowledgement may get the fault pardoned; would any but a
very fool, or obstinate and wilful man, that had vowed to seek his own
ruin, refuse to confess? I do not wish thee with open voice (so as men
should hear it to thy reproach) to cause thine own mouth charge thee with
guile, (which in truth were somewhat hard, and yet not so hard, but that a wise
man would readily do it to get remission) but alone in the secret thoughts of
thine own breast, or in the secret prayers of thy closet betwixt God and thy
self, where none other ear ca^ hear, but his, that is already acquainted
with the matter, and knows more then thou can confess, but alone here, I
say, to sigh out thine humble acknowledgement, and say, O wretched man I, to
this moment I have but dissembled, and seemed to be good, without being so.
Alack, I am (I will no longer be ignorant, or deny, or not heed it, that I am)
an Hypocrite, I find I am not changed in heart, some sin I think too
pleasant, or gainful, or needful to forsake; some duty too hard or
expencefull to perform; I never yet accustomed to take the pains of binding
the law of wisdom upon the tables of mine heart; I never yet regarded to
feel the power of Religion mortifying my most beloved lusts, and framing my
very soul to newness: I never heretofore did feel and bewail mine
hollownesse; and therefore, Ah, it must no longer be gainsaid by me, I am an
Hypocrite. In truth, brethren, you must needs do thus, or else ye shall for
ever remain Hypocrites. Were it not better for thee thus to shame thy self
before Christ, then to make him shame thee before the whole world at the last
Judgment, or make thee shame thy self to no purpose, before many on thy
deathbed? Every secret thing must be made open, every hidden thing must be
brought to light. O now drag this corner-seeking, and light-shining vice into
the open view, by a free and plain confession as thou have been exhorted,
that it may not at that day remain to be laid open to thine eternal
confusion. If thou tellest me that thou have bin long time a professor of
religion, and have long accounted thy self the child of God; and therefore if
the matter be brought to that pass, that after all this while thou must be
feign to take upon thee the name of an Hypocrite, thou can not see any hope
of ever being true. I answer thee, that this is a vain fear, with which
Satan seeks to hinder thee from doing that that is absolutely needful to thy
salvation: for this is one, and a principal cause that thou wast never yet
true, because thou would never yet be made to see thy felse false. But
remove this impediment (by the much persuaded confession I call for at thine
hands) and whatsoever thou have been, and how long soever thou shall be made
true; for God comes hither now in this his ordinance, to make thee true, if
thou do not make thy self incapable of truth, by refusing to acknowledge thy
want of truth: wherefore breaking through all unwillingness and delays, and
laying aside all shifts and defenses, fall upon thy knees in thy secret
chamber, and there say unto thy self, and in more words complain against thy
self unto God, that thou art as yet an Hypocrite, a barren branch, that
stands every hour in peril of being cut off.

This done, 2. A constant lamenting of his hypocrisy.
in the second place frame thy self to mourning and sorrow for thine
hypocrisy, and ferret out thy guile by lamenting it. For there is no sin or
corruption in the heart of man, so tyrannous and ouer-ruling, but that godly
sorrow will fetch it down and ouer-master it. Indeed a little whimpering
grief, a sigh or two, a tear or two, a sad countenance for a Sermon time or
so, will not prevail. The best medicine that is, will not heal a sore, if
there be not a sufficient quantity of it applied, if it be not constantly
applied and followed close. He that will be content to grieve a little at
Church, or so, for his guile, and out of the present evidence of the Spirit
working with the Word, will perhaps yield to see and to lament his hollownesse,
but lets the matter pass quickly, and takes no more pains about it, shall
anger the sore, as it were, and not heal it, and by careless neglecting of
Gods grace in such motions offered, he shall cause his hypocrisy to fester
more, and grow more incurable: for even this weak work of the Word will help
(out of his own erroneous disposition) to coozen him, and to make him too
soon think himself upright, and so he shall never become upright. But the
sorrow I speak of, must be a settled and constant sorrow, which a man must let
rest upon his soul, and willingly entertain within himself many a day
together, though not in a violent manner to hinder his other occasions, yet in
a still quiet manner, to make his thoughts in the midst of all other
occasions, (as well they may, without offering any wrong unto such occasions)
be still running upon the matter of his guile, and in an inward and silent
manner continuing to bemone the same within himself. A spirit of grief will
not change an Hypocrite into a true Christian, a constant grief will. This
then do, (as he that has a grievous sore or wound, applies the curing of that
wound above all things, until it be whole) set thy self for a good space of
time together, to make it thy principal work to observe the working of thine
hypocrisy, and to bewail the same. Sometimes be earnest with thy self, and
in thy solemn and secret prayers and confessions, labor to rend and break
thine heart with grievous sorrow, and to be wonderful vile in thine own
eyes, because of thy long continued hypocrisy: and strive to do as Peter did
for his denying his Master, (for a counterfeit following him, is little better
then a denial of him) even to get alone and weep, (at least grieve, which may
well be without weeping) very bitterly: and when thine other occasions call
thee from thy chamber, yet hold thy thoughts still on work (and let the
plaster lie to the sore all the day.) Be thinking, Ah wretched creature I,
that have so great a space of time continued an Hypocrite, a professor of
Religion, not changed in heart, not washed in the inner man, not made a new
creature! O how great cause has God to abhor me, have I to abhor my self,
that have so long gone about to coozen God, and to mock mine own soul! And
so whatsoever thou be doing, let thine heart be feeding on this bitter
herb of inwardly bemoning thy guile and thine irreformednesse, and
vnchangednesse of heart. Bid these cogitations welcome as thou sit at
meat, and count them as the best sauce for thy meat, yea, as the best dish on
thy table. In company let these cogitations be thy most esteemed companions,
and in solitariness give thy self over to them, and so continue to do, till
thou find a plain change of thine heart, a manifest alteration, and so evident
a framing thee to be another then thou wast before, that at last thou may be
able, (which if thou will not be weary of striving, within no long space of
time thou shall be able to say) Now I find and feel, that I am made new.
Brethren, if any of you had a very sore leg, or arm, he would be content to
go to some Surgeon, to dress the same every morning and evening, and let
(perhaps) a smarting plaster lie upon it all day long, and all night too, for
three weeks, or a months space together, that he might be healed and not lose
his joint. O why should not he that has an heart diseased with that grievous
fistula of hypocrisy, be contented, as it were, to dress it twice a day, by
some solemn, secret, and earnest lamenting it before God, and to let the
plaster of grief lie at it all day, by frequent renewing of his sorrowful
thoughts for it, that this foul and festered sore may be healed, and he may
not lose his soul and body both by it? Will thou not bestow as much time,
pains, care, in healing thy soul, as thy leg or arm? Doubtless this care
would go happily forward, for God himself would be the Surgeon, and health
would follow without fail; for the medicine is sovereign, and has been tried
by many, and prescribed by an excellent and skillful person. Saint James bids
wauering-minded and double-hearted men, he means Hypocrites, to turn their
laughter into tears, and to afflict themselves and weep: lo how affliction,
grief, sighs tears, be the ingredients of this medicine that will kill
hypocrisy! Saint Paul, after God had met him going to Damascus, took this
medicine carefully, and in the space of three days it healed him clean,
almost, and made him of a proud hypocritical persecuting Pharise, to become a
most true-hearted and sincere Apostle and Preacher of the Gospel. For, coming
to Damascus, he neither ate nor drank for three days, but gave himself to
mourn for his hollownesse, bloodinesse, unbelief, and other sins, and so
was healed of all at once. O happy medicine! O speedy and blessed cure! O
blessed grief! O the most gainfully spent three days that ever were spent, to
work such an alteration in such a soul! Wilt not thou take the same course,
that did good to one so far gone with guile? O now settle thy self to mourn
for thy guile, that thou may be healed, and may be comforted. But some man
may perhaps say, that it is not so easy a matter to soften an hard heart. I
answer, It is not indeed, but it is a possible matter, and that it may be
effected through Gods blessing with careful endeavors, from which Gods
blessing will never be kept back. 3. Means of mollisying a guilesull heart.
I will therefore show you two or three means to mollify even a guilefull
heart, and to make it, if not weep, yet mourn earnestly: and let every man
know for his comfort, that mourning may be accepted before God, though tears
be away. The Lord will not reject dry sorrow, if he see it hearty and true, and
such as a man is even out of conceit with himself, because he cannot make it
greater, and wetter too.

Understand then, that there are three things that will help even the man that
has been hitherto but an Hypocrite, to lament and mourn for his hypocrisy.

The first is, 1. To consider seriously of the danger in which he stands.
to lay open before his mind in some settled and serious meditation, the
infiniteness of that evil which shall surely come upon him for his
hypocrisy, unless by lamenting it he do prevent the same. Put thy self in
mind of the certainty of thy being damned if thou continue an Hypocrite, and
of the intolerablenesse of the punishment of damnation. Say, O how inevitable
(but by repentance, whereof sorrow is a necessary companion) and how extreme is
the peril wherein I stand! If I cast not out this guile out of mine heart, it
will certainly keep me out of heaven; if I keep it still in my soul, it will
surely cast me down to hell. I must, I must of necessity, (because of the
truth of God that has said it, and his justice that hates this sin) be
damned everlastingly, and for ever fry in those unquenchable flames (which none
can suffer without being swallowed up of their torment) unless I be changed,
and of an Hypocrite as I have bin, become sound at heart. This cannot be
without bewailing mine unsoundness: and ah then shall I not bewail it? Tell
thy self again, and again, and many times, in what excessive danger thy
soul stands, of being for ever tormented with the intolerable sense of Gods
anger (a thousand times more scalding then the worst fire that can be made of
any artificial matter) unless by lamenting thou prevail against thy sin;
and this will help thee to lament thy sin: Muster up all the threats and
menaces of Gods Word against hypocrisy, and against Hypocrites, and laying
them close to thine own soul, say, Upon me shall all these be fulfilled, if
by mourning I free not my self from them. Faith in Gods threats will make the
heart ache and prick; and much pressing them upon a man's soul, and considering
the author and firmness of them, will cause them to be believed: and so thou
have one way of melting thy self.

To this add a second, 2. To consider seriously of Gods gracious readiness to
accept and pardon him also.
and the effect shall follow without doubt, and that is, consider of the
certainty of Gods accepting even thee also graciously in Christ Jesus, upon thy
so mourning and confessing. The Lord of heaven is so good, say thou unto thy
self, that even an Hypocrite, and my self the worst of Hypocrites, may be,
and shall be accepted into favor, for all his gross dissembling, and frequent
abusing of Gods goodness, and resisting of his Spirit. Hope of pardon will
turn the hardest hardness into softness: I say, hope of pardon, well and
firmly grounded upon the promise of the Word: for false and presumptuous hope,
that bears it self bold in the false application of the promise, looking for
the benefit promised, without respecting the condition whereupon pardon is
promised, does rather add to the hardness of the heart, and make it more
stony. Speak thus therefore unto thine own soul, and say; Well, for all I
have been but an Hypocrite hitherto, yet I may be pardoned, and I may be
saved, if I lament for mine hypocrisy; and therefore I will bewail it, and
strive for that breaking of the heart with grief, which will cause the Lord to
bind it up with mercy and with comfort.

Lastly, 3. To stir up anger and dislike against himself for his hardness.
fall down before the Lord, and if thou do not feel the sensible motions of
sorrow, yet stir up anger and dislike against thy self, for thy too much
hardness now, and too much folly in former time, that tookest pains to delude
thy self, and to delude him that was too wise to be deluded: say with the
Psalmist, Ah, why have I been so very a fool, yea a beast before the Lord, as
to please my self in a bare show of goodness, and in a mere outside of
piety? how could I be so far hood-winked all this while? does not the Word
of God plainly enough show this folly? have not I received many warnings in
many examples? What got Saul by dissembling? What did it profit Judas to deal
with guile? and what auailed it Ananias and Saphira, to dawbe and counterfeit?
Ah wretched creature I, why have I followed the pattern of such unhappy
persons? where was my reason all this while? and what was become of
understanding? Ah, Lord, I am ashamed of my folly, of mine unthankfulness, of
my presumption, of mine abusing thy sweet and gracious proffers of mercy. And
thus continuing for one hour in a day together, to blame, and shame, and
condemn thy self, and to quarrel with thy self for thy guile, at length
thou shall find thy self, with laboring, cast into a kindly sweat, as it
were, of holy grief for this thine hypocrisy, which will so open the pores of
thy soul, that this ill humor will euacuate, and be much reformed.

Now having seen and striuen to lament thy guile, proceed to stir up hearty
desires, 3. The third means to overcome hypocrisy, earnestly to desire and
pray for the Spirit of truth.
and make fervent prayers unto God for his spirit of truth and of uprightness.
We cannot overcome the smallest corruptions of our heart in our own strength,
but it must be a divine power, which must enable us to prevail against sinful
dispositions. Now this strength the Lord of heaven, the strong God, the author
of all strength, is ready and willing to bestow upon all that humbly sue unto
him for it, for he gives to all liberally, and hitteth no man in the teeth.
Beg then for the spirit of power, and of a right mind, and beg heartily and
confidently, because thou beggest of him that is able to give, and much more
willing, then thou art to receive. He that has made others of weak, to become
strong, and of false, to become true, can, and will perform the same grace to
thee, according to his promise. For he commands all to ask, and shuts up
his mercies from none that truly and heartily beseech the same at his hands.
Perhaps the devil may seek to turn thee from this exercise of prayer, by
casting in a cavil against thee, to this purpose, that the prayers of
Hypocrites cannot be accepted, and thou having been hitherto but an Hypocrite,
how should thy prayers prevail in heaven? For the settling of thy soul
against this doubt, know, that the prayer of an Hypocrite that does not see and
lament his hypocrisy, cannot indeed be bidden welcome in heaven, but all that
are heavy laden with sin, have a command to come unto Christ Jesus, and a
promise that they shall be refreshed: wherefore, now thou having begun to see,
and detest, and be burdened and grieved with thy guile, good warrant have
thou to ask help, and good assurance that thine asking shall not be in vain.
Therefore I say again, lift up thine heart and voice, and cry mightily to God,
for the powerful work of his Spirit, to make thee sincere before him. O Lord,
say thou, which art only able to form the soul of man anew within, create
thou in me a new heart, and form a right spirit within me; make me sound in
thy precepts, and let not iniquity have dominion over me. Make me (Lord) a true
Israelite, in whose spirit there is no guile. Make me truly good; good for thy
sake, and because thou would have me good that I may please thee, and not
only or chiefly that I may serve mine own turn, yea or save mine own soul;
yea generally and universally good: good in all things, with such a goodness as
thou accountest perfect in thy Son Christ's perfection, because he in whom it
is, does strive and labor after perfection. Follow this suit most closely and
earnestly, and give not over till thou find it granted; and if thou can
not go on in variety of words, yet repeat over the same petition often, and
often, and be not weary; for so they be hearty and fervent, the Lord of heaven
will never be weary of such repetitions. Our Savior has spoken a Parable, to
the intent that we should pray always, and not wax faint. Thou know I
presume what ye parable is. A poor Widow, by importunity, forced an
unrighteous Judge to do her justice against her adversary. How much more shall
the righteous God avenge the cause of his servants that cry day and night unto
him? And if his compassion be such toward them, that he will avenge them of
their external enemies, which only seek to make their lives tedious by
persecutions; shall he not much rather assist them against their inward
corruptions, which tend to bring their souls to destruction? wherefore resolve
thy self to be importunate, and to take no nay, nor ever to give over till
thou have sped in thy suit: wherein nothing can hinder thee from speeding, but
thine own too soon giving over the suit through weariness. Men are troubled
with earnestness and importunity, and amongst them many times a stout beggar
has a stoutnay, because they condemn it as a matter of impudency, to be a
stout beggar: but to God nothing is more pleasing, then this stirring up our
selves to take hold upon his name, and this giving him no rest day nor night
till he hear our prayers; and with him only faint suitors, that will take a
repulse easily, and be soon put back, do go away empty of the thing they
sued for. Know then, that thy salvation depends upon this matter, and
therefore as in a case of the greatest importance in the world, make thy
desires fervent, and resolve never to cease asking, till thou shall receive the
Spirit of truth and uprightness: And know, that God does not deny to hear thy
prayers at first, because he is not able or willing to grant them, or because
he counts it a matter too troublesome for him, but alone to indeare the
benefit obtained, to make thee see the worth of it, and become the more
thankful. Pray therefore, and pray fervently, and pray continually: O Lord,
create a right spirit in me, and make me sound in thy precepts.

And to prayers, 4. To meditate often on the excellent nature of God.
join in the fourth place holy meditations of the nature of God: for he that
knows God thoroughly, and is to any purpose acquainted with the excellency of
his nature in himself, and sees the beauty of his grace in the face of Christ,
cannot but be so far in love with him, as even to be good for his sake, and
to make him the beginning and ending of all his desires and endeavors. It is
alone ignorance of God, that makes us set our selves in Gods room, and aim at
our own benefit in stead of his glory. But he that will take pains to clear
up his own eyes, and to behold the glory of God, as he has revealed it in his
Word, and in his Gospel, shall be so affected with the splendour thereof, as
that now he will account nothing worth any thing, but that surpassing glorious
Majesty, that infinitely excels all things, and so hypocrisy must needs
vanish. The knowledge of God will make a man to perceive how little it shall
avail him to disguize himself. The knowledge of God will make him to see how
worthy the Lord is of all the service of all creatures. The knowledge of God
will make his heart to become in love with God, and no man will dissemble with
him whom he loves: wherefore labor to get, and to grow in this knowledge, by
a frequent pondering and musing upon the nature of God, and beholding in his
Temple the beauty of his Majesty, as David speaks. Tell thy self often of
his infiniteness and eternity, and that all things are from him, and by him,
and for him, and he alone is from and of himself. Say unto thy soul, he is
the owner of all things, and the ruler of all things. All the good properties
of all creatures be but drops of his sea, and sparks of his flame, and there
is infinitely more of all good things in him alone, then in all them; and
whatsoever is in them, it is more his then theirs, and theirs no longer, nor
further, then as he will impart: with him is wisdom, with him is power,
greatness, and riches, and Majesty, and dominion are his. He is infinitely
just, and righteous, hating sin with ten thousand times more vehement hatred
then we can think he does, and punishes it with ten thousand times more
severity then we can think he will. He is thoroughly and thoroughly acquainted
with all that is in man, and needs not to receive information from any other.
His eyes in every place behold the evil and the good, and he is most fearful
and terrible to the sinner, and even far more burning then any consuming
fire. Put thy self therefore in mind frequently, of his all-searching eye,
all-hearing ear, almighty hand, and euery-where-present presence. Say with
David, Lord, whither shall I go out of thy presence? And thou compassest my
path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. He that will
thus set his mind on work, often to muze of Gods excellencies, shall find the
candle of the knowledge of God to be lighted up within his soul. And as a
thief endures not the light, and therefore if a candle be tinded, he flies:
so this sly thief of hypocrisy will be gone, if we set up and renew this
burning lamp of knowledge within us. Wherefore gather together such worthy
texts of Scripture, as tend to set forth God unto us, and bestow much time in
pondering of them, and telling thine heart how true they be, and most
inconceiueably great and good he is that has in them discovered but his back
parts unto thee; and thou shall soon find, that the beams of this Sun will
dispell the fogs of guile within thee. 5. And last, to be constant in examining
himself by the Law, and discussing ones own deeds.


Last of all, thou must be constant in examining thy self by the Law of God,
and in discussing thine own life, calling thy self to account often, at least
every day, for the thoughts, words, and deeds of the day; renewing the
sorrowful confessions of thy soul for what thou find to be amiss, and
thine hearty purposes of amendment. Hypocrisy cannot prevail, but where a man
does suffer himself to pass on carelessly and heedlesly through the world, not
regarding much how matters go with his soul, nor caring to set himself in
Gods presence, and consider how he has behaved himself toward God. He that
lets his reckonings run on a long time without setting them in order, or
considering how they stand, is many times a very banquerupt, and knows it not;
but he that does often make his accounts even, does likely keep beforehand.
We must daily cast up our accounts with God, we must daily reckon with him and
our selves for our debts and arrerages. But especially a man must have a
special eye unto that most beloved sin of his, which he takes most delight
in, is most prone unto, and is lothest to see and leave, and most watchfully
mark and observe each stirring, and turning, and moving of it within his
soul, be it what it will be, worldliness, passion, revenge, vainglory,
lust, voluptuousness, carking, or the like. Likely hypocrisy, that is it
self a close corruption, and loves not to be seen, has some lieutenant, as
it were, some master-sin, that keeps its place openly, and holds up its
dominion. See this, oppose this, subdue this, and the reign of guile is
overthrown. This ferreting out of all sin by the Law, and chiefly of the
master-sinne; this frequent appearing before God to try our daily conversation
in his presence, will cause that a man shall not be under the dominion of
guile. He shall discover so much hypocrisy, and so much hurt coming to him by
hypocrisy, and so much good by the purging out of hypocrisy, that by
confessing and opposing it, he shall gain certain freedom from the tyranny
and usurpation thereof.

Lo, brethren, so many of you as have hitherto been servants to guile, I have
revealed unto you the means of recovering your liberty. Do these things, and
though you have been to this time arrant hypocrites, you shall be changed and
become upright. Only do these things now for the present, from this time
forward, without deferring or delaying, without putting off the Lord until
another time: for the plaster will come too late when the sore is past cure:
After a man is dead, make him a cawdle, says the Proverb. This is madness
indeed; when God has so long borne with thy dissimulation, as that now he
resolves to bear with thee no longer, nor ever to pardon thee, and therefore
turns thy conscience loose upon thee to pursue thee, as he did on Judas, then
shall thou be unable to do these things, and then shall thou find it past
time a day to think of reforming thy guile, when God is now in cutting thee
off for it: for the night will come when no man can work, as Christ tells.
Wherefore now at the pure reproves of Gods Word, and at the gentle and loving
motions of his Spirit, address thy self to this, though painful, yet happy
and needful labor of reforming thy guile; and I protest unto thee in the name
of the Lord, that thou shall prevail. See thine hypocrisy, grieve for it
before God, considering the certain and insufferable danger of it, and the
assurance of escaping it by this means, and even falling out with thy self,
because thou can not grieve more for it, and withal, pray earnestly unto the
Lord for his Spirit: meditate much of his excellencies and presence, and use to
mark and examine thy life daily, chiefly in respect of thy most dear sin
which thou find thy self lothest to see, and leave, and then hear thou the
Word of the Lord unto thee, Thy sin shall be pardoned, thy guile shall be
removed, and thou shall (from this time forward) become a living and a
fruitful branch. O how happy shall this change be? how comfortable this
alteration? and how shall thou bless the time, the day, the means, the cause
that so changed thee? And now I pray you, brethren, give me leave yet a little
further to press this exhortation upon your consciences. Answer each of you
within himself, and say, What is thy resolution, and what intendest thou to
do? Will thou pass over this exhortation, as carelessly as thou have already
done many others? and go as fruitlesly from this Sermon, as from others
heretofore; never regarding to amend the sin which the Word of God discovers
unto thee to be so mischievous? will thou, I say, even neglect and set light
by this admonition, and even forget it so soon as thy back is turned on the
Church, and never take care of following it? or will thou heed it, observe it,
follow it, and now begin to make thy self a true Christian, by purging out the
formerly prevailing guile of thy soul? Come to a resolution, before thou go
hence, what thou will do, whether obey the Word of God, or disobey it,
practice it, or let it slide, without endeavor to practice. Me thinks it
should not be possible that any amongst you should have an heart so desperately
hardened as not to observe an exhortation so nearly concerning him, and so much
and earnestly beaten upon him. Me thinks it cannot be that any marking it,
should possibly settle himself in a wilful obstinacy of going on as he has
begun, and not mending so damnable a sin. All the way that Satan has to make
you lose the fruit of this exhortation, is to nuzzle you in a good conceit,
that sure you be not Hypocrites, but already true-hearted: and therefore the
exhortation, though needful, yet is to you impertinent. But thou must
understand, that though thou be not a rank Hypocrite, yet the things
delivered concern thee, and are needful for thee also, as well as for him
that is. For there is none of all Gods Saints so perfectly renewed, but that a
great deal of the leaven of hypocrisy may be found in him, though not so much
as by quite ouercomming him, should give him the name of an Hypocrite, yet so
much as by often breaking forth in him, may justly cause him to take heed and
beware of hypocrisy, as our Savior Christ bids.

Now the same things that are auailable to beat down any vice from bearing
rule in the heart, the same things are also needful for the further and
further weakening of it, that it may be less and less noisome to the heart.
Wherefore howsoever the case go with thee, thou have a portion in this work;
if thou know thy self to have been but an Hypocrite, most of all does it
appertain to thee to practice it, that thou may no longer stand in hazard of
being cast into hell every hour. If thou can not tell whether thou be an
Hypocrite, it beseems thee to put it in practice, that thou may in such a
degree subdue hypocrisy, as to be able to know and say, that thou art none
Hypocrite.

If thou be already so sincere, The sieve forenamed things do also pertain
to the upright, that be may grow more upright.
that thou can truly and assuredly affirm thy self to be no dissembler, yet
thou also must do the things persuaded, that by more prevailing against guile,
thou may have more comfort: and lest, if thou do not thus continue to
mortify this corruption, it get head against thee again, so far, as almost
to lay its yoke upon thee the second time: for a man that is now so true and
upright, as that he is well assured the power of guile is broken within him,
shall yet (if he fore-slacke the performing of the things I have formerly
prescribed) by little and little have guile so apt to grow in him, (as weeds in
a garden) that he shall be little less then quite ouer-run with it in a
short space. Wherefore though the things be somewhat tedious to flesh and
blood, and though corruption has no mind to set about them, (for when did any
man, whose body was wounded, come otherwise then unwillingly to be searched,
tented, plaistered? and who ever took a potion, but with some rising against
it of his stomach?) yet enforce thy self, and urge the necessity of doing
upon thine own soul so much, till thou have made thine heart resolute to do
them; and so may not alone cease to be an Hypocrite, but daily more and
more cast out this sour leaven, and keep the feast of an holy conversation in
the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

Brethren, be not deaf to the voice of the living God, frustrate not his
ordinances, disappoynt not your selves of the good his Word would do you by
neglecting its directions; but now consider what course has been prescribed
unto you for the healing of hypocrisy, and put it in practice, and be healed.
And, O Lord of heaven, thou that know who they be that have but dissembled
hitherto, vouchsafe so to work with thy Word now, that they may be made to
see, bewail, and resist their guile henceforward, that so thou may win
glory to thy self in making them fruitful, rather then in cutting them off.
And so much for the first part of Gods Husbandry, his just severity against
Hypocrites.

CHAP. VI. Containing the second Doctrine, viz. that the best branches have
need of pruning.
LEt us now go forward to consider his Fatherly goodness toward the upright.
Every branch that brings forth fruit, he purges or pruneth, that it may
bring forth more fruit. It should seem then that they have need of purging,
and therefore have some things amiss about them. For it were an idle labor,
and a matter deserving reproof and reproach in a gardener to be paring a branch
that has nothing about it, which would do more hurt then good: and surely the
Lord of heaven need not to remove any thing from his branches, if he did not
meet with some things evil and superfluous upon them.

Know you then, The fruitful branch needs pruning: the best man has his
faults.
that the most fruitful branch that grows upon this Vine, has something in
it that will require the use of a pruning knife, that is to say, the truest
hearted Christian that ever was in this world has had his faults, and whiles
he lives in this house of clay, shall have them. Even those boughs that are
hanged with large clusters of ripe and pleasant Grapes, have yet some
superfluous leaves, some out-growing sprigs, some dry and rotten twists, that
were better away then there, and that cause the Grapes to beneither so many,
nor fair, nor sweet as else they would be. Does not Saint James tell us, that
In many things we offend all? Lo the express plainness of this text: for
there is great force in the words many, and we, and all; for who shall exempt
himself from that confession, wherein Saint James himself found cause to bear
a part, James 3.2.
and that so, as he includes in it with himself, all the number of the Saints
of God then living? and who shall come after and say, that himself, or such
and such in his time, offend in nothing, or in few things, when, of all the
Saints in the Apostles time, it is confessed by the holy Apostle, and the holy
Spirit that guided him, not alone that they formerly have offended, but also
that they presently did offend in many things. 1. King 8.46. and 2. Chr. 6.36
Solomon also is plain, and says, that there is no man which lives, and
sins not. If in the old Testament there were none which lived sinlesse; and
under the new Testament they did all acknowledge themselves offenders in many
things: I hope then it is plain enough, what has been, and in all ages will
be the state of good Christians, and true-hearted, even that they shall be
troubled with sins, and with many sins. David says also, Psalm. 19.12.
by way of confession to God, Lord, who can know his errors? not alone
confessing of himself, but of all, that they have not alone some errors, but
many more then they can possibly come to the understanding of, Romans 7.21.
in this life. Paul also tells us, that when he would do good, evil was
present with him. And who can boast of freedom from this cumbersome presence
of evil, if the Apostle himself could not? Some would elude the evidence of
this text, (but to no purpose) for the matter we are in hand to prove,
because, if this place should fail us, yet the other places alleged, and to
be alleged, do by their plainness refuse to be eluded; but this text they
would elude, by saying that the Apostle does not here speak of himself, as he
was after his regeneration, but as he was before regeneration; so describing a
mere natural man, brought as far as the Law without grace could bring him.
But this fancy the Apostle himself does plainly enough cut off, saying in the
conclusion of his discourse, So then, I my self in my mind do serve the Law
of God, but in my flesh the law of sin. This I my self, joined with the
present tense, can denote none other but Paul himself, as he then was, when
he wrote these words, and according to the condition in which he then
remained. And does he not to his complaint, O miserable man, subioyne his
triumph of Thanks be unto God, through Jesus Christ? Can the mere natural man
come to such a sight of his miserable servitude to sin, as withal to give
thanks unto God, in Christ, for his deliverance? It is manifest then, that the
Apostle affirms thus much of himself, as he then was after his believing in
Christ, and many years spent in his Apostleship. And if it were thus with Paul
at that time, shall any man in all the world expect to find it otherwise?
Saint John also writes most plainly, saying, If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

The point then is fully proved, needing indeed none other confirmation, then
the continual experience of all Gods Saints agreeable to the Word of God. But
for your better satisfaction in the matter, we will show you, both the cause
why it is so, and the reason why it stands better with the wisdom of God to
appoint it so to be, rather then otherwise. For without all doubt, the Lord
could give us perfection of sanctification in this life, if so it seemed good
unto his wisdom. And the cause of it is, The cause of our not being perfect
here, is our not being fully united to Christ.
our not being fully and perfectly united unto Christ Jesus our Head, from whom
all graces are derived, as water from the fountain. If we were conjoined to
Christ in the highest degree of union, we should also be void of sin. For as
in our uniting unto the first Adam, we did so wholly receive his corrupt
image, that there remained no good thing in us: so in our uniting to the second
Adam, we should so wholly be filled with his holy Image, as to have none evil
abiding in us. But whilst we remain in this world, we have not a full
possession of him, we are not so nearly united unto him. We are like a maid
contracted, espoused, made sure to a man, which has an infallible right into
him, and has received diverse tokens, even rich tokens of love, to assure her
of the marriage in due time, but is not yet married unto him, nor is put into
the possession of his person and estate wholly and fully, as at the
consummatio^ of matrimony. And this also arises hence, that he is a glorious,
incorruptible, immortal and spiritual Man; we are mortal, corruptible,
mean, and natural men, and so weak, feeble and imperfect a thing, as a
mortal unnatural man, though it may in some degree be joined unto so glorious
a nature and person as that of Christ's, (namely, in respect of a certain right
and interest into him, and of the receiving of some first fruits and benefits
from him) yet cannot be admitted into a full, and whole, and perfect
conjunction with him, namely, so far, as to see him as it is seen, and know
him as it is known, and to be all in all with him. Now so exceeding deeply does
the stain of sin cleave unto us, which we have received from our first
parent Adam, that an union of less closeness then this, even of wholly
possessing Christ, and being wholly possessed by Christ, will not serve the
turn wholly and altogether to expel the corruptions of our hearts. You see
now whence it comes, that in this life we remain obnoxious to diverse
imperfections.

Next, Reasons why God will not give us a total freedom from sin here.
let us consider why the Lord of heaven will have it to be so, rather the^
otherwise. In truth it should be an intolerable presumption and sauciness in
us, to demand a reason of Gods actions, if himself did not vouchsafe to stoop
so low, as to render us a reason thereof himself. But in this matter the
Scripture says plainly, that God has shut all under sin, that he might
have mercy upon all. Doubtless this is principally to be understood of giving
over man to be sinful in his first corruption, showing the reason why God did
permit and appoint it so to be: but withal, it may very fitly serve to inform
us in the present matter, showing why the Lord does please to leave even his
own servants, after their ingraffing into Christ, unto the sinfulness of
their nature, so far, that they shall not be wholly free from it; namely, 1.
That it may most manifestly appear we are saved of grace.
that it might most manifestly appear that they be saved of grace, and not of
merit, and that he may fully and unquestionably enjoy the praise of having
given it them of free will and bounty, not paid it them as a thing earned by
the worthiness of their works, although in another respect, the Lord pleases
to call it a wages, viz. (not in regard that it is given for the dignity of the
works, but) because of the certainty of such an ouer-abundant requital. For
as an honest man will surely pay his labourer his hire (according to the Law,)
so the Lord will surely give eternal life unto his servants, that by
continuance in well doing do labor for the same.

Now seeing the Lord did principally aim at his own glory, in giving
salvation unto men; it is most agreeable to reason, that he should in such sort
bring them unto salvation, as may most manifest the riches of his mercy, the
glory whereof he does most affect and seek in that work: and it is a more
clear demonstration of mercy, to give them salvation, through the
justification which is by faith in Christ, notwithstanding that themselves
remain very weak, feeble, imperfect, sinful, and unable to perform exact
obedience to his Law, then if he should at the first moment of their
regeneration, free them wholly from all weakness, and after a life spent in
all fullness of obedience, and in perfect freedom from sin, crown them in
the end with eternal glory: for such unspotted holiness of life might carry a
show of claiming life for the dignity thereof, but the guiltiness of manifold
weaknesses does stop the mouth of every man before the Lord, and forces all
that have any wit in their heads, and feeling in their hearts, to acknowledge
that they are freely saved by his grace, and that of his own will, not by the
works which they had done.

Secondly, the Lords will is, 2. That we may be conformable to Christ in
afflictions, and go to heaven the same rough way that he did.
to make us conformable to Christ our Head, and to go to heaven the same way
that he went before us; namely, through manifold afflictions, that so out of
the sense and feeling of the burden of sin, and out of our long and
troublesome wrestling with it, we might be become more heartily and abundantly
thankful unto him for our deliverance. Therefore the Apostle tells us that we
must suffer with Christ, before we can reign with him; and himself tells us,
that whosoever will be his Disciple, must take up his cross and follow him;
for he will have trial of the love, fortitude, and patience of his soldiers,
and see whether for his sake they will endure the conflict, before he set the
Crown upon their heads. Now if he should not leave us in a state subject to
some sin, we could not be subject to any affliction: for where there is no
fault imputed to be punished, nor none inherent to be purged, there it should
be unrighteous with the Lord, to lay any punishment: for justice will not
suffer that the creature be made subject to correction, where he is not
subject to blame. Hence the Lord of heaven, that would have us pledge our
Savior in the bitter cup of sorrows on earth, before we feast with him, with
the new wine of consolation in his Kingdom, has left the relics of our
flesh in us to exercise us, that though sin have not dominion over us, yet it
has a dwelling and working in us, as the remnants of the Cananites kept under
tribute. If any shall object within himself, How can it be, that creatures so
full of sin, should possibly be united unto Christ? how can it agree with his
holiness, to take men and women defiled with corruption, and make them so
near unto himself, as flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone? (for so we
are made unto him in this life.) The answer is ready, that the fruitful
branches, at the time of their ingraffing into Christ, are made partakers of
the blessing spoken of by David, in the Psalm, viz. Their transgression is
remitted, their sin is covered, and the Lord imputes not iniquity unto them.
Through the imputation of Christ's perfect righteousness unto them, and
acceptance thereof for them, all their sins are made as if they were not,
and therefore cannot possibly hinder them from being in their measure united
unto Christ, and reconciled unto God. For all the sins of the penitent
believers, that ever they have committed, or shall commit, are (in respect of
God) fully and wholly forgiven, and quite done away; God pronouncing them
perfectly just in his sight, and not imputing to them any iniquity at all:
whence it must needs follow, as from the next and immediate ground thereof,
that they shall never fall away from grace: for God can never pronounce him
unjust, whom he has once pronounced just; nor never impute iniquity to him
again, to whom once he imputed none iniquity, because this were a manifest
change and alteration, whereof there is no shadow at all in God. And so you
have this point sufficiently cleared.

We will show you also what good use you are to make of it.

CHAP. VII. Containing the first use of the point, for the refutation of two
errors: viz. the merit of works, and the conceit of perfection in this life.
NOw this truth, in the first place, A confutation of two errors, 1. of the
merit of works, dreamed of by Romanists.
The first is of the Papists, of the merit of works. No obedience can possibly
merit in any kind of meriting, but that which is complete, absolute, and
perfect. For the life promised by the Law, cannot be challenged by virtue of
the Law, unless the condition, whereupon the Law does promise it, be wholly,
and in every part and particle fulfilled: seeing if one man make a covenant
with another of giving him such a reward, upon condition that he do go to
such a place, and dispatch (for example) four several businesses: the man
with whom this bargain is made, cannot, by virtue of the bargain, challenge
from the bargaine-maker, the reward specified, if he go to the place and
dispatch but half the businesses, or all, or any of them but by the halues:
for a conditional promise, in reason and equity, binds not the
promise-maker, but upon the perfect fulfilling of the work for which the
promise was made. Now the Law, the covenant by which we must challenge life, if
we will stand upon any kind of merit, says, Do this, and live, and that we
may know its meaning to be, do it fully, perfectly, exactly, without any
failing; it explicates it self, saying, Cursed be the man that confirms not
all the words of this Law to do them. Wherefore by virtue of the Law, upon the
worth and desert of the works thereof, no man can lay claim to life, unless
he can say, I have done this, I have confirmed the whole Law to do it. Now
whosoever has sins and corruptions, and disorders in him, whosoever
offends in many things, whosoever does the evil he would not, cannot say
that he establishes the whole Law by doing it: and our point has made it
plain, that the best of all Gods Saints the Apostles, Paul, James, John, Peter
not excepted, (and I hope, none will be bold to think himself better then
these pillars) must be feign to confess that they transgress in many things,
and must not dare to say that they have no sin in this life; wherefore it
follows ineuitably, plainly, clearly, incontrollably, to any reasonable man's
understanding, that they can in no sort lay claim to heaven, by any manner of
worth, or deserving of their works. And in very deed, the Papists themselves
are feign to yield us this cause in somewhat a close manner, and with a fair
cover of words, that they may not seem to yield it. For they tell us, that
these works of the Saints are dipped in the blood of Christ, and so being
cleansed of all stain and blemish, what hinders but that they may merit? This
is in a show of difference to come unto us, and grant the point controuerted.
For now who sees not, that if there be any worth in these works, it does not
abide in themselves, nor grow from themselves, but from gracious acceptance of
them in that blood, by dipping wherein, the spots of them are done away. For
there is (I think) none of us which denies, but that God accepting our works
as perfect in Christ, does reward us for them, as if they were perfect; but
seeing the reward becomes due in Christ, and not by the works themselves, we
think it a foolish pride to maintain the stately name of merit of works,
when we are feign to beg the reward for another sake, and cannot challenge it
simply for the works sake.

Thus this truth inforceth them, after much turning and winding, in effect to
confess it, though the truth is, they would not have it seem so, for fear of
a sore loss that might follow thence unto their Clergies kitchen and manger, I
mean their living and pomp. But let them pass.

There is a second error of heretics, 2. Of perfection of holiness in this
life, dreamed of by the ancient Puritans.
(so they may well be called) no less dangerous, yea verily, I suppose much
more dangerous then the former, of old condemned under the name of Puritans,
from a conceited and imaginary purity, or absolute freedom from all sin,
whereof they boasted, and now as the speech goes, revived in some parts of this
Land. This is that the Saints of God in this life may attain to such
perfection, as not at all to commit any sin, (with such gay fancies they
please to seed themselves, and their seduced followers) Now it is most
certain, that these men are the most abominable and dissembling hypocrites in
all the world, or else the most besotted and benumbed spirits: for their own
whole carriage, and continual experience does confute them, even to
themselves, and yet they will not see themselves confuted. If ever any of you
meet with any foolish Hypocrite, offering to tell you a tale of such perfection,
that he hopes to get, or that he has gotten, or that may be gotten by any in
this life, as never to sin any more, never any more to need repentance: do
no more but turn him to Saint John's Epistle, and tell him, that he that says
he has no sin, deceives himself, and the truth is not in him. Bid him
consult with Solomon again, who propounds the question as of a thing
impossible, Who can say, his heart is pure? and tell him again, that the same
Solomon knew what he said, when he said, that there is a generation which is
pure in their own eyes, but are not cleansed from their filthiness: and tell
him, that those branches in Christ which need no pruning, are sure (like a
branch ouerladen with Grapes) through the conceit of their much fruitfulness,
broken off from him: for he says, that every one remaining in him, needs,
and receives pruning; which were not needful, if he were faultlesse. And so
leave the fond, deceived, and selfe-conceited Hypocrite unto himself, and have
no more to do with him. For either he speaks altogether against his own
heart, or else his heart is naught worth: as Solomon says of the wicked; yea,
more hope is there of the salvation of the most desperate sinner alive, then of
such an one. For Christ always (...) the full, empty away, and pronounces a
(...) upon these spiritually rich persons. See thou a man wise in his own
eyes, says Solomon? there is more hope of a fool, then of him. Surely he is
wise in his own eyes that thinks he has no sin: wherefore we can have
little hope of him.

This error is so contrary to all the feeling and sense of all Gods Saints,
who are feign still to say with David, Lord, who can know his errors? as that a
man would marvel how any man, in whom there was ever any knowledge of the Word,
and any show and beginning of goodness, should be so far seduced and drawn
away, as to entertain such an opinion. But the cause is manifest: hypocrisy
is always accompanied with pride; and the growth of hypocrisy breeds also a
growth of pride, and pride swells out the eyes, that a man cannot see the
cleerest truths.

And thus have we briefly discovered unto you these errors, to rectify your
judgments. For if the words of Christ be true, these opinions that are
directly opposite unto the truth contained in them, must needs be false. Now
hear some other uses to rectify your practice also.

CHAP. VIII. Containing a second use of the point, stirring up the servants of
God to an holy longing for death.
Paul, We should long for the time of our dissolution, when we shall be
perfectly freed from sin.
and to long that we were once dissolned, and perfectly united unto Christ,
that (as he prays for us) being where he is, and seeing his glory, we might
be perfectly like him, in a spotless purity and holiness. Impatient folks
are many times so tormented with worldly crosses, (made so troublesome unto
them alone by their own folly and pride, whereby they neglect to see God, and
to stoop unto him in crosses) that they are even altogether weary of their
lives because of them, and our of a kind of stomackfull sullenness against
God, as once Jonas, or else a feeble sinking under the burden of misery, as
once Eliah; they even think with themselves, I would I were dead, and are bold
to trouble God with that unsavory petition of making an end of their days,
that they may be rid of their crosses: which they have neither patience enough
to bear for the present, nor hope enough to look for a good issue out of, for
the time to come.

But (my brethren) consider, Have you not other and worse things to be weary
of, then crosses, and for which, if for any thing, to be weary of life also, as
of a burden, which you long to be removed from off your shoulders? Have thou
not pride, passion, worldliness, ambition, lust, envy, vainglory,
blindness, hollownesse, deadness of heart, and a thousand more, besides these
corruptions within thee, which give thee far iuster cause of panting for the
period of thy days, and wishing that thy life here might be but short, then
the frowardness of a yoke fellow, the stubbornness of a child, the meannesse
of thine estate, the falsenesse of thy friends, the power and fury of thine
enemies, or any other cross (if any be) worse then these? Ah, we have not
sufficiently informed our selves of the loathsomeness of sin, neither are we
sufficiently heavy laden with the sense thereof, if the cumbersomnesse of this
do not cause us, even in the time of our greatest immunity from other
miseries, to covet our departure hence. If sicknesses make men cry for death,
because they be terrible to the body; how should not the sicknesses of the
soul make us much rather to seek for it, seeing we shall not cease to suffer
the fits of this disease, till death be sent to sever our souls from our
bodies, and both from our corruptions? But death at once with a most happy
paricide (as I may term it) kills both it self, our last foe, and sin its
mother, our first foe, and sorrow its sister, our daily foe. That one pang
which pulls away the soul from the body, does also pull away sin both from
the soul and the body. O most desirable pang, and worthy to be thirsted
after, more then any earthly thing. Job, when his body was full of botches,
could say with much vehemence of passion, Why dyed I not from the womb? why
gave I not up the ghost when I came out of the belly? then should I have lain
still and been quiet, I should have slept, then had I been at rest. He could
in elegancy of speech commend death, and say, There the wicked cease from
troubling, and there the weary be at rest; there the prisoners rest together,
and hear not the voice of the oppressor; yea he says, that a miserable man
would long for it, and dig for it more then for hid treasures, and would
rejoice exceedingly, and be glad if he could find it.

This impatiency of life is no way worthy commendation: it savors too much of
self love, to be good and allowable. But if, out of an holy impatiency of
sin, we could as feelingly take up speeches of a like nature, O how truly
might it witness with us, that we did hate sin, that we were enemies to the
lusts of our hearts, that our corruptions were to us as imprisonment,
sickness, pain, captivity, and so that we were sure of our part in Christ's
goodness, who comes to preach liberty unto the captives! Verily our souls are
as full of hotches, many of them, as Jobs body; and it will hardly be better
with many of us, so long as we abide in these earthly tabernacles; were we as
full of spiritual life, as he of natural, and our souls as truly endued
with holiness, as his body with sense, we should complain of this burden
with much bitterness, and say, O that I could tell where to seek death! O
that I might find the grave, and come to those quiet regions, where
worldliness and pride, and wrath shall no more torment me, and where my will
shall be no more carried away with any fleshly perturbation! I confess, that
this is the least part of the good that death brings unto the Saints, that it
does utterly dismiss them from the servitude of the flesh; but were we so
thoroughly spiritual as we should be, this would seem of so great worth with
us, as we would prefer it before all that the world counts delightful. The
Bridegroom would rather go to his grave, then to his bride-chamber; the
traveler would rather lie down in his bed of earth, then in a bed of down;
and every man would be of Salomons mind, and count the day of death better
then the day of birth. I confess that we must so far resign our wills to
Gods will, as with all contentedness of mind to wear out the days of our
apprentiship and pilgrimage. For so long as God has any service for us to do
any where, though the place and company be full of troublesomnesse, yet should
we force our wills to do him service, with our own disquietment; but yet a
virtuous desire of being separated from this unhappy condition of life (wherein
we shall never fully be separated from the sin that cleaves so fast) would
be very commendable, and very profitable. The gavvdes of this world would not
so easily beguile us, the cumbers of this world would not so frettingly gawle
us, if we did dis-sweeten the one, with making our selves to taste the
bitterness of our sin, and dis-imbitter the other, with feeling the far
greater bitterness of that which is as far more harmefull then it, as lead
is heavier then cork. Then should we prove our selves to be men and women of
a discerning spirit, that can know, of things, what is good, what is bad; and
of bad things, what is more, what is less bad. Then should we show our selves
to approach near that height of grace which the blessed Apostle had, who in
relating of bonds, imprisonment, hunger, thirst, nakedness, whipping,
stocking, shipwreck, and daily dying, never bursts forth into lamentations; but
rather recounts with joy, that which was so painful to suffer; and seems to
be glad of life, for nothing else, but that (by suffering more of those
troubles) he might do more service to the Church, and honor to Christ: but
when he has occasion to declare his sinfulness, the body of death, the law of
his members, the rebellion of his flesh, then only is heard bewailing and
crying out, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body?

Let therefore the feeling of sin make our desires so earnest after full
freedom from it, that we may for this cause even breathe after death, (when
there are none other adversities to distaste the comforts of this life unto us)
that by it we shall be set at liberty from the devils tentations, the worlds
affrightments and allurements, but specially from the corrupt lusts which we
both do, and whilst we lodge in this dungeon, shall carry about with us. And
let each of us say often to himself, O that I were parted from husband and
wife, from children, from friends, from lands and goods, and from this world,
and all that in this world is counted worth having, so that I might also be
parted from my corruptions, and never more hereafter stand in need of pruning!
Fasting and prayer will purge, the Word and Sacraments will cleanse, and all
Gods ordinances, and all our Christian endeavors will help to lop off these
disordered passions that are within us. But this is alone a cleansing in part,
a paring off some evil, and leaving much behind: only the last blow of death
will make a full riddance of all that is evil in us; and after that blow
given, there shall nothing remain behind that may call for any more purging.
This is the sovereign medicine that will consummate the cure of our diseased
souls, which, till then, shall never be delivered from all diseases, though
we be in Christ as the Vine, and have God the Father for our Husbandman. O
then, Lord, send thou this last enemy, which may do me more good, then all
the former friends I meet with can do, even work a dissolution of my soul
from my body, and of my sin from them both. Let it come, Lord, let it come
speedily, do thou hasten it in due season, and take away all sin, by taking
away this life of nature, to make way for a far more excellent life of glory.
Desire of death is then only warrantable, when a desire of Gods full presence,
and of sins perfect absence, be the causes moving that desire.

CHAP. IX. Containing the third use of the point, viz. an exhortation and
direction how to keep down our corruptions, whilst we live.
We must labor to keep down our corruptions, by which we shall escape many
sins.
that death might be the death of sin; so likewise all the while we do
live, (knowing that we cannot be free from sin perfectly) we must increase
our care of keeping down our sins, and striving after that perfect freedom
which death will bring with it. For though we shall still remain so feeble, as
to sin in many things, for all our labor to the contrary; yet our labor
against corruption shall not be in vain, because by virtue of it, we shall
make sin much weaker then else it would be, and save our selves from many
sins which else we should fall into. A besieged City keeps its gates fast
locked, and the walls well manned, and never gives over watching and warding,
so long as the enemies army does ingirt it: so though it receive some damage,
and lose many men, yet the enemies army cannot break in upon them, and take
the City, and kill all the inhabitants, or make them captives. Our corruptions
incompasse our souls round; if we cease to be watchful, and to be ready in
arms, they will prevail against our souls, and bring us to destruction, or
very near unto it, but by resisting with all diligence, we shall be safe from
this utmost mischief. Some diseases will stay with men's bodies for term of
life, but by keeping good diet, and other good means, a man may save himself
from much torment, and escape many a sore fit, which cannot but follow from his
carelessness. So our spiritual maladies will break forth lesser and seldomer,
and put us to less misery by far, if we keep a good diet, and use other
good ways of helping our souls against them. He that goes in a foul way,
shall meet with some spots of dirt, though he be never so wary in choosing his
ways, yet he shall not be all mire and dirt, as he that is heedlesse, and goes
through thick and thin without making difference. Some stains also our
souls will gather, in our passage through this dirty world, but nothing so many
and great, if we pick our way, as otherwise. Gross, foul, presumptuous,
infamous sins may be shunned, all finnes may be lessened, and caused to
break out seldomer, and in lower degrees, if considering our aptness to them,
we bestirre our selves to keep them under. Be we wise therefore for our
souls, as we would be for our bodies and states, and seeing we cannot be
without corruptions, let us hold them in subjection, as much as is possible;
for who can tell to what height they may grow, and what mischief they may do
us, if our diligence this way be wanting. But me thinks it should not be
necessary to use more words in persuading a Christian man to strive against his
corruptions: they be so contrary to the life of grace that is in him, and so
opposite to that new nature which the Lord has infused into him in the time of
his regeneration, that he can no more choose to oppose them in some measure,
then a man can choose whether he will strive against that that offers to stop
his breath.

A man, out of an instinct of nature to preserve himself, stands so disposed,
that he finds himself moved without deliberation, (even out of an undeniable
principle that always bears sway in his mind and will) to thrust away from
him things that offer to cut the body, or slay it, or rob it of life. The eye
will wink and shut its lids when a man thinks not of it, if any thing offer
to come near that might be offensive unto it. It is none otherwise in the life
of grace: he that has it, finds in himself (even as it were a maine
principle that bears rule in his whole soul, when he thinks not of it in
particular) that he cannot but be an enemy unto sin, he cannot but bear a
grudge against it, and wish, and labor the rooting of it out of his heart, and
holding it hard in, from breaking forth in his actions. Alone there be diverse
Saints of God that want skill to do that which grace does put in them a
perpetual inclination to do. Wherefore I will be bold (not to make so large a
discourse of this matter as the thing requires, but) to give you some three or
four special directions, which in following, you shall find your selves much
helped against these remnants of sin which move within you. The first rule is
as follows.

Let a man frequently stir up in himself thoughts of dislike, griese,
sorrow, loathing, Directions to help against all sin. 1. Stir up in our
selves often thoughts of sorrow, dislike of our selves for sins past.
detestation, and dis-esteeming himself for the sins he has committed in any
kind, and specially for such grosser sins as he has fallen into, and such as
he finds himself most apt and likely to fall into again. For he that can
make himself vile in his own eyes, for evils past, and can bring his heart to
a due abhorring of himself for wickednesses already perpetrated, and even
look back upon them with loathing and abomination, is most likely to be kept
from running into them again. For this is even a punishing and chastising of
himself, and a taking of a most just vengeance of himself for them; and we
know that the force of punishment is, to bridle and restrain offenders, and
keep them from offending any more afterward. In so doing, he does as one
would say, whip and scourge his own heart, and exercise severity against
himself, which cannot but cause him to stand alienated from the same faults
afterward, as he that is whipped or scourged by another, is thereby made more
careful, not to make bold in that kind again. So the Prophet having offended
through impatient repining against the prosperity of the sinner, provoke
himself to an abhorring and abasing of himself for it, saying, So foolish was
I, and unwise, and even as a beast before thee. And so Paul does make himself
contemptible in his own eyes for his persecution of the Saints, saying, I am
not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Saints of God. And
Job says, I am vile, I have spoken once and again, but I will add no more:
and after again, I abhor my self. And these thoughts and motions a Christian
man must not alone pursue with more largeness and earnestness in his folemne
and set meditations, as he shall find opportunity; but must ever and anon (as
he goes about his ordinary affairs, and is conversant in worldly businesses,
and occasioned by company, to call to remembrance any fault of his) be saying
within himself, Ah vile sinful wretch and hate-worthy creature that I am,
have not I sinned against God, and mine own soul, in such passionatenesse,
such wantonness, such injustice, and the like? O that I could even detest my
self for this; who but a very beast or fool, would have been so often and so
grossly overtaken? It is not possible to imagine, unless one do take
experience of his own practice, how much the renewing of this holy anger
against a man's self for sins past, will strengthen him against the same, and
abate the power of those corruptions of his heart, which brake forth into such
rebellion. Wherefore do thus often, many times, many score times in a day, put
thy self in mind, as occasion shall offer it self, of thy former sins, with
a rising of thy soul, against thy self, and with an holy kind of sharpness
and tartness, being even out of love and conceit with thy self, saying, Ah
vile creature, how could I find in mine heart to do such things? would any man
have thought it possible for any creature from whom all piety and reason both
were not banished, to run out into such words, such deeds? and what is
wanting to the length and largeness of these cogitations throughout the day,
in regard of the interruptions of other affairs, that labor to supply by
their oftennesse, and by their earnest working within thee, closing still with
a turning away of thy liking from them, and a wishing that thou had never so
offended God.

Secondly, 2. Renew often in thy self a resolution of no more committing thy
most pleasing sins.
let a good man hold always fast within himself a resolution of not
committing such and such sins as he is most apt to commit, and in regard of
his condition, calling, place, bodily temper, or the like, is most in danger to
commit; and let him often revive in himself also thoughts and motions to that
end, saying within himself, Well, through Gods gracious assistance, what ever
come of me, I will no more transgress the Law of God, and displease him in
such and such offenses. Should the creature wrong the Creator, and the child
do injury to the father? Nothing is more unreasonable then that I should for
any thing, sin against my strength and my Redeemer: of my self I cannot
cease to sin; but God will work in me both the will and the deed: and
doubtless by his help I will not sin in such kind, measure, manner, any
more. I will no more be so bitterly wrathful, nor use such indecent gestures
and speeches in my passion. I will no more be so foolishly wanton, nor use
such evil and defiling speeches and behauiours. I will never be so impatient
and discontented again. The Apostle Peter prescribes this remedy against sin,
and uses the phrase of being armed with it, because a Christian soul, so long
as it remains peremptory in this resolution, is like a soldier clad in
strong harness, who though he be smitten at and receives a blow, yet through
the faithfulness of his armor is defended from the piercing of the weapon,
and from the wound. If Satan, or the flesh suggest a motion, or present an
occasion of doing such evils, as a man has often said within himself, Well,
by Gods grace nothing shall ever make me do it; the will having bent it self
fully against such things in general, flings away from this particular motion,
and rejects it with disdain. Wherefore Saint Peter (as I was in saying)
commends this matter unto us, in these words: For as much as Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves with the same mind, that he who
has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin, that he no longer should
live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of
God. You see how a Christian should go fenced; well, I will no longer follow
sin, nor do after the corrupt lusts of men, but the holy will of God. And you
see also by what argument, pressed upon himself, a Christian should fortify
this settled determination in himself, namely, because Christ has suffered
for us.

And this determination must not alone be prosecuted more plentifully and
earnestly in our settled and solemn meditations, but perpetually also renewed
and confirmed, even as we go about our other affairs: for a man's hand may be
working in his calling, and his heart drawing it self to the maine work of
his calling of Christianity, by lifting up it self with such thoughts as
occasion may offer it self. Surely that sin that slew Christ Jesus our Lord,
is too vile a thing in it self, too hateful to God, too hurtful to the
committer, for a Christian man to live in, or once to practice: and therefore
what-euer may befall, I will not commit such, and such, and such a sin,
naming that, that the present occasion shall give him most cause to name, or
that his heart has most reason to be most careful of shunning. And this a
good man should do, not once, twice, or thrice in a week, but ever and anon,
twenty, and twice twenty times in a day, in half a day. For though we live in
the world, yet our maine business is to travel toward heaven; and therefore
the soul must take all occasions of furnishing it self with thoughts that
tend to further it in that journey.

Thirdly, 3. Observe, and resolutely and speedily resist evil or idle motions.
a Christian ought ever to keep a most wakefull eye over the motions that
stir in his mind, that so soon as ever any sinful or frivolous fancies
begin to steal or break in upon him, he may make speedy and resolute
resistance, by raising up some holy affection of loathing the fault, grief for
it, anger against it; or else reverence of Gods holy presence, fear of his
fierce anger, trembling at his just threats, or else by sending up some present
and short request unto God, for the assistance of his Spirit, saying, Lord,
help me with thy grace, should I ever do so vile or fruitless things? nay,
should I suffer the cogitations of them to dwell in my soul? God forbid. Lord,
strengthen me by thy Spirit, that I may not dishonor and offend thee by such
words, such actions. Thus the Spirit by lusting against the flesh, shall
mortify the deeds of the flesh. Yea, and if it so fall out that these shorter
eiaculations, or brief petitions of the soul will not serve the turn, but
that the motions grow more thick or vehement, and the heart begins almost to
consent unto them, and so we find our selves on the losing hand, (for when once
the will has given ground, by either thinking, Why should I not do it? or by
making but a faint refusal, a man's soul is foiled; and if occasion be not
for the present committing of it, yet the next time occasion does come, unless
he have gotten more strength, and armed his will more strongly, he will soon
be drawn to commit it;) I say, when we thus perceive corruption strong, and
grace weak, we must take so much care of our souls, as if it be possible to
lay all other things aside, and in the solemnest manner fall on praying to God
for strength against that corruption: but if other occasions stand so auerse,
that we cannot have time or place to make a solemn prayer, yet we must double
and redouble the desires and groans of our heart, thinking within our selves, O
heavenly Father, thou see I am weak, and I feel I am yielding, and sin is
ready to get the upper hand; O strengthen me with grace, strengthen me with thy
power, and let thy Spirit rule in me, and crush down these foul passions, for
thy mercy sake; and if yet the evil thought follow him, as often it will, he
must not be weary of renewing the same requests, saying, O I must not yield, I
will not yield, but, Lord, without thee I cannot resist; Lord, beat down for
me these wicked desires and inclinations, according to thy promise, and so
still (though it cannot be without exceeding much wearisomenesse of Spirit)
continuing to raise up holy wishes and holy affections, (seeking and taking the
first opportunity of getting alone to his solemn prayers) he shall be made
strong in Jesus Christ, and in the power of his might, and shall be a
conqueror over the tentation. For (brethren) we must conceive the case to stand
thus with all the members of Christ; without him they can do nothing, and all
their sufficiency is of him: he does indeed implant in their souls, at their
first regenerating, an ability of turning away their wills from evil things,
and of departing from iniquity, but yet so, that there is necessary to their
performing of these holy actions, a special cooperation of his sanctifying
Spirit; and they must know that they do good, and shun evil by a borrowed
power, not a power originally in themselves, and by a borrowed power given of
grace above nature, not dwelling in their nature of it self. And whilst they
do acknowledge this dependence upon the Lord, by making him their refuge in
the time of tentation; and therefore do not alone stir up their own
strength, and set their own good affections and desires on working: but
withal, send to heaven for aid, and (as utterly distrusting themselves)
implore present assistance from God: (because they do indeed give honor unto
God) they seldom fail to get the victory: but when in these spiritual
encounters they satisfy themselves with their own endeavors, and think it
sufficient to set their own spiritual strength on work, forgetting to beg
help of Gods holy Spirit, because this is a manifest demonstration of
selfe-confidence, and of a spiritual kind of selfe-conceitednesse; therefore
the Lord, to make them know themselves, does withdraw his special grace, and
so, (after a few faint resistances) because they renew not their strength by
running unto him their strength, they are in some degrees or other plainly
foiled and overthrown. Wherefore we must know, that when we find the flesh
to abate nothing of his forwardness to evil, by our opposing good purposes
and thoughts against it, (yea rather, that it seems to grow more violent as
water, the current of which is stopped) then I say we must know, that the Lord
does now of purpose turn Satan, with our corruptions upon us, that we might
find our frailty, and betake ourselves wholly to him and his might; and then as
having a special calling to seek to God, we must, as I said above, not wax
faint, but double and redouble our desires; and if that will not serve, so
soon as we can possibly get opportunity, address our selves to solemn
invocation.

Thus doing, we follow the example of the Apostle Paul, who when he was
molested with a thorn in his flesh, (me thinks that should denote some
troublesome corruption of his own heart, which is said to be given unto him:
because even poison may be given in a receipt by the skillful Physician) did
presently apply himself to God in prayer for the remouall of it, and so was
answered, that Gods grace should be sufficient for him. Wherefore neither let
thy thoughts and first motions of thy soul pass away unobserved or
unresisted: neither yet resist them alone in thine own strength, but spy them
out speedily, and presently oppugn them, partly by setting on work the grace
already received, partly by requiring a new supply of grace: and he that will
make this practice familiar and easy to himself by use of doing, shall find
by proof, the unspeakable good that will come of it to his soul.

Lastly, 4. Deny to our selves things otherwise lawful, that do occasion our
corruptions to grow strong.
the Christian man that would prevail against his corruptions, must deny to
himself those things which being otherwise in themselves lawful, do yet
become unto himself, through his corruption, occasions of evil in any kind.
For such is the finfulnesse of man's evil heart, that even that which is not in
it self sinful, may give an advantage to his sinfulness, and draw him to the
committing of sin. These things when his experience has discovered unto him,
he must carefully shun and avoid, and not suffer his ouer-free use of his
liberty to become a snare unto him. Diverse exercises, sports, meetings, times,
places, and other like there are, of which a man cannot say precisely that they
be sins, yet they do so strongly work upon the naughtiness of the heart,
that they do even tempt and draw the heart unto evil: these he that will not
restrain himself from, shall never be able to keep himself unspotted of the
world, but shall be, even with a kind of force and violence, haled to the
committing of wickedness against his firmest resolution to the contrary. In
using the^, a man does even lay himself open, and tempt lust and Satan to
tempt him, and tempt the Lord of heaven through his vnbridlednesse of heart, to
deliver him up into the hands of tentation; and then how shall he choose but be
vanquished and overcome thereof? Wherefore our Savior tells us, that if our
hand or foot offend us, we must cut them off and cast them from us; yea, if the
very eye offend us, we must pull it out and fling it away. His meaning seems
to be, not alone that all, even the dearest things that are sins, must be
abandoned, but even also, that things which allure, provoke, and solicit us
to sin, because of the weakness of our souls, must be likewise renounced
and forsaken, for all their delightfulness or profit. For he that does not so
much love holiness and innocence, that for the attaining thereof he can be
content to abridge himself of some part of his lawful liberty, shall never
reach to any soundness and perfection of holiness. Even as a weak and crazie
body, if he make no choice of his food, but will indifferently fill his
stomach with any kind of meat that likes his appetite, shall so increase the
ill humors of his body, and so strengthen his natural diseases, that it will
be impossible for him to escape diverse terrible pangs of them, as experience
shows us in bodies subject to the Gowt, or Colic, or to a consumption, or to
the like malady: so rightly fares it with our infirm and sick souls, some
sinlesse sports, some company not in it self, or to any other unlawful: some
liberty not to be condemned as wicked, will yet so confirm and strengthen
certain peculiar distempers of some man's soul more then of others, that the
inioying of such contents will prove exceeding mischievous, and do him an
hundred times more harm, then the content thereof can be worth unto him. Be
we therefore as wary and cautelous for our spiritual health, as for our
natural: Let us set bounds to our selves even in the use of our lawful
liberty in things indifferent, and not please our senses and fancies, to the
wounding and hurting of our souls.

Now brethren, these are the most needful directions for the ouermastering of
the evils of our inward man, which I thought fit to commend unto you. He that
will follow them, shall find a sensible decay of the body of death; he shall
find the flesh more and more subdued unto the Spirit; he shall find himself
able to prevail against those passions and lusts, that he had sometimes
thought impossible to be prevailed against; he shall be kept from many gross
faults, and many dangerous our-strayings, and shall far less frequently, and
less violently be foiled of his spiritual enemy, then without them, it will
prove or seem possible. Yea in thus pruning himself, he shall save the
Husbandman a labor of pruning, and keep himself at ease from many
burdensome crosses that must needs come upon him otherwise. Consider therefore
of thine own infirmity, consider that thou art in part alone sanctified;
consider that sin is not quite and clean taken from thy soul, but alone
deposed from that tyrannical dominion which once it did exercise over thy
soul: consider that Satan watches all advantages to catch thee in a snare,
and to bring thee back again to folly; and because thou art not fully
perfect, be content to devour the pains of helping thy self against thine
imperfections; which if thou will not be persuaded to do, know that thou shall
even enforce the Lord to compel thee, as it were, by foul means, to the
doing of that, without which he does well know that thou can not be safe,
namely, of fighting against the fleshly lusts that fight against thy soul.

CHAP. X. Containing the fourth and last use of the point, viz. a consolation
to the people of God against their vnallowed finnes.
But moreover, Comfort to Gods people against the sins which they feel and
disallow.
though it seem at first hearing to be altogether uncomfortable, does yet
afford a sure and needful comfort unto the servants of God, that have
wisdom to apply it the right way. For why, it follows hence necessarily,
that the branches in this Vine should not be appalled nor out of heart, because
they are continually troubled with the feeling of many things amiss, which it
were far more desirable to have lopped off, then continue upon them. Here
is cause not of not being humbled, but of not being discouraged in the senfe
and feeling of our manifold corruptions. For it is sure, a man may be a lining
and a fruitful branch, and yet stand in great need of much pruning. It does
often arise in the hearts of the truest of Gods people, as an argument against
their truth, that they have so many sins still stirring in them, and that
they do daily transgress so many ways, and oftentimes in very high degrees,
and gross kinds.

Now if we had well consulted with the Saints of God that lived in former
times, and of whose lives the holy Scriptures do give us a map or abridgement,
we should easily perceive that there were no force at all in this argument,
unless in so speaking, we will offend against the generation of Gods children,
as the Psalmist speaks in another case. For what reason were strong and good
against me, or any of you that now live, the same had been also firm and
strong against many of those that were members of the Church in former times;
and if the Scriptures do assure us of their being dearly beloved of God, and
surely ingraffed into Christ, even at the self same time when they did
complain of like corruptions to those that we now do complain of: then we
may safely collect hence, that we also are in Christ, and in the favor of
God, notwithstanding that we cannot deny our selves to be polluted with such
evils. Wherefore if you will truly conclude of your selves in this behalse,
whether you be, or be not in Christ: you must not look so much only to what
corruptions you have, as to what you allow. For true grace may stand with the
having of many, but not with the allowing of any. He that excuses,
extenuateth, makes light of any sin at all, and thinks he needs not greatly
care for leaving off that, because it is so small a matter, and because he is
persuaded that there is never a man alive but does as bad; and therefore bears
himself boldly upon Gods misapplyed mercy, that he shall do well enough for
all that he allows sin; he gives it liberty and license, and yields
himself to the dominion of sin, and this man is not a living member of
Christ's body, nor a fruitful branch of this Vine. Let him by no means beguile
himself, nor suffer any forms of seeming goodness that he has in other
things, to make him conceive well of himself; he is doubtless an halter, and
Christ Jesus will reject him at last. But he that has many sins, sees them,
acknowledges them to God, has his soul troubled at them, and desires,
rather then his life, to be freed of them, and becomes exceeding base in his
own feeling, because of them, still casting himself upon Gods gracious and
free favor in Christ for pardon of them, may be, and is a fruitful branch,
though he have a thousand sins of infirmity in him; yea though he be
overcome of tentation to commit the same sin again and again.

Let not the devil abuse any of you, to make him less careful of lamenting,
and opposing, and being humbled under his sins, because he hears he may be a
good Christian, and partake of the benefits of Christ for all them: for in so
abusing this comfort, you shall make your selves incapable of this comfort,
because it belongs alone to those that so have sinned, as they be troubled,
vexed and disquieted with it, as with the breaking of a leg or arm, and do
even make haste to the binding of their souls up again, by the renewing of
their repentance. Indeed the Hypocrite, if he can once get a conceit fastened
in him, that though he do commit such a sin, yet he may go to heaven well
enough for all that, he thinks himself safe, and is little careful to oppose
or bewail that sin, which he conceits will not damn him: but the true
Christian will be no whit less careful to frame himself to mourning for
sin, and to take pains against it, because he is secured for the matter of
damnation. For the thing, in regard of which he does hate sin, and would
feign be rid of it, is neither only, nor chiefly this, that it is like enough
to bring his soul to hell: but this also, yea this chiefly, that it is
offensive to God, and displeases his loving Father, and makes him unable to
hold such familiar and friendly society with God, as else he might have. So
that the misapplying of this consolation, to nourish security, presumption and
boldness in sinning, is a sore sign of a man that is far enough off from
any truth: wherefore, we desire that none of you should so abuse the sweet
comforts of Gods Word. But make the right and true use of this comfort, and lay
it like a good plaster discreetly and seasonably to thy wounded soul; and
when thy doubting heart, by Satan's crafty prompting shall tell, that thou art
none of Gods, because of such and such faults that thou have committed, and
do often fall into, (and that to this end, that thereby he may cause thee to
give over all hope, and cast off all care of praying to God, and humbling thy
soul in confession, and suing for pardon in Christ, and so to frame thee
either to utter desperation or utter looseness, one of which things must
necessarily-follow upon the believing of that conclusion:) When, I say, Satan
is busy thus to turn thy sins to the overthrow of thy faith, and to the
turning thee quite out of the way of godliness and peace: now answer by the
seasonable remembering, and due applying of the present point, No no. O mine
unbelieving heart! I am full of sins, but I confess them, and am troubled
with them. I fall often, but I ever rise, and ever resolve to rise to go to
the Lord; and acknowledge, and strive to bewail them, and to crave and beg his
help against them more and more earnestly. Wherefore I am sure that those
sins cannot disprove my being a true Christian and a child of God: and
therefore I will both call upon him, and stay upon him, and resolving still to
strive to be more free from sin, will rest upon Christ, for what I cannot
but acknowledge to be wanting in my self. To see our sins, so as to grow
vile in our own eyes, and more and more contemptible in our own account, and
more and more to labor to have our souls contrite and broken for them; this
is a good sight of them, and we must be persuaded to it: but to see them, so as
to give over hoping in Gods mercy for their pardon, and laboring against them
in his strength, because our often foyles and failings do make us conclude, it
is in vain: this is no way allowable. As good scald as burnt, the Prouer be
says: As good not see our sins at all, as make so bad an use of the sight of
them. But now, O all ye that are fruitful branches, keep fast your title and
interest into that name, and let not your many superfluities (so long as you
find them in pruning and cutting off) make you deem your selves incapable of
that honor.

CHAP. XI. Containing the third point of doctrine, that God will prune the
fruitful branches: that is, help true Christians against their corruptions.
ANd that you may the better enjoy, and not abuse this comfort, proceed we now
to the third of those four points which we propounded to speak of: viz. Gods
goodness in purging his servants. This pruning must needs import some act of
God, which is the same to the soul of a Christian man, that cutting off the
superfluities of the Vine-branches is to them; and this can be nothing else but
the helping of them against their corruptions. For look what superfluity of
leaves, twigs, or the like is to a branch, the same are corruptions of all
sorts to the Christian man: and therefore pruning is the taking away, removing,
strengthening them against these corruptions.

Know then for a surety, that as a good and husbandly Gardener will take away
from the Vine all out-shooting and over growing things, that might make it
yield him less increase of Grapes: The Lord will more and more weaken the
corruptions of his people.
even their ignorance, their blindness, their pride, their passion, their
self-love, their worldly-mindednesse, and the like. The Lord is very careful
and ready to help his servants against the sins of their hearts and lives,
and against all the evil of their corrupted nature. The most High is a partner
with a Christian in his combat against his lusts; yea the chief workman in
this business of reforming what is amiss in him. He will bestow dressing on
his sheep, whiting on his linen, weeding on his garden, and on his field.
Those sins that are in the people of God, not reigning with their good
liking, but usurping without their allowance, have Gods holy eyes bent upon
them indeed, to observe and take notice of them, not to hate the person in whom
they be, (for he looks upon the person through Christ; and as Paul says, It
is no longer they, but sin in them:) but to help and assist the person
against them, even as a good and loving father observes the spots of his child's
face, to make him wash them off, and his scabs or itch, to provide him a
medicine: or as a kind Surgeon looks on a sore, to search, and dress, and
heal it, not to kill the man for it. As he that meets with an Apple rotten
at core, though it look soundly on the outside, casts it away from him to the
dunghill: so the Lord, meeting with those in whom sin has dominion, cuts
them off, and reiects them utterly: but as a man meeting with an Apple a little
specked here or there, pickes out that is naught, and pares and eats it: so
the Lord finding men in whom sin is dwelling in some degree, but is not
predominant, pickes out that sin, and preserues them for the use of his
glory. The Apostle says, that God will tread Satan under our feet shortly; and
it is out of question, that Satan can never be trodden under foot, if sin be
not: yea sin (says the same Apostle) shall not have dominion over your
mortal bodies. Can we desire a more express promise? The same thing we may
note in the words of the Prophet: I will take away the heart of stone out of
your bodies, and give you an heart of flesh. And again, I will deliver you
from all your uncleannesses. We see the Lords intention plain enough, he will
help his servants not alone against one or two, but against all their
filthinesses. So does the Prophet Isaiah foretell, saying, The Lord shall wash
away the filth of the daughter of Sion, and purge the blood of Jerusalem from
the midst thereof, with the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burning.
All these places put the truth of the point out of doubt; and the reasons of it
are as clear as can be, not only from the truth and power of God, (who is
able abundantly to mortify our sins, and has told us that he is faithful
and true to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness)
but also from two other pertinent considerations; namely, first, that their
need requires it: secondly, that it stands upon his honor to perform it.

For first, Because else they should perish by the prevailing of sin.
their sins would totally and finally prevail against them, and they could
not possibly but perish. If a Garden be not timely weeded, it will quickly be
so overrun with weeds, that there will be no place left for good and
wholesome herbs and flowers to grow therein. If a dangerous foot be not
plaistered with convenient salues, it will fester and rankle, and rot the
joint, and bring death to the body wherein it bred: even so would sin also
prevail against the best of Gods servants to their utter destruction, if he
himself did not join to help them against it. For in truth, all their power,
without the perpetual assistance of his special grace, would be to little
purpose for the subduing thereof. Either therefore the Lord must purge his
people, or see them dye for ever, for want of purging. This latter, his tender
pity and fatherly compassion, his eternal, infinite, unspeakable, free, and
unchangeable love can never endure to see; wherefore his wisdom, power and
goodness will set themselves on work to effect the former, even to purge them
that they may be saved. And that the rather, because in the second place, It is
for Gods honor to perfect the work be has begun in them.


For this is one of those ways whereby he is made glorious in all his Saints,
for that his working in them is so miraculously effectual, as to change
blindness into sight, lamenesse into soundness, weakness into strength, and
death into life. For as a Physicia^ having undertaken the cure of some desperate
disease, will not (for his credit) leave it off bunglingly in the midst, half
whole, half ill, but must perfectly consummate and accomplish it, to the
total strength of the member ill-affected, and person diseased, because the
glory of a Physicia^ does stand in the multitude of those whom he has
perfectly healed of grievous maladies: So the Lord of heaven and earth, having
begun to heal the sick, yea desperately sick) souls of his poor afflicted
and sinful servants, must even go through with that hard work, for his glory
sake, that it may not be said, he laid the foundation, and was either so weak,
that he could not, or so unconstant, that he would not set up the roof, and he
must win to himself the glory of infinite power and skill in making them
every whit sound, as our Savior speaks of one whom himself had restored to
bodily health. It is his honor to show himself strong in their weakness,
true in their falsehood, wise in their folly, good in their badnesse, and fuller
of excellent ability to redress their evils, then they can be of evils that
may need redressing; and the glory of glories that he affects to have in his
Church, is this, that he turns Lions into Lambs, Woolues into Sheep, and
Bears into Kine, and Serpents into Sucklings, fools into wise men, and
sinners into Saints, so taking away the most mischievous, violent, ouerbearing,
and but by his strength vnsubduable corruptions of their nature, whom he
sanctifies by grace, as that he works the quite contrary virtuous qualities
in them.

CHAP. XII. Showing the means and manner of the Lords pruning.
NOw having sufficiently manifested the present point to be true, let us, for
the better clearing thereof, and to make it more easily and plentifully
useful, acquaint you with two necessary points about this pruning. First, The
means of this pruning.
by what means it is effected, and then in what manner. For the first, the
means of purging are of two sorts, proper, Some proper.
(that are fit to bring forth that effect, of their own nature) and
accidental, that do not of their own nature serve for so good a purpose, but
by Gods wisdom and power are ouer-ruled to the helping forward thereof. The
proper means are also of two kinds, principal, and isntrumental. The
principal is the blessed Spirit of God, 1. The chief, Gods holy Spirit.
for that reason termed a Spirit of burning, because it serves to consume the
corruptions out of our souls, as fire does the dross out of the metal. The
holy Ghost is given unto them that believe, that they may mortify the deeds of
the flesh by the Spirit, which bestows his efficacy upon them, in those
spiritual ordinances of his that he has appointed: and they are then said to
crucify their lusts by the Spirit, when they do carefully use those
spiritual weapons, wherewith the holy Ghost will never fail to cooperate. And
if there were not a supernatural operation of the Spirit of Christ Jesus in
us, to heal and help us against these evils, never should we, by all our own
endeavors, attain any sound and through purging, but alone a slight and
superficial washing of the outside. And it is of great importance for us to
understand, that the holy Ghost is the chief worker in this work, without
whom it would never succeed happily, though we should labor therein with all
our might, both that we may be able with a more abundant thankfulness to
acknowledge his care of us, and love to us in so great and beneficial a
service, giving away the whole praise from our selves to him; and also that we
may be ready with more humble carfulness to receive and yield our selves up
unto this heavenly work of his, which can by no means be hindered or
interrupted, but by our not regarding, or not submitting our souls unto it.
We must be strong in Christ Jesus, and in the power of his might. His Spirit
must cloth us, and come upon us; through him we must do valiantly in this
spiritual warfare, and he must tread down those lusts that rise up against us:

But this Spirit works in, 2. The isntrumental, the Word of God.
and by an excellent instrument, the Word of God, the Law and Gospel read,
preached, heard, meditated upon, which therefore we term an isntrumental
cause of our purging. For when as a Christian man does exercise himself in the
Word, as for example, by coming to hear it preached, the Spirit of God does
then work withal, to make those speeches effectual, stirring up, and
inclining his heart to mark and observe the corruptions that are discovered
unto him, and so to heed the words as to be moved by them. So we read, that
God cleansed David from his impenitent continuance in his foul sins, by the
wholesome reproof of Nathan the Prophet. And now are you clean, says our
Savior anon after the text, by the word that I have spoken unto you. And as
all the exhortations and admonitions of the Word of God do serve to rub off
the rust from the souls of his people: so chiefly the doctrine of the Gospel,
by virtue of the blood of Christ which it offers and gives unto them, is a
most cleansing doctrine. This leaves in the will of the truly justified man,
such a deep impression of the bitter death of Christ for sin, as works in
it a loathing detestation of sin, and makes it to turn it self away from a
thing so abominably evil. And this is to crucify our sins upon the Cross
of Christ, when the consideration of the extreme foulness, and unutterable
odiousness of sin (which is clearly manifested in the sufferings of our Lord
for it) and of the most excellent beauty and brightness of the tender mercy
and kindness of God shining forth in the same passion, is so seriously
received, and does so deeply sink into the very heart-root of a man, that it
mightily draws him to set down and inact this conclusion in himself of
sinning no more. In this meaning it is said, that faith purifieth the heart,
and that having this hope, we purge our selves, as Christ is pure: and
therefore the Word of God, chiefly the Gospel, being applied to the working
and increasing of our faith and hope, becomes a blessed instrument of our
purging. And with these proper and natural means, Some accidental.
are used also certain accidental means that are made so beyond their own
nature. These are chiefly three, Afflictions, Tentations, and falls into sin;
for even by poison, oftentimes is poison cured, and by iron is iron driven out.

For the first, 1. Chastisements.
the servants of God are, and must often be chastised, that they may be whited.
These corrections are fit to stir up sorrow in those to whom they befall;
which sorrow, by grace, is turned into godly sorrow, the most effectual
corrosiue to eat out the dead flesh of the soul, and so the fruit of them is,
as the Prophet speaks, the taking away of sin. Afflictions make us to feel
the dangerousnesse of sin: they testify Gods dislike of wickedness; they
manifest our own frailty and baseness; they convince us of the vanity of the
world; they pull down the pride of our stomach, so eating out the proud flesh
that grows within us, that the medicine of the Word may come near the sore;
they quicken us to prayer; they drive us to examine our selves, and enforce us
to consider of our ways, that at last we may be able to profess with the
Prophet, Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I keep thy righteous
judgments. There is scarce any thing more needful for Gods children, then
these Fatherly chastisements: they do break open the heart, to make a free
passage for the Spirit of God to enter in at. They do plough up the heart, to
make it capable of the seed of life, the holy doctrine of the Word of God that
is spoken to them. In prosperity, many times, the soul is dull of hearing, and
scorneth to be reproved: It is sated with outward contents, and takes no
delight in remembering the death and bloodshedding of Jesus Christ: It takes
pleasure in vanity, and cannot have while to think of things spiritual and
most profitable. But afflictions awaken the heart out of the deep sleep of
security: they distaste the sweet meats of the world, and bore the ear, and
cover the pride of heart, and make a man, in whom the Spirit of God is, to
hearken and attend unto the motions of the Word, and of the Spirit. The truth
is, that afflictions, of themselves, and in their own nature, as being fruits
of sin and evil, are not of this force to purge the heart, but through the
wisdom of him that is able to turn all things to the best, and by the
working of the Spirit, which takes advantage of all seasons and opportunities,
they do become most happy instruments of our cleansing: and there is scarce
any one of all the Saints of God, but may from his own experience affirm,
that it has been a great part of his happiness, to take and drink these
potions from the hand of his wise and loving Father: for they have purged out
of his soul those noisome, and evil humors, which would otherwise have made
him little less then deadly and desperately sick.

But moreover, 2. Satan's bitter tentations.
the Lord does make the devil himself an unwilling instrument of pruning his
servants, by means of those fierce tentations wherewith he does mightily
assault them. Even Satan's violent buffettings are, by Gods goodness, turned
into most excellent purgations. When the devil is let loose upon a Christian
man, (as the shepherds dog upon the sheep) and with fury and craft strives to
bring him to utter despair, making him believe, that the very pit of hell it
self stands gaping before him, ready to swallow him up; or when he does work
mightily upon his sinful affections, with a kind of excessive violence, haling
him to the practice of those detestable sins which his soul hates, and
making none end to lie at him with incessant and vehement solicitations to
commit such and such foul deeds: Oh this cuts, this wounds, this vexes and
tormenteth; this sets them on praying, on weeping, on crying, on bleeding; this
does so shame him and disgrace him to himself; this makes him so far out of
love and conceit with himself, and so extremely vile and odious in his own
eyes, that he thinks no name nor usage bad enough for himself; this also
makes him, with a blushing and confounded face, and with a most dejected and a
broken spirit, to run and cry unto the Lord his God for help and strength.
Thus the more Satan strives to stir corruption, the better it is purged,
(for stirred it must be, before it can be purged) and by his tentations being
brought to see and feel a number of corruptions, which else we would never see
and feel; we find his sinful malice, by Gods goodness, made an excellent
furtherance to our cleansing of our selves.

And not only so, 3. Their own slips and faults.
but in the third and last place, our own sins, faults and slips, do become
instruments of our making clean from sin, even as a man does better scowre
his foul hands, having first smeared them with some foul thing that helps
more to rub off the foulenes that cleaves fast unto the skin: not that the
Children do, or may at any time of purpose commit sin to this end, (for it
is quite besides, and against the nature of them to bring forth this effect;
yea every sin is apt to leave, as a filthy spot behind the committing of it,
a greater pronenesse to commit it then before) but that the Lord does please
diverse times to give them over to be foiled of their own sinful lusts, that
by smarting for them, they may be more humbled under them, and made more
careful to see and resist them afterward. Thus Peter's fall before the high
Priests servants, was a means to make him a better, (that is to say, a more
humble and selfe-contemning man) for his whole life after; and in a sense a man
may well term it, an happy fault for him. And so the Prophet David's heinous
and presumptuous sin did excellently prune him, by helping to abate that
conceit of himself, which the great prosperity of a rich and flourishing
kingdom had wrought in him. So we may say of many a Christian man, that he
would never have been good, if some of his actions had not been stark naught;
and had not the Lord given him over to the committing of such and such gross
sins, he would never, to any purpose, have been convinced of sin, and so
never have been cleansed of it. We think not our selves subject to all manner
of evils, we make no great matter of the lower degrees of sin, and so grow
slithy, and fashionable, and dead in our confessions, because we think we
have nothing worth speaking of, to reckon for before the Lord. Hence the Lord
is provoked to give us up unto our selves, that by some notable foil, or
soyles, we may be made to know what is in us, and so be enforced to set about
the cleansing of our selves, with much more care and earnestness then
otherwise we would have done. So have you heard the Lords means of purging.
Know also the manner of doing it: The manner of weakening sin: 1. By small
degrees.
and that is to be conceived of thus: First, he does it by degrees; secondly,
by making a man's self a voluntary worker of it.

The Lord does at once, in one act within himself, justify perfectly each
believer, fully acquitting him of all sin whatsoever, through the imputation
of Christ's perfect righteousness unto him, though this be manifested unto his
soul by degrees, as he does particularly seek the sight of it, upon occasion
of his particular sins: but sanctification is not wrought in an instant; yea,
it is effected by little and little, some now, some then, as a sore is healed
by laying on of one plaster to day, which draws out some corruption, and
makes the wound or ulcer less filthy, and another to morrow, another next day,
whereby it grows less and less filthy, and less deep, and less wide. For
indeed, such an extreme change from the utter foulness of corrupted nature,
to perfect holiness, cannot possibly be wrought in an instant, unless the
Lord himself should please even immediately, and more then miraculously to
work it, which it seems not good unto him to do. Hence it is, that having
ordained to purge us by means, (and namely those that you heard of before) he
performs it in such manner as sorteth to the nature of the means; alone this
is to be noted, that still the change of Gods servants from sin to
holiness, is made more apparent, by making the corruptions more felt, as they
be more healed, contrary to that which falls out in bodily sores. For if a
man's hand be wounded, the nearer it is to healing, the less pain he feels
with it, and the less troublesome it is to him: but if the soul be wounded
with any corruption; for example, with pride, or worldliness, or the like, the
more it is cleansed from him, and the lesser degrees of it remain in him, the
more troublesome and offensive will those remnants prove unto his soul, so
that the little pride and worldliness that remains behind unhealed, will vex
him more then the greater quantity of those vices did when they were less
healed. Evermore sins prove most tedious and cumbersome, when a man has
attained a greater perfection of strength against them. For the soul, the more
holy it is, the more it hates unholiness, and the more sensible it must needs
be of the thing that it more hates. A man in his utter unregeneracy is dead in
sin, so that he does not feel it at all to be burdensome unto him; but
when grace comes in small degrees, it begins to be felt, and the more mighty
grace grows, the more it is felt, till at last, in that measure of perfection
that is in this life attainable, the smallest imperfections are more
discontentfull, and breed more anguish, then at first the greatest did. Hell,
and death, and the punishment of sin is more bitter to Gods servants in their
weaker estate; but sins, and disorders, and corruptions are most bitter, as
they grow most confirmed in spiritual strength.

But as this help against sin does come by small degrees, 2. Gently, by
making them willing instruments of it.
so likewise it comes unto them by a sweet and gentle manner of working, God
drawing and alluring their wills, and moving them to become willing instruments
of purging themselves, according to the words of the Prophet, Wash you, make
you clean: and again, Wash thine heart, O Jerusalem: and again, Make you a
new heart: and so faith Saint John, He that has this hope, purges himself.
The Lord does not make a Christian man good, as it were, in despite of his
heart, and whether he will or no, but does work in him a desire of goodness,
and inclines his will to wish and pursue it, and stirs up in him a
detestation of sin, and turns away his will from it, and so is he a
fellow-worker with God to his own cleansing, when the Lord has once breathed
the breath of a new life in him. By his own crying, striving, laboring,
praying, resolving, resisting, opposing, he gets the victory against his
sins, and becomes more then a conqueror. The Lord will not beat down the
sins of his people, as sometimes he did the Canaanites with hailestones,
without any help of their own, that they should, without fighting, come after
alone to the spoil: but they must fight against their fleshly lusts, and must
work with God, as it is said that Jonathan did, and so God does subdue their
enemies under them, by working in them a resolution, care and endeavor to
vanquish them, and stirring them up to meditate, pray, cry, and use the
spiritual weapons of this holy warfare. And thus does the Lord purge the
branches in this Vine.

Now having sufficiently proved and cleared the point, we must make some use of
it.

CHAP. XIII. The first use of the point, to show their misery that are not
pruned.
FIrst, The misery of those whose sins do not abate, but rather increase.
no growth of mortification at all, none abatement of their corruptions, no
diminishing of their carnal lusts and disordered affections: but after much
hearing of the Word of God, and a long formality of Religion, they remain
still as wrathful and impatient, as lustful and unclean, as worldly and
unjust, as voluptuous as vain glorious, and in other things as much disordered
as ever they were. The Lord has come near them in his Word, it has not
purged them; he has come near them in afflictions, and lo, their dross will
not be melted from them: nay, their sins seem to wax stronger and
stronger, and their corruptions grow every day more heady and violent then
other, and yet they see not this impairing of their souls, with grief and
shame of heart, but rest themselves well satisfied in so miserable an estate.

Brethren, there are not a few people inhabiting under the roof of Gods House
the Church, with whom it fares directly in this manner that I have described,
to whom we have a dismal tidings to deliver, and that is this; that they be
not fruitful branches in Christ, because they want that which our Savior
Christ affirms, that every true branch obtains. Whatsoever person he is,
that lives a reputed member of the Church, frequenteth the ordinances of God,
meets with diverse sorrows and calamities, and thus has a long while
continued, and yet sees no more sin in himself then before, is no more
troubled at his sin then at first, gets no more power against his sin then
at the beginning, but goes along still in a kind of settled ciuility of living
to men-ward, and there rests himself, neither perceiving, nor greatly caring
to perceive any healing of privy pride, of secret guile, of deadness and
coldness of spirit, of unbelief, of the love of earthly things, of wrath, of
reuengefulnesse, of other naughty lusts of his evil heart: let this man come
hither, and out of this text of Scripture truly interpreted, truly applied,
collect and gather a most fearful conclusion against his own soul, in this
wise: Every fruitful branch in the Vine, that is, every true member of Christ,
every sound-hearted Christian is purged, that is, healed and cleansed of the
sinfulness and corruptions of his heart and life: but I, though I have been
trained up in the bosom of the Church, and inioyed all Gods ordinances, and
have also tasted of some sowrenesse too in my days, which should have helped
to my reformation, have found no purging nor cleansing, am no whit helped
against my sins of all sorts; wherefore I am not a fruitful branch, I am not
a true member of Christ, I am no sound-hearted Christian. Is not this a sound,
certain, and infallible conclusion, that is so directly, plainly and truly
inferred out of the words of our Savior? And how then can you flatter your
selves in vain, O all ye that are not cleansed of your iniquities? How can
you make your selves believe you are good Christians? how can you promise to
your selves remission of sins and salvation, and all other privileges of
true Christians, and enjoy a kind of false content in a false hope of finding
favor with God? Doubtless it is true that Solomon says, There is a
generation that are clean in their own eyes, and yet are not purged from
their filthiness. These persons that have no pruning, feel no need of
pruning, and are most apt to brag of cleanness, by how much they are more
vnclensed. But miserable is that man, whose best remedy against misery is this,
that he will not see it. I pray you therefore, if you be branches destitute of
pruning, that you would not suffer your self-love to hinder you from taking
notice of your vncleansednesse, nor from a serious consideration of your misery
following thence, in that it is most certainly concluded from this Scripture,
that you be but Hypocrites at the best. And yet let not my weak Christian
misconceiue this point to his own needless and causeless vexation,
concluding against himself, that if that be no true branch which wants
pruning, then himself is doubtless in an hard case: for alack, diverse of his
corruptions are so far from being purged from him, that they do rather gather
strength, and prevail more and more within him. For doubtless it may befall
even a true sanctified man, Some one or other corruption may grow more strong
in a true Christian:
to have some sins more violent and headstrong in him, after that he has a
long time continued in the profession of Christian Religion, then they were at
the first, and the corruptions of his heart in some kind may discover
themselves by much and often breaking forth, which informer time he was better
able to keep, as we know it by record of holy writ, to have fallen out to
David, Asa, and other of Gods faithful children.

Far be it therefore from the heart of a Christian, to conclude he has no
soundness, because he finds some one or other disorder rather grow more
mighty in him. This may be, and yet he enjoy the benefit of pruning, which God
performs to all true branches: if he see and feel the working of this
corruption whatsoever, if he lament it, if he continue to strive against, and
become vile in his own eyes because of it, this sin does not rule in him; and
this is the very pruning promised, which shall at length so far prevail, till
that he himself do perceive a very sensible conquest over this lust.

So long then as sins in general do decay, But sin in general does
decay, and that sin is seen and lamented, and becomes matter of humiliation.
and that one sin that lifts up it self more then before, is seen,
lamented, resisted, a man may, and must account himself a living branch. But
the men whom I condemned as Hypocrites and dry branches, are those, which
satisfying themselves in a formal performance of outward exercises of piety,
are quite destitute of the efficacy of them, for the subduing of sin, so that
further then credit and natural respects do sway with them, they follow any
sinful lust of their hearts, and yet feel not their misery in that behalf,
but applaud themselves in their estate, all the while that they are free from
such gross practices as would cast them into reproach and obloquie amongst men.
A man professing Religion, and being thus uncleansed of his filthiness, is
sure no better then a withering branch, which yet these kind of men will scarce
ever be made to confess. Wherefore leaving them, we will make a second use of
the point, to comfort all Gods Saints, that if they will not deny the good
work of Gods grace in them, must needs confess, that the Lord has mercifully
vouchsafed to prune them.

CHAP. XIIII. The second use of the point, to comfort them that are pruned.
HEarken therefore, Comfort to them that find pruning.
whom he has pleased to purge and cleanse, and whiten, whose corruptions he
has much abated and subdued: hearken you, I say, and accept of that portion of
comfort which the Lord does allot you. Do you not find in your selves that
selfsame operation of God, which our Savior here does appropriate to living
branches? why then, collect a joyful assurance to your selves, that you are
indeed true members of Christ, seeing that the Lord has pleased to make you
known for such, by doing that for you, which he does perform for all true
Christians, and only for them.

I confess that there is a kind of cleansing, A kind of cleansing may befall
an unsanctified man.
which is not from Gods sanctifying Spirit, such as has bin found even in
Heathen men, without the Church, and without Christ. This is such a leaving of
some one or other outward gross sin as arises from age or misery, or other
like natural causes: the heart, in the general disposition, still remaining
the same; for a man's own rod may so beat him, as the common Proverb
speaks, that he may be forced from those evil practices which once he
followed: as the unthrifty man, after he has wasted his estate almost to the
bottom, and perceives penury coming against him, may so far return to
himself, as to cease to be riotous; and the these that has been frighted
once or twice with the narrow escape of hanging, may cease to give himself
over to theeuery; and the man whose age and bodily decay does not serve the
turn to perform his unchaste pleasures, may cease to follow harlots; and so
in other like particulars. This departing from a few outward acts of evil, the
heart remaining still impoysoned with the wonted inward disorders, or other as
bad, is not the cleansing which the Lord does afford to the true branches of
the Vine, neither may any man entitle himself to the comfort we have in hand,
from such a maimed kind of reformation. But if any man do find himself
cleansed in soul from the love and liking of all known evils proportionably,
that what by the Word, what by afflictions, or such like means, he has been
made to take notice of more corruptions in himself, then ever before he
thought to have been there, and seeing the same, to detest them, and abhor
himself for them before God, craving his strength and power to reform them;
and by craving strength, has obtained at Gods hands, though not a total
release from these corruptions, yet a great decay of them, and a far greater
ability to leave them, then in former time: Let these men rejoice in the living
God, and take this work of his Spirit in them, for an assured proof of their
being truly ingraffed into the body of Christ. Those that do mortify the
deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, they shall live; those that are crucified
together with Christ, shall reign with him, and having been made conformable
to his death, shall also be made conformable to his glory. Wherefore as Samson
fed on the honey which he found in the carkase of the Lion that he had slain;
so let all Gods people feed upon the comfort which grows unto them from the
sins that they have overcome. For doubtless, nothing is more auailable to
increase the work of mortification, then with joy to look upon the good
beginnings thereof, and comfortably to behold the dying of sin, that a man
may say to himself, Lo now, mine inward and spiritual enemies are smitten
down before me, and become like foes that are put to flight, and many of them
slain in the chase. When a man looks into himself, and comparing himself
with himself, finds, that by Gods grace, such and such evils do less
prevail within him then they were wont; yea, that now the least motions of
them are more hateful to him, then formerly some gross outward faultings
therein; and that the inclinations of that kind which he feels in himself,
are either fewer, or weaker, or both, that he sooner spyeth, more heartily and
inwardly lamenteth and condemns, more carefully and diligently resists and
opposes them, at least is much more humbled and abased to himself by means
of them, then formerly: This is to be pruned, and this is a true sign of a
lively branch in the true Vine Christ Jesus. Neither let the people of God take
less comfort in this pruning, because it is not total, nor all at once; but
if they find it to go forward, though slowly and by small degrees, and to
have been attained by their spiritual industry in the use of spiritual
means: now let them clap their hands and triumph in God, saying, Through God I
have done valiantly, for he has trodden down mine enemies that rose up against
me. We must not suffer our selves to be so much vexed with the remainders of
our corruptions, as to deprive the Lord of the glory, and our own souls of
the comfort which we might reap from the beginning of their overthrow: but
must make our selves exceeding glad of this their first falling before us, that
so we may more assuredly conclude as they do concerning Haman, when he began
to fall before Mordecai, that he should not prevail, but should surely fall
quite before him. When we observe the fruits of our faith, as means to
confirm our faith, and the good works of Gods grace, as arguments to assure
us that we are received into the state of grace; this is an excellent means
to make these fruits of faith, and works of grace to grow stronger and
stronger in us. An heart cheered up in beholding and acknowledging the
goodness of God, that has in some measure blessed his endeavor against sin,
shall be greatly furthered in this spiritual combat. It animates soldiers
to fight: when as Jonathan speaks concerning Saul's soldiers, they eat the
spoil of their enemies: but when they do keep themselves fasting, as it
were, like as Saul did his soldiers, pretending thereby to make them more
eager in following the chase; this makes them to be faint and weary, and so
does very much hinder the slaughter of the foe. Wherefore, ye Christian
soldiers, that have fought manfully under Christ your Lord, with the weapons
of the Word and Prayer, and the like, and have found that your holy meditations
and prayers have diminished the force of your corruptions, in some good measure
eat you the spoil of your spiritual enemies; comfort your selves in the
sense of this good work, and with great contentment of spirit, conclude for
your selves that you are true branches, because the Husbandman does bestow the
pains of pruning upon you.

CHAP. XV. Containing the third use of the point, to encourage the Saints in
striving against sin, because the Lord will help them in this labor, and
they shall surely prevail.
But this point does yield likewise a third use, Encouragement to proceed in
resisting of sin.
to animate the people of God to a resolute opposing of all their corruptions,
because, lo the God of heaven is ready at hand, to cut off those evils which
they are hewing at. A man is sure of success in the work of mortification, if
he want not diligence to labor in that work. The flesh must down,
corruptions shall tumble, the Spirit shall be victorious; stronger is he that
is in us, then he which is in the world; and certainly the grace of God shall
have the upper hand, and our faith shall be our victory. We are many times
little less then out of heart, because the proceedings do seem very slow,
and well-neere indiscernable. But be not discouraged, O ye Christian souls,
promise your selves victory in this spiritual conflict; for the Lord does
fight on your side, and you shall conquer. In truth, we want much of that
mortification which we might attain, if out of this confidence we would put
forth our selves to the utmost. The devil labors to make us believe, that it
will be to no purpose to resist our lusts: we have so often resolved to leave
such a fault, and cannot yet leave it; we have thus often resolved against
anger, lust, pride, worldliness, and the like, and yet behold, the passions
and motions of them are stirring, and also break forth again; sure therefore
it will never be better, and it is in vain to continue striving about that,
which cannot be effected. These be the heartlesse and unbelieving conclusions,
wherewith the devil and the flesh would dismay us.

But now know thou that these conclusions are false. I tell thee the quite
contrary in the name of the Lord: It shall not be in vain to strive against
sin: the husbandman will prune the branches; and shall not he be able to
bring his works to pass according to his promise? Tell me from thine own
feeling: do not these sins vex thee more and more, and art thou not more and
more angry and discontented against thy self for them, and more and more out
of love with thy self because of them? if so, as sure thou can not deny but
it is so, then all is safe; this is to be in pruning, now the sin is dying:
only do thou make use of Gods words to Joshua, fighting against the
Canaanites: Faint not, nor be discouraged, but take to thy self a valiant
spirit, to continue praying against, meditating on the Word of God, and the
death of Christ, opposing the first motions of it, and using all other good
ways that God has directed thee unto, for the subduing of it, and I say unto
thee, thou shall prosper: go up and fight against these Philistims, and the
Lord will deliver them into thine hands. Our want of being sufficiently purged,
does come from want of sufficient endeavors to purge our selves; and this want
springs from a want of faithful assurance of Gods assistance, and good
success in our endeavors. But now I beseech you all that be members of
Christ, set in earnestly and with a good courage, and you shall vanquish them,
you shall more and more prevail against them, till at last you have quite
overcome them, in the ouercomming of the last enemy, which is death. If we did
labor against sin alone in our own strength, we should find indeed, that
vain is the help of man, and the labor of flesh and blood in this behalf;
but the God of heaven, he is the husbandman, and he pruneth. The Lord is
present with thy prayers, to make them effectual for the killing of thy lusts.
The Lord is present in his Word, to make it a two-edged sword, to cut off all
carnal affections, and to wound the body of death more and more. The Lord is
present with thine holy meditations, to make them effectual to weaken any of
thy sinful passions. Faint not therefore, but stir up thy self to work with
God in those holy exercises, and know, that thy success shall be, as often it
has been with Gods people in the natural battle, far beyond thine
expectation. And of the matter of Gods Husbandry so far. We must now look
into the end and effect of it: (for God will never miss of his ends, though
he often miss of those ends, whereto his actions in their own nature are
fitted, and which, speaking after the manner of men to our capacity, he tells
us that he intended.) This is, that they may bring forth more fruit.

CHAP. XVI. Containing the fourth point of doctrine, that the people of God
must increase in fruitfulness.
SO are we come to the last point we intended to speak of: The true Christian
must wax better and better.
viz. that the true branches of the Vine must labor to increase in
fruitfulness.

Every true Christian man must proceed and go forward in the fruits of the
Spirit, growing better and better, and more and more abundant in the work of
the Lord. As we look that a tree, the longer it grows in our Orchard, the
more and more increase it should yield us; in like manner should we behave our
selves toward God. The Apostle Peter wishes us to long for the sincere milk
of the Word, that we may grow thereby. A Christian is like a young child that
sucketh on the breast of his mother, who does to this end receive that kindly
nourishment, that he may increase in stature and strength of body. Paul
aduertizeth the Thessalonians, saying, I beseech you brethren, as you have
received of us how you ought to walk and to please God, 1. These. 4.1. and 10.
that ye abound more and more. And afterward concerning brotherly love, We
beseech you, that you increase more and more. And David says, Psalm. 92.14.
that the trees which are planted in the courts of Gods House, do bring forth
fruit in their age, and are fat and flourishing. But the point is without
denial; and the reasons of it are more then evident.

They are not yet perfect.
so long as they live in this world, and therefore must strive forward to
perfection. Paul himself tells the Philippians, that he pressed hard toward
the mark, because he not yet reached it, and wishes as many as are perfect,
to be so minded. In a race, a man must never cease running till he touch the
goal; we shall never touch the goal of perfection, till we have delivered
up our souls into the hands of God by death, (for here we know but in part,
and therefore can do nothing in whole:) hence it follows, that till death we
must be still going onward. When a man has attained his full stature he must
grow, then indeed he needs only nutrition, but till then, augmentation is
requisite: (for these two motions are very different, as you know) and his
limbs must become greater, and stronger, (yea and will do so, unless
diseases hinder) Now we be but striplings or rather infants in goodness. In
truth we are but in the womb of the Church; all the while we walk in this
world, our death-day will be our birth day, and then we shall at once be made
full and complete: wherefore till then there must be a continual addition of
grace, to that we have already received. Indeed some Christians, in comparison
of others, are called strong men, (as even of infants in the womb, some are
perfecter then other) but simply there is none a full grown man, brought to
the measure of the fullness of the stature of Christ, till he be fully united
to Christ, and walk no longer by faith, but by sight, seeing as he is seen,
and knowing as he is known. We must conclude then to be walking forwards,
till we lie down in graves, for never are we at our iourneys end till then.

Secondly, God has offered them sit means of growing.
the Lord has affoorded and provided us sufficient means and helps to grow.
The Word of God is able to build us up yet further: the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper does bring the body and blood of Christ unto us, to be our spiritual
food. The Spirit of God that works in, and with these, and all other means,
is a spirit of life, and serves not alone to mortify the deeds of our flesh,
but to quicken our inward man also, till we come to be perfect men in Christ,
and have his Image fully renewed in us. We want none helps this way that we
can desire, if we want not care to use them; and we may be well assured, that
he which has provided them, did never intend that they should be provided in
vain, but that he would have us use them, and by the using, attain the fruit
of them.

Thirdly, If they grow not better, they shall soon grow worse.
it cannot be long before we grow worse. There will be a sensible decay of
grace after a little while, if there be not some addition to it. We move
either upward or downward, and we cannot long hang in the midst; for things
that do but tend to perfection, and have not yet gotten it, if they approach
not nearer to it, will be removed further from it. If the fire be not fed with
fuel, it will go out: and a young tree, if it cease shooting up its
branches, does quickly cease to live. All natural motions are more and more
earnest toward their ending, and so much more swift, by how much they grow
nearer to their proper place of rest: so must all the motions of goodness be in
Gods Saints.

Last of all, Growth in grace will procure growth in glory.
shall procure unto us a growth in glory hereafter. The more holiness we
attain in this world, the more happiness we shall attain in the other
world. Every dram of grace shall be rewarded, as it were, with a pound of
glory. If we be rich in the work of the Lord, our labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord, but he will exceeding plentifully requite all the services
which we have performed for him, and all the virtues which we have for his
sake labored to get and exercise. He that sowes liberally, shall reap
liberally; he that sowes sparingly, shall also reap sparingly. This life is
our seedes-time; that to come, must be our harvest. Who would not be
encouraged by so inestimable rewards, to strain himself to all painfulnesse,
that he may grow? So it is possible to grow in grace, for we have sufficient
helps and means: it is profitable, for we shall grow in glory, and that also
proportionably: it is necessary, for we are not yet come to our full growth:
yea, it is of absolute necessity so to grow, for else we shall grow worse and
worse, even from ought to naught, as the Proverb speaks: and all these
reasons confirm the point, and show, that it is the duty of Gods people to wax
better and better, only it may be demanded whether that all the Saints of God
do perform this duty, and be in act, more holy and virtuous, every day then
other? To which I answer, that it is with Gods people, as with children who
are subject to many sick sits, in which they do wear away, and even lose
their flesh and strength; but yet for all that they recover, and come to be men
at last, yea and strong men too.

A Christian oftentimes does go backward for a season, Sometimes Gods people
for a time do grow worse, but they recover, and become more humble, that is,
better at length.
but he recouers himself, feels his going back, returns, and at the last,
becomes better indeed (though not in his own feeling) then ever he was. For
after (it may be some long) fainting and fading of grace, he is brought back
with a deeper sense of his own baseness, then ever he had before, and so
growing in humility, grows likewise in all graces, (for with the growth of
that, all do grow,) though perhaps he may not live to do so many excellent
works, as formerly he had done; and so the story of holy Writ does show that
it was with David, who seemed worse after his settling in the Kingdom then
before, and was so for a while, but rising up again, he was more holy then
ever before, though he fought not so many battles as before.

CHAP. XVII. Containing the first use of the last point, viz. a terror to them
that grow worse.
NOw this point concerning the branches bringing forth more fruit, Terror to
them that decay rather.
serves to discover the unhappiness of those men, in whom no such growth is
found, but the quite contrary, viz. that are grown backwards and fallen behind
hand, being more feeble in all graces, and scant in all good works, then
formerly they were wont to be. And thus, alack, it is with many a man. Time
was, when they were frequent in hearing the Word of God, and could not be kept
from it by any means: now their hunger after it is turned into fullness, and
the least occasion that is, will detain them from it; yea, rather then fail,
they will quarrel with the Minister, (either for some point of doctrine which
he teaches contrary to their minds, or for some faultiness in the manner of
teaching, or for some mis-behauiour of life, or for some thing or other,
against which they can allege any probable show of quarrel) rather then that
they will not seem to themselves to have cause of not caring to come to hear.
They were wont to read much, and pray often, and take time to meditate upon
those things which they had heard; but now all these things are either quite
laid aside, or very seldom performed: once they were abundant in works of
mercy, now they are scant and sparing: formerly they were lively in their
services, now little less then dead: and so it is with them, that any man
which has occasion of conuersing with them, may plainly perceive them to be
changed from better to worse. O, this is a lamentable condition, having its
original in the ouergrowth of voluptuousness, worldliness, pride, or some
other like carnal affection, and shall have its issue either in some grievous
sin, or heavy calamity, or both, even though they be Gods children. I dare
not say, brethren, that it may not befall a true Christian, thus to fade for a
season, (and yet the withering of the blade is a sore sign of a stony ground:)
But this I dare say, that unless they do seasonably recover themselves, and
return to their former goodness, or more, the Lord will surely chastise them
in grievous manner, sending some or other heavy calamity upon them, either
inward or outward; or if he do not so fetch them home again, this decay of
seeming graces, is in truth the first degree of the cutting off of Hypocrites.
So long as a man continues thus in the wane, he can enjoy no comfortable
assurance of himself, nor can other men maintain any full persuasion of him
that he was upright, but he must needs be subject to the misery of being
always questioned both in the opinion of others, and in the account of his
own heart, for matter of his entireness and truth; and so though it were
rashness to say, that all they are dissemblers that fare in this manner; (for
a man may recover himself, as I showed above,) yet this may one safely say of
such, that they are so like to dissemblers, as neither others, nor scarce
themselves can distinguish them from Hypocrites. Indeed there is one note of
difference betwixt the winter of a true branch, and the withering of a dead,
which we will anon show unto you: but yet this note of difference will afford
but a small quantity of comfort to them with whom it is winter. Let that man
therefore, whose soul is guilty of such decrease in piety, see, and take
notice of its unhappiness. Woeful is the estate of him, that if he be not an
Hypocrite, yet is now become so near in likeness to that evil brood, as his
own heart will hardly be persuaded to take him for better. I will show you a
true note of distinction betwixt a living branch, (...) the decays that it may
suffer, and a dead branch thus beginning to be cut off from the Vine, that we
may not leave the upright hearted destitute of that comfort which appertains
unto him, even though he be at his worst that ever he can. The false hearted
man does likely please himself in his growing backward, conceiting that he was
too forward before, but is now grown sober, and stayed, and wise; though
indeed, what he formerly did, was no more then he ought to have done, and so he
satisfies, yea and magnifyeth himself in his lamentable decays. But the true
Christian is exceeding weary of his going down the wind for his soul. It is a
clog to his soul to find himself worse then he was; yea, if he seem to
himself but to stand at a stay, it is an anguish unto him, and his life is
tedious, when he finds not that life of Religion and goodness in himself
that once he felt. Now then, if your decays be by you thus felt and bewailed,
if they be an heavy load and burden to you, very troublesome and
discontentfull to your minds, you may have bin true-hearted, for all these
faintings and swoones, and yet your case is much to be pityed: for the Lord
must be at pains to prune you, that you may bring forth more fruit, because it
is nothing else (as I said before) but the ouer-growing of some corrupt lust
that has brought you to this evil pass. But if any amongst you be so fallen
away from his former shows or beginnings of piety, that he be well apayd with
this his backwardness, and take it for his glory, that he is now grown
lukewarm, so boasting in his shame; let that man know, that he was but an
hypocrite before, and that this is a beginning of his cutting off from the
Vine; yea and that his estate is not recouerable, without exceeding much labor
and pains. Take notice therefore, I entreat every soul amongst you, whether
it be decayed, and in what manner it stands affected under these decays, that
you may accordingly censure your selves, and fruitfully accept this reproof of
the Word. For, give me leave a little to reason with you on Gods behalf: What
unfaithfulness, what niggardize, what churlishness have you found in the God
of heaven now alate, that you shoul be less zealous and careful in doing him
service, then you were formerly accustomed? Is God grown worse to you, yt you
are so changed toward him? Is the Word of God less mighty to bring you to
salvation? Is prayer less effectual to draw good things from heaven? Are holy
meditations less comfortable to the soul? Are the exercises of repeutance,
and of godly sorrow less gainful, that you do now bestow less time and care
in these duties, then in former season? or is the fear and love of God,
humility, faith, mercy, bounty, zeal, less pleasing to God, less beautiful,
less sweet, less profitable in it self and to the possessours, then once it
was, that you have now suffered your selves to be less studious of any of the^?
O consider how extremely you do dishonor God and goodness, and indamage your
selves, and discourage others by this your going back in the way of goodness.
Consider how wrongful it is to the whole Church, and how every way exceeding
scandalous, if your decays be public, that you are waxen less good then you
were. Lay these things to heart, and put not off a reproof lightly. Consider
with your selves what corruption it is, that as a bad humor becoming
excessive, has brought your souls into this consumption. Lament before God
your shameful folly, in bringing the estate of your souls behind, and cease
not confessing, bewailing, and praying, till you find your selves quickened and
restored. Assure your selves, that if you have been any other then arrant
Hypocrites, and dry branches, who being cut off, are cast out and wither, till
they be gathered up to burn; you must sometime or other take the pains of
thus restoring your selves to your ancient fruitfulness. Were it not as good
accept of this admonition, as tarry longer, and make the work harder by
delays? If words will not bring you to a sense of your misery, in that your
souls are so ill affected, you shall compel the Lord to become severe in
chastisements; for much rather had he to make you smart, then to see you
perish. See, see the sickness of thy soul, which has made thee to grow weak
and feeble in all inward graces and holy duties, and suffer not thy self to be
so hardened, that the hearing of these words should be in vain unto thee.
Show thy self not to have been a dissembler in thy former forwardnes, by
suffering thy self to be restored to it again by this exhortation. Make it
appear, that all was not false which did aforetime seem to be in thee, by
recovering thy first estate, and doing thy first works. O now yield to the
call of the living God, and let these words of his in his own ordinance, be as
a good restoratiue to thy sick soul, to make it whole and strong again.

CHAP. XVIII. Containing an exhortation to all true Christians to increase in
goodness, with directions for that purpose.
ANd let me in the next place call earnestly upon each soul amongst you, An
exhortation to growth in goodness.
to approve himself a true branch, by indeuouring after this increase in
fruitfulness: for nothing does more infallibly argue life, then growth, I
mean, a suitable and proportionable growth of each part. Be not therefore
satisfied with what you have already gotten, but strive to get more. Make your
selves even unsatiably covetous after grace: account your selves never to have
enough, but for this matter: imitate the Horse-leach, and the grave, and be
always saying, Give, give; for no grace is further sound, then it is joined
with an hungring after more. O then, travel forward in the paths of
righteousness daily. Labor to be each week more holy, more heavenly minded,
more patient, more temperate, more contentfull, more prayerfull, more abundant
and affectionate in holy cogitations, and to do all good things more
sincerely, and more heartily, with a more particular and actual intending of
Gods glory in each of them, and with a more feeling attractiue of love inducing
you to them. Grow, I say, continually, either bigger, or better, or both. Let
these words put wings to your souls, and let this exhortation, as it were a
good gale of wind to a ship, carry you more swiftly toward the haven of
perfection. You cannot glorify God, or profit your selves, or edify your
brethren more, or better; you cannot make a better preparation for death, or
the day of affliction, nor make your assurance of eternal happiness more
large and undeceivable, then by making a continual progress in the virtues of
Christ Jesus, Faint not therefore nor grow weary; let not your hands fall from
this work; slow not your pace in this journey: but provoke your selves, and
let the Word of God provoke you to be yet more and more godly, righteous,
sober, and to proceed from faith to faith, from virtue to virtue, till you be
made at last fully conformable to the Image of Christ. Let there be no going
back in any hand, no flying, no reuolting. By going back, you shall as much
as proclaim to all the world, that you account Gods service an ill service,
and his work an unprofitable work, not worth the while to employ your selves
in it. By going back, you should give occasion of discouragement to others,
and lay up matter of grief and shame for your selves. Offer not God this
injury, do not such hurt to your selves and to your brethren. But as the God
of heaven renews his mercies daily, and inlargeth his bounty, so do you
daily renew your obedience, and let your graces be still on the thriuing hand.
But that my words may not be fruitless in persuading you to grow, let me also
declare unto you what it is that you must do, to the intent you may grow.

Growth, you know, does presuppose life, Means of growing.
and that we must take for granted to be in all those that shall be fruitful
hearers of this exhortation. And yielding a man to live with a spiritual life
in Christ, the means of growth to his soul, may not unfitly be resembled to
those that concern his body. The body will grow, if it be of a good
constitution, and have a good stomach, good diet, and good digestion; so will
the soul also: and therefore we will speak a word or two of each of these.

First then, as the body, 1. To preserve the good constitution of the soul.
so the soul must enjoy the benefit of a good constitution. Now as the good
constitution of the body consists in a right mixing together, and tempering of
the four first and chief qualities; so the good constitution of the soul
stands in a right and due ordering of the principal faculties of the mind
toward the different objects thereof: I mean, the judgment, the will, and
the affections: when the judgment entertaineth an high and excellent esteem
of God, and things divine, but a mean and base esteem of ones self, and all
things earthly: when the will most vehemently and earnestly inclines it self
to God, the chief Good, and carefully withdraws it self from fained or
inferior good things: when the affections are inflamed toward God and heaven,
and cooled toward earth, and the things of the earth; This is a sweet and
happy constitution of the soul: and if this constitution be not preserved by a
diligent watching over the moving and working of our minds, and a daily
striving to pull them from things below, and set them on things above, there is
no possibility of growing: but if this constitution be carefully preserved,
the means following will infallibly procure a proceeding in all the fruits of
good living.

And the second thing required, 2. To keep a good appetite.
is, to keep a good stomach or appetite, that is, a continual desire of more
grace, feeling its wants, and longing for a supply. We must tell our selves
often how far short we come of that we might attain, and others have
attained; and we must earnestly provoke our selves to desire a supply of what
we feel our selves to want. We should often say to our selves, Alack, how
poor a quantity of faith, patience, hope, charity, temperance,
heauenly-mindednesse have I gotten? how slender are all graces in me? If I
compare my self with those of Gods Saints, whose examples are commended in
Scripture for mine imitation, I come so short of them, that it may almost be a
question, whether I have any goodness or none at all. What a little meekness
have I, in comparison of Moses? what a little zeal of Gods glory, in
comparison of David? what little patience to bear affliction for Christ's sake,
in comparison of Paul? what little faith in Gods promises, in comparison of
their faiths that the Apostle to the Hebrews commends to me? O how far
did Job surpass me in patience, in bounty, in religiousnesse, in the fear of
God? How far did Nehemiah go beyond me in love to the Church and people of
God, and zealous desire of promoting the worship of God? So weigh thy self in
the balance against the godly men which are famous in holy Writ, and seeing
how much thou want of what they had gotten, (and yet that which they had,
comes far shorter of what they should have had, then what thou have, does
come short of what they had) then move thy desire to an increase, and think
thus, Ah that I could get at least a little more grace! Ah that my grain of
faith were made two grains! Ah that my one talent were made two talents, my
two five! What might I do to get more grace? what course might I take to fill
up that which is wanting to my faith, patience, temperance, confidence, and
other like virtues? To whet a man's appetite in this manner, and to sharpen his
desires toward virtues, does exceedingly help to make him capable of them,
and is, as one may term it, a great inducement to the Lord, to bestow more
upon him; for the Lord, as once Job, does love to feed the hungry, and to give
drink unto them that thirst. But some man may happily demand, How shall one get
his soul a good stomach? To this question I answer, that the bodily appetite
is stirred up by two things, sharp sauce, and due exercise; The way to get a
good appetite. 1. Sharp sauce, that is, the renewing of godly sorrow for
sins past.
and so is the appetite of the soul after grace.

Now the sauce of the soul, in which by dipping its morsels, it may provoke
its desires after holiness and virtue, is the renewing of sorrow for sins
past, and present. And when a good man finds himself to grow dull in holy
desires, if he will set a little time apart, to call himself to account for
his sins past, and to consider the greatness and multitude of them, the
heavy punishment he has deserved, and Christ has suffered for them, the
exceeding great dishonor he has done to God by them, and how exceeding vile
and base they have made him; and heerehence to enforce himself to be sad and
heavy, and to sigh and groan for these offenses of his; This will quicken his
spiritual desires, this will revive and stir up his longings, and make him
earnestly covetous after grace.

But exercise is needful to get a stomach; 2. Exercise, that is, a setting
our selves to practice what we learn.
and the souls exercise is to set it self on work about good duties, to
stir up frequent acts of virtue within it self, often bending his heart in
love to Godward, melting it in compassion toward the afflicted, enlarging it
in congratulation to those of Gods Saints that are in good estate, and so in
other virtues, especially when we have been taught any good work in the Word,
to watch the next opportunity of doing that duty, and to set our selves, for
some good space of time together, principally to look to the practice of some
principal virtue, the love and fear of God, joy in the holy Ghost, godly
sorrow, confidence in God, and the like. This addressing ones self to the
practice of good duties, will beget a desire of grace. And this is the second
thing necessary to cause an increase of grace.

The third is, good food. 3. Good food will make one grow, and Christ is our
food, and other things, so far as they lead to Christ.
And the food of our souls is Christ Jesus, offered unto us, in the Word, and
in the Sacraments, and in some sort also in the works of God, that we may
feed upon him, and grow strong in him, and in the power of his might. Christ
Jesus is the bread of life; when by the Word and Sacraments, and works of God,
we are moved and drawn to go out of our selves, to rest, cleave, stay upon
him for grace, life, salvation, strength, and all good things, then we do even
fill our souls with him, and then we are sure to wax strong. In all the
ordinances of God we must be directed to Christ, neither can they do us any
good, further then they guide us to Christ, and to a depending upon him. If you
remain in me, says our Savior by and by after, you shall bring forth much
fruit. Lo our food. In the Word, and in each part of it, we must seek Christ;
in the Sacraments we must seek Christ. All the works of Gods hand must lead
us unto Christ; I mean, to look to him for grace, to stay upon him for all
good things: when the Word teaches any good thing, it must cause us to rest on
the Lord Jesus for strength to perform it; when it discovers any sin, it
must drive us to Christ for power to amend it, and favor to pardon it; when it
promises good, it must still draw us to the same Christ, in him to obtain the
promises; when it threatens evil, it must drive us to Christ, that we may
trust by him to escape it. So the Sacraments must conduct us to Christ, and
settle our souls in assurance of attaining all good things in him. When we
receive blessings of any kind at Gods hand, they must make us taste the
sweetness of his love in Christ; when we feel the sharpness of his
chastening hand, it must spur us forward to a more earnest seeking of our
reconciliation with him in Christ: and thus all that God does to us, and all
his ordinances that we enjoy, by leading us unto the true Bread of life, shall
happily confirm and strengthen us in the inner Man. For if we abide in
Christ, and Christ's Word in us, then shall we be surely fruitful.

The last thing to help growth, 4. Good digestion is needful to growth: and
our digesting, is serious pondering and meditating of good things.
is good digestion: when the bodily food is conveyed into the stomach, and
there concocted by the native heat, then it becomes fit to be dispersed abroad
to the strengthening of every limme and joint: so the Word of God, the
Commandments, the promises, the threats, and the works of God, both of mercy
and justice, must be mused, meditated, pondered upon. A man must set himself
seriously to consider how true those promises be, and how much they concern
him, and so settle his heart more and more in the embracing of them. He must
tell himself how holy those Commandments be, how much he is bound to obey
them, and so even enforce his heart to a resolved purpose of following the
direction of them. A light perfunctory hearing and speaking of the divine
truths, of the Word, concerning God, Christ, our selves, and our duty, and the
like, will afford little or no strength; but if a man will bestow pains and
time to consider of these things seriously, and to make his thoughts dwell upon
them some good while together, striving to beat them into his heart, and to
frame his affections accordingly; this would be as sure a means of strength
unto his soul, as good and wholesome concoction of good food unto his body.

And thus, my brethren, so many of you as are living and true branches in
Christ, may see what is required of you, that you may bring forth more fruit in
him. Lay to heart that which you formerly heard, consider the profit,
possibility, necessity of this growth, and be not a sluggard for thy soul.
Thou see how the worldly-minded man does toil his head and body, in seeking
to grow in riches: thou see how the ambitious man bestirres himself, in
getting more preferment: thou see with what an eager and vnsatisfiable
greediness, the voluptuous man does pursue his pleasures: why should not
thou, that art a Christian, and a spiritual man, with at least some measure of
the like diligence, address thy self to thrive in the goods of the soul, to
get an higher degree of this best promotion, and to enjoy more and more of
these most pleasant of all pleasures? No profit is so profitable, no honor so
honorable, no pleasure so pleasurefull, as to be fruitful in good works,
and to abound more and more in the virtues of the inward man, and all the good
effects thereof. Wherefore again and again be entreated to make it the
principal scope of your lives, to wax more and more godly, and righteous in
life.

CHAP. XIX. Containing a comfort to them that have grown, and do grow in
goodness.
IN the last place, Comfort to them that do grow.
receive much comfort herein. O well are they: growth is a most sure sign of
life: a rotten branch grows not, a rotten arm grows not. Whosoever therefore
perceives that his care of living godlily in Christ Jesus increases, that he
is more and more desirous to obey God, and that his works are better at last,
then at first, blessed be he of the Lord: let him receive this happy comfort
from the mouth of God, and conclude himself infallibly to be a living branch,
a sound-hearted Christian. Indeed the people of God, to whom this consolation
does most duly appertain, are not ever forward for the most part to embrace
the same: yea, they are ready to deprive themselves of it by diversity of
objections, and by name thus you shall have them speaking against themselves:
Alas, is there not a growth of Hypocrites, as well as of the true-hearted? Does
not the blade spring up as well in the stony, and in the thorny ground, as in
the good ground? And how can I assure my self, but that this growth of mine is
such, as may befall a dissembler? I answer, It must not be denied, that the
man of a guilefull spirit, the close Hypocrite has his fullness, his period,
his state, to which he may come, and to which, till he have reached, he seems
both to himself and others, to grow.

But the difference is manifest and express. The difference betwixt the growth
of Hypocrites, and the true-hearted.
The Hypocrites growing in the shows of goodness, causes him also to grow in
conceit of himself; he thinks better of himself, and much applaudeth his
own proceedings: but the godly man grows in a mean conceit of himself, and
as he waxes better and better, so does more and more condemn himself, that
he is not better then he is. He sees things to be better with him then they
were; but alas, he sees them also to be so far short of what they should be,
that he is even grieved with himself, to think of his wants and defects. The
true godly man grows in humility, as in other graces; but the Hypocrite grows
in conceitednesse, and high esteem of himself. When a man prays, but is much
moved with dislike of himself, because he prays no better; meditates, but
blames himself, because his meditations are so shattered and distracted; is
merciful, but is angry against himself, because he is not more merciful: this
man's growth is a sound, perfect, and sincere growth; but when he performs
these duties so, that he is good in his own eyes, because of the performance
of them; this is but a shooting up of a blade, that after will wither and come
to nothing. The fruitful branch, in his fruitfulness sees so many wants, that
he is humbled thereby, the unfruitful branch is so satisfied with his shows
of fruitfulness, that he still magnifieth himself, and despises others,
being increased in pride, by the increase of those things that seem good in
him. It is a most manifest thing in all true godly men, that when all men else
do perceive them to grow, and commend them for it, they do most complain and
condemn themselves for want of growth; for they are so still carried onward to
that ye is before the^, as they forget that that is behind: but the dissembler
so looks behind him, and forgets what is before, that he stands admiring
himself for that which he has already done, and thinks he is better then
this man, and that man, and compares and prefers himself before others.
Again, the godly man does commend others that are better then himself, and
beholds their goodness with great liking and approbation, being discontented
with himself that he is outstripped by them: but the Hypocrite is moved with
envy and indignation against those that go beyond him, and will have some
quarrel to pick against their (as he counts it) ouer-forwardlinesse. The
godly man says still, he is an unprofitable servant; the Hypocrite brags of
his service, and glories in himself that he is increased in wealth. Now then,
consider if thy growth in goodness be accompanied with a growth in humility,
and in an abasing of thy self, and thinking better of others, then of thy
self; or if it be joined with conceit of thy self, and magnifying thy self
above others, and envy against them that seem to obscure thy praises: and if
it be with thee in the former manner, thou growest indeed, and must enjoy
comfort; if in the latter manner, thou growest alone in show, and have no right
nor interest into this comfort. But further, the good man will say against
himself, Alas, I do not grow, I do not bring forth more fruit. I demand
then, Upon what ground is it that thou chargest thy self with not growing? Is
it because thou find thy self not all out so able to continue praying and
mourning, as in some times heretofore? I answer, that the true Christian is
likely most affectionate at the first, by reason of the strange alteration that
he finds in himself. But say, Is not thine heart more abased now, in the
sense of thy faults? Art thou not more sharp against thy self, more
favorable to others? Is not thine heart now more carried with a respect of
God, less with a respect of thy self? Do thou not become more hardly
conceit of thy self, then formerly? Surely when a man's mind is more and more
alienated from himself, then he grows most, though he seem to himself
least to grow, and though he think himself less able to perform many good
duties, then formerly he was. Wherefore now let all Gods servants stay up their
hearts with divine consolations, and gather to themselves a joyful assurance
of their being upright, by their increase in fruitfulness. When a rich man
casts over his accounts, and finds his stock to be greater then it was, and
his revenues to be enlarged, O how his heart leapeth within him, and what good
it does him, to perceive that he is increased in wealth! Why should not the
godly man, whose wealth is inward and spiritual, perceiving the stock of
virtue to be augmented, and his two Talents to have gained other two, behold
this with much praise to God, and with a great deal of content and peace in
himself? We are bound in conscience to see and acknowledge the goodness of
God this way, and to prepare our selves for a further increase, by taking
delight in the gains which we have already made to our selves in the trade of
godliness. I deny not, but that a godly man must still consider how far he
is removed from the goal of perfection, and comparing himself with the Law,
complain much of himself for being unprofitable. But there is no
contradiction betwixt these two. A man may well consider of his wants, to
behumbled in them; and yet withal, take notice of his increase to be ioyed in
that: both must be done, and the one of these will exceedingly help to the
doing of the other. If we do not join these two together, we shall find
much inconvenience by separating them. He that still thinks how much he is
able to do in the work of obedience, and does not seasonably mind himself of
his many defects, shall be in danger of swelling and puffing up. But he that
always looks to his wants and imperfections, and does not sometimes raise up
his heart in the meditation of the work of grace within him, which has
edifyed and built him up in godliness, and made the little he had at first,
far more then it was, shall become hereby dejected, vncheerfull, and
unthankful. Wherefore, feed humility with the one of these cogitations, and
thankfulness with the other. It is yielded, that thou art, as Paul says,
nothing; yea, less then nothing, in comparison of what thou should: but
again, thou art something, in comparison of what thou wast, and what thou
should have been, but for the work of Gods grace in thee.

Acknowledge therefore, to the glory of the Vine, and the Husbandman, and to
the consolation of thine own heart: Lord, what by thy Word, what by
afflictions, what by one or other means that thou have used and blessed, and
by the gracious assistance of thy Spirit, in, and with all: I do truly
perceive my self to be in some measure confirmed and strengthened in grace,
my faith is stronger, my patience more steadfast, mine heart more set upon
heavenly things, my care of shunning all sin, and the occasions thereof, my
desire of serving thee in all obedience, more constant and earnest then it has
been. Blessed be thy name, thou art indeed a good Husbandman, and by thy good
husbandry, have made me, that else should have been a dry and barren branch,
to be somewhat fruitful, and to increase in fruitfulness. Virtue is then
improued to the best, when it is put to the use, of making our souls to give
more glory to God, and to take more comfort in him.

FINIS.

