THE Imitation or following of Christ, and the contemning of worldly vanities:
Whereunto, as springing out of the same root, we have adjoined another pretty
treatise, entitled, The perpetual rejoice of the Godly, even in this life.

Ephesians 5. Be you followers of GOD as dear children, and walk in love,
even as Christ has loved us, etc.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham.

depiction of Christ crucified, surrounded by adoring angels INRI
C. TeBrun pinx.
S. Gribelin Sculp.


To the Noble and Right worthy Prince Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall
of England, one of the Lords of the Queens Majesty's privy Counsel, and
Knight of the honorable order of the Garter.
IF Augustus Caesar, renoumed Prince, being presented by a poor and simple
Poet with a few brief and compendious Epigrams, did not only, by aunswering
with the like, seem to accept and allow that his travail, but also with
great and ample reward, give encouragement therewithal: I trust that your
Lordshippe (being of your self both wise and well affected) will much more in
this so precious a present, receive my travail and fruitful exployt. The
work of it self, deserves a good Patron, and the worthynesse thereof puts
me in mind of your grace. And although in the same, no difficult questions at
all are pursued (I mean in matters of religion) yet ghostly instructions and
right Godly lessons at large are dilated: knowledge of letters and literal
sense, therein so much is nothing supported, as amendment of life and manners
advanced. How much it is needful in these present days, your Lordshippe (I
think) does well understand: and to you it is known, how far does dissent our
life from our knowledge. And by how much the more it shall be by your Lordshippe
thought worthy the sale, by so much undoubtedly, your honor the better, shall
show your self fautor and friend unto virtue. Not distance of place could
have altered my mind, but that to your grace I would have presented this
sign of good will and loyal intent. And yet (notwithstanding such inward
affection) I am to crave pardon of skillesse attempt, and hoping no less then
favor therein, I leave your good grace, unto the Almighty, who always in
honor preserve your estate.

Your humble Orator. Edward Hake.

To the Reader.
THOU have here (gentle Reader) the pathway to perfect life, under the title of
The Imitatio^ of Christ, whose footesteps if thou follow, thou can never go
astray, for he is the way, the truth, and the life. Learn here with Christ to
contemn the world, learn his modesty, his meekness and humility. In
doctrine, learn his synceritie, simplicity and verity. Learn his love and
incomparable charity. And to conclude, learn to bear thine own Cross after
Christ manfully. This shall thou soon learn to do, if thou can once become
humble in thine own eyes. For to the humble God gives grace, but the proud
he does resist. Fly therefore from pride, as far as possible thou may. It
was the overthrow of the first man: yea God spared not his Angels in their
pride. Wherefore Christ has said, that who so shall exalt himself shall be
brought low, and who so shall humble kimselfe, shall be exalted. Humble thy
self therefore with Christ, follow his steps in this life, and where thou
shall not find thy self able to tread in his steps, as thou would, call
upon him for help, and thou shall be sure that either he will make thee able,
or else accept thy desire, for the deed that thou desire to do. And that
crown of righteousness that is due unto him, he will give unto thee in that
day when he shall take thee unto himself. Farewell in Christ, and pray with
all the holy Saints: that Christ's Kingdom may shortly come.

Amen.
The Table or Summaries of all the Chapters.
OF the contempt of worldly Vanities. folio. 1. Of Modesty. folio. 3 Of the
Doctrine of the truth. 4 Of Wit in our doings. 6 Of the reading of holy
Scripture. 7 Of the unruly affections of the mind. 7 Of fleeing vain Hope and
Pride. 8 Of taking heed of overmuch familiarity. 9 Of Obedience and
Subjection. 10 Of the avoiding of familiarity of words. 10 Of the attayning
of peace, and earnest desire of profiting. 11 Of the profit of adversity. 12
Of resisting temptations. 13 Of taking heed of rash judgment. 15 Of the
works of Love. 16 Of bearing of other men's faults. 17 Of solitary Life. 18 Of
the examples of Godly Fathers. 18 Of the exercises of one that is the child of
God in deed. 20 Of the love of solitariness and silence. 22 Of chastining thy
soul and keeping the same in awe. 25 The consideration of man's miseries. 26 Of
the meditation of death. 28 Of the last Judgment of God, and punishment of
Sinners. 31 Of the zealous amendment of our whole life. 33 Of the ^^^^rde life
of Man. 37 Of Modesty and obedience. 39 Of the good and quiet person. 40 Of
the sincerity of mind, and plainness of meaning. 41 Of the consideration of a
man's self. 42 Of the joy of a good Conscience. 43 Of the loving of Jesus above
all things. 44 Of the familiar friendship of Jesus. 45 Of the lacking or being
without comfort. 46 Of thankfulness for the benefits of God. 49 Of the small
number of the Lovers of Christ his Cross. 50 Of bearing of Christ his Cross.
52 Of the inward communication of Christ with the faithful Soul. 56 That the
truth does speak within us without noise of words. 57 That the words of God
are to be heard humbly: and that the same notwithstanding be not pondered and
wayed of most men. 58 A prayer by which heavenly doctrine and religion is
called for. 59 That truth and modesty in the sight of God, is to be ex^^^ised.
60 The ^^^yse of God, and thanksgiving for his benefits: and likewise of the
force of the love of God. 61 Of the trial of the true Lover, and how the
enemy must be resisted. 63 Of Modest hyding the benefits of God. 65 Of setting
little by a man's self in the sight of God. 57 That we ought to drive all our
doings to Gods glory, as to the fardest end or mark that we shoot at. 68
That it is a sweet thing to serve God and to despise the world. 69 That the
desires of the mind are to be examined, and ordered. 71 Of the manner of
patience, and the fight against desires. 71 Of obeying our betters according to
the example of our Lord Jesus Christ. 73 Of considering the secret judgments
of God that we do not advance our selves to much in prosperity. 74 How we must
be minded, and what we ought to say in such things as we desire to have. 75
Prayers to perform Gods will. 76 That true comfort must be sought for in God
only. 76 That all carfulness is to be committed to God. 77 That the miseries
of this life must be suffered patiently according to Christ's example. 78 Of
bearing of injuries and wrongs, and who it is that is pacient in deed. 71 Of
the confession of a man's own infirmity, and of the miseries of this life.
80 That we must rest and repose our selves in God above all good things and
gifts. 82 Of the recouncing of so many benefits of God. 84 Of four things
which do procure peace. 85 A prayer against evil thoughts. 86 Prayers to
obtain the lightning of the mind. 86 Of the avoiding of curious enquiry how
another man does live. 87 In what things steadfast peace of mind and true
profiting does consist. 88 Of the excellency of a free mind: and likewise
that humble prayer is better than reading. 89 That men are most of all hindered
from the coming to the highest felicity, through the love of themselves. 90
Prayers to attain to cleanness of mind and the heavenly wisdom. 90 Against
ill speakers. 91 How God must be called upon and praised in adversities. 91 Of
craving of Gods help and confidence to recover grace. 92 Of despising of all
things in the world, that the Creator may be found. 94 Of the denial of a
man's self, and the putting of all desire from him. 96 Of the instabilitie of
man's mind, and of setting God before himself above all things. 97 That there
is pleasure above all things, and in all things, to one that loves God. 97
That this life is never in safety from temptations. 99 Against the vain
judgments of men. 100 Of the pure and entire yielding up of himself to the
attayning of the liberty of mind. 101 Of convenient dealing in outward
things and flying unto God in dangers. 101 That man be not importunate in his
business. 102 That man has no goodness of himself, nor that he can boast of
any thing. 103 Of the contempt of mortal honor. 104 That a man must not set
his peace upon men. 104 Against vain and worldly knowledge. 105 Of not drawing
outward things unto a man. 106 That we must not believe all men, and that we
soon fall and offend in words. 107 Of putting thy trust in God, if thou be
assailed with the darts of evil tongues. 108 That all grievous things must be
suffered patiently for the life everlasting. 110 Of the day of
euerlastingnesse, and the anguishe or troubles of this life. 111 Of the desire
of life everlasting, and how great good things are promised to them that fight.
113 How a man being pressed down with euilles ought to yield himself up unto
God. 106 That we must rest upon base or course works when we depart from the
highest works. 118 That man ought to think himself worthy, not of comfort,
but of stripes. 119 That Gods favor has nothing to do with those men whose
minds are earthly. 120 Of the diverse motions of Nature and of Grace. 121 Of
the corruption of Nature, and of the power and strength of Gods grace. 124 We
ought to deny our selves, and to follow Christ by his cross. 126 That man be
not overmuch discouraged, if at any time he have fallen into any offense. 127
Of learning the deper things and the hid judgments of God unsearched. 128 That
all hope and trust must be fixed in God alone. 131
Finis Tabulae.
The glory of the Honorable, is the the fear of God.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Of the contempt of worldly vanities. The first Chapter.
He that follows me, does not walk in darcknesse, but has the light of
life.
THese are Christ his own words, by the which we are admonished to follow
his life and manners, if we desire to be lyghtned truly and delivered from all
blindness of heart. Therefore we ought to meditate and ponder the life of Christ
with exceeding great study and desire. For undoubtedly the doctrine of Christ
does pass all the doctrine of all good men that ever were: and in case a man
be endued with the spirit of Christ, the same does find in his Word a secret
or hidden Manna. Howbeit, it happens yt many do therefore conceive small
desire by the often hearing of the Gospel preached, because the same are void
of the spirit of Christ. For assuredly if a man will understand Christ his
words fully, and with delectacion, he must of necessity endeavor to fashion
out his whole life according to his example. What good does difficult reasoning
about the Trinity in case thou be void of humbleness of mind, and does
therefore offend the blessed Trinity? Surely they are not hard sayings that
can make a holy and just man, but it is a studious life that does make one
beloved of God. I had rather feel the repentance of my sins within my self,
than understand after what sort repentance is defined. If thou have all the
scriptures by heart, yea, and all the witty sayings of the Philosophers to, what
good do all these without Charity and the grace of God? Vanity is vain, and
all things are but vanity, besides the love of God and his only service. That
(when all is done) is highest wisdom, to go on unto the Kingdom of Heaven by
contemning of the World. It is vanity for a man to seek transitory riches,
and to put his hope in the same: It is vanity for a man to seek for honor
and promotion, to advance himself: Vanity it is to follow the lusts of the
flesh, and to covet those things which shall afterward cause one grievously
to be punished: Vanity it is to wish for long life, and all that while to
make small account of a good life: Vanity it is to look upon the life present
only, and never to cast what will come after: Vanity it is to love those
things which do pass away with in credible swiftness, and yet not to make
haste to that place where joy does endure everlastingly. Be often mindful of ye
proverb, which says. Neither is the eye satisfied with seeing nor the ear
filled with hearing. Wherefore, endeavor thou to withdraw thy mind from the
love of transitory things, and be take thy self to things that be Heavenly.
For they which be obedient to his own lusts, ye same do both defile their
minds with the conscience of sin, and do thereby also forgo the grace and
favor of God.

Of Modesty. The second Chapter.
ALl men are naturally desirous of learning: But what good Learning without
true religion, nothing worth.
does knowledge that is void of Religion? Even the basest Husbandeman that is,
having the true fear of God with him, is in all respects to be preferred
before the lofty Philosopher, who (by Astronomicall speculation) occupies his
head about the course of heaven, without the regard of himself. He that
knows himself aright, the same sets but Noscere ipsum.
small store by himself, neither is he tickled with worldly praises. Though I
have knowledge of all things in the world, and yet do want the love of GOD,
what good shall the same do me before God, who will judge me according to my
deeds? Give over greedy desire to learn, which diversely distracteth the
mind, and deceives it. For the learned sort have desire to be had in
admiration, and to be called wise. Now, many things there are, the knowledge of
which do little profit the Soul, or rather nothing at all: and he is a very
fool that earnestly applies any other things than those which do make to
his own salvation. Many words do not fill the soul, but a godly life does
refresh the mind, and an upright conscience does minister boldness to
approach unto God. Look how many the more and better things that thou have
learned, so much the more grievous punishment shall thou have, except thou
lead thy life so much the more virtuously. Wherefore wax thou not insolent,
either for any cunning or knowledge that thou have, but rather become the more
fearful for the knowledge of things that god has given thee above others.
And if thou think to thy self that thou know many things, and that thou
have learned we ought not to advance our selves of learning but rather to
acknow ledge our ignorance and want of skyll.
many things, weete thou well that there be a great sort of things more which
thou do not know: and be not therefore proud and lofty, but rather
acknowledge thine own ignorance and want of skill. Wherefore should thou
put forth thy self before other, when there are many found better learned, and
more skillful of the law than thou thy self art? If thou will know and learn
some thing with vtility and profit, love thou to be unknown, and to be
accounted as no body. For true knowing and despising of a man's own self, is
the chiefest and most profitable learning above al other, and great wisdom
and perfection it is to set little store by himself, and to magnify other
men, and to have them in price and estimation. If thou shall see one offend
openly, or commit some grievous crime, thou ought not therefore to think
thy self more perfect than he is: For thou know not how long thou shall
thy self continue in virtuous life. We are frail assuredly all the sort of
us: but yet think thou that no body is more frail than thy self.

Of the doctrine of the truth. The third Chapter.
Happy is he whom the truth teaches: not with letters and words that
vanish, but with it self, by it self, even as it is. For our opinions and
senses do often times deceive us, and be of little force. What profits
subtle disputacion about hid and obscure matters, which though we be ignorant
of, yet shall they be no hinderance unto us at the judgment day of God?
Truly, it is notable folly that we do wilfully apply our selves unto
curious and hurtful things, and despise such things as be profitable and
necessary for us. Being so Egle eyed, yet we see nothing at all. Wherefore
should we pass upon those diffused terms of the Logicians called Genus and
Species? For he is rid from a great number of opinions whom that everlasting
Word does speak unto. For all things have their being of the word only: and
all things do speak the word only: and this is that beginning which does
speak unto us, and without whom no body understands or judges the thing
aright: But he unto whom all things are that one thing, and which draws
all things unto that one thing, and beholds all things in that one thing, the
same is able to be constant of mind and evermore to repose himself in God. O
God of truth, make me one with thee in everlasting love. It yrketh me to read
and here many things diverse times. It is in thee whatsoever I do desire and
covet. Let all Teachers hold their peace: let the whole world keep silence
in thy sight: do thou only speak unto me. For the more nearly joined that
every man is with himself, and the more dwelling in himself, he does the
less run at random abroad: the same does perceive both so many the mo
things, and the more profounde things without labor, because he receives
the light of his understanding from above. A pure, simple, and constaunt soul
is not drawn into diverse works, which does all things unto the honor of
God, and labors earnestly to cease from al love of himself. For what does
more hinder a man and vex him, than the unruly affections of the soul? A good
and godly man does first and foremost take deliberation with himself, before
such time as he begin his business: neither does he suffer himself to be
drawn away to wicked lusts, by his own deeds, but enforces them to be at
obedience and commandment of right reason. Surely There is no combat more
xecellent, then for a man to conquer himself.
there is no combat more sharp, than for a man to endeavor to conquer
himself: and this is the work that we ought to take in hand, that we do
conquer our selves, and become every day more strong than our selves, and
evermore profit somewhat in virtuous life. For the whole perfection of this
life has a certain imperfection adioined unto it, and all the knowledge of
truth that we have here, is yet not void of darkness and ignorance. The
humble knowledge of our self is altogether a more certain and approved way
unto God, than profound searching out of knowledge. And yet is not knowledge to
be found fault withal, or the understanding of any thing, which being duly
considered, is good, and the creature of God. Howbeit, An upright conscience
ought to be preferred before worldly knowledge.
I say that an upright conscience is evermore to be preferred before it, and
the life that treads the path of virtue and Godliness. But because most men
do study rather how to have knowledge, than to live well, it happens that
most commonly they err or wander, and do get in manner no fruit and
commodity, or at least wise, slender and small in consideration of their
traueyle: who in case they would be as diligent both in rooting up of vices,
and also in sowing of Virtues, as they are in proposing of questions, certes
there should not be so many enormities and heinous offenses committed of the
Vulgar people, nor yet should there reign so great liberty of life amongst
those that are learned. And when the day of our doom or judgment shall come,
and account shall be required at our hands, not what we have read, but what we
have done: nor yet how well we have spoken, but how Christianlike we have
lived. Go to now I pray you, where are all those masters and passing
fellows at this present which were once of thine acquaintance, whilst they
were living, and flourished in learning, whose stypendes other men do now
enjoy, which perhaps do not so much as once think upon them now? Even
they seemed to be somewhat also as long as they were alive: and yet now there
is no words at all made of them. So soon does the glory of this World
vanyshe away. If these men had framed a life according to their knowledge,
then had they traueyled in the studyes of learning happilye. How many men do
perish in the World through their vain knowledge, in that they make small
account of the worship of GOD: and because the same had liefer to be great
than to be humble, it happens that their thoughts are nothing but vain and
unprofitable. He is great in deed, which has great charity. He is great in
deed, which being small in his own judgment, does account all Type of honor
as a thing of nothing. He is wise in deed, which reckneth all earthly things
but for Mucke and Ordure, that he may win Christ unto himself: and he is
well learned in deed, that does Gods will and forsakes his own.

Of wit in our doings. The fourth Chapter.
We must not believe every thing that is spoken, or put into our heads, but
the matter must warilye and at leisure be pondered, how it agrees with the
will of God. Evil oftentimes (alack for pity) is sooner both credited and
spoken touching another man that good is: so great is our infirmity. But such
as be perfect, do not believe man's saying, because they know man's weakness
to be both prone unto naughtynesse, and oftentimes to offend and fall in his
words. It is a point of great wisdom, neither to be headlong hasty in those
things that thou do, nor yet to be so stiff, that thou wylt never give
over that which thou have once coueted in thine heart. It is a point of the
like wisdom, neither to credit every man's words, nor yet by and by to utter
and communicate unto other those things which thou have heard or credited.
Counsel with the wise The counsel of wisemen rather to be followed, then
thine own fantasies.
and godly person, and rather endeavor to be instructed of him that is better,
than thy self to follow thine own deuyses. A good life makes one wise to
Godwarde, and skillful of many things. The more humble and obedient every man
does she we himself to God, both the wiser and the more quiet is the same
person in all things.

Of the reading of holy Scripture. The fifth Chapter.
TRuth must be sought for in the holy Scripture, and not eloquence: and they
ought to be read with the same spirit, as they are uttered forth unto us:
and in them profit rather than the subtlety of reasoning should be ensued:
neither is it less meet for us willingly to read godly and homely books,
than such as are difficult and profounde: neither let the authority of the
writer move thee, to consider whether he have been of small or great
learning, but let the love of pure truth draw thee to reading: and again
consider, not what person it is that speaks it, but what thing it is that is
spoken. Men do perish, but Gods truth abides for ever: and God speaks unto
us after diverse sorts, without having any respect at all unto persons. Our
own curiosity does oftentimes hinder us, whilst that we covet to perceive
and discuss those things, which should be let alone in all respects. If thou
desire to have fruit and commodity by them, read thou them humbly, simply,
faithfullye, and never covet after the name of knowledge. Love to be
questioning with godly men, and attentively hear their sayings, and be not
offended at the nipping words of thine Elders, for they are not causeless
spoken.

Of the unruly affections of the mind. The.vi. Chapter.
Whenever a man does covet any thing inordinatelye, by and by he is made
unquiet in his mind. The proud or covetous A covetous mind never satisfied,
but an humble spirit leads his life in peace
man is never at reast within himself: but he which is poor and humble of
mind, the same leads his life in perfect peace. But he which has not yet
mortified the affections of his mind, that person is both easily tempted, and
also is ouercommed with trifling and vile things. One weak of mind, and that
as yet is half carnal and prone unto sensuality, is scarcely able to pull
himself wholly away from earthly desires: and therefore while he does withdraw
himself, full often he does the same with sorrowfulness, and if one do
withstand him, he is soon moved or angry. But if he have ensued that thing
which he has desired, he is forthwith pricked with the conscience of sin,
because he has obeyed his desire, which does no whit make to the peace which
he sought for. Therefore true peace of mind is found, not in obeying, but in
resisting the desires and affections: and that peace is not in the heart of the
carnal man, nor in one addicted to external things, but in a man that is
fervent and spiritual.

Of fleeing vain hope and pride. The.vij. Chapter.
IT is a point of lightness to put hope in men and other creatures, A point of
lightness to trust in man, or any other creature.
be not thou ashamed to be a slave to others for the love of Jesus Christ,
and to seem poor in this life. Stay not upon thine own self, but put thy
hope in God. Endeavor to thy power, and God shall help thy good will and
meaning: put no confidence either in thine own knowledge or in the policy of
any mortal man, but rather in the favor of God who both helps the humble,
and also thrusts down the proud. Glory not either in thy riches if thou have
them, nor yet in thy friends, if they be mighty: but glory in God which both
ministers all things, and desires to give himself above all things. Advance
not thy self as touching either the mightiness or beauty of thy body, which
being taken with some small or light disease, is by and by defaced. Do not thou
stand in thine own conceit for thy towardness and wit, least thou offend
God, whose gift it is, whatsoever goodness thou have of nature. Judge not thy
self better than other, least perhaps thou be counted worse with God, who
knows what is in man. Be not proud with well doing. For Gods judgments
are far other than the judgments of men, whom that thing does many times
dysplease, which does like men well enough. If there be any good thing No hurt
to make himself inferior to al men, but to prefer himself before other it
is hurtful.
in thee, think that there be better things in another man, to the intent that
thou may keep still humbleness of mind. It does no hurt at all, though a
man make himself inferior to all men: but it is hurtefull if a man do
prefer himself but before one man. An humble man enjoys contynuall peace:
but the mind of the hawtie person is tossed oftentimes with anger and ambition.

Of taking heed of overmuch familiarity. The.viij. Chapter.
DIsclose not thy mind to every man: but communicate thy business with the
person that is wise and Godly. Be seldom times conuersaunt with youth, and
those that be not of the household of faith. Flatter not the rich, nor yet be
desirous to live with great men, but rather associate thy self to modest and
simple, to godly and well manered persons, and deal in things that are
profitable. Be familiar with no women, but commend or praise all godly women
universally. Wish to be familiar to God only, and his Angels. Eschew the
familiarity of certain men. Charity must be had toward all men: but it is
not expedient to be famyliar with all men. Sometime it chances A hard thing
to judge well of a man, before he be tried and known.
that one being unknown, has a very good name, and afterward, when that
same party is once known and present, he grows out of estimation, and
becomes more obscure again. We think to our selves something that we shall
like other men well with whom we are grown into familiarity, of whom when
the wickedness of our conditions is once perceived, we do also the more
displease and mislyke them.

Of obedience and subjection. The.ix. Chapter.
IT very much avails to live in the subjection of an other, and To live in
subjection of other, and not at a man's own liberty, does very much avail.
not to be at a man's own liberty: and much more safelye do men obey, than
rule and command. Many be obedient for necessity rather than for love: and
the same they do with pain, and quickly murmour and grutch: neither do
those persons attain unto the liberty of mind, except they show themselves
obedient both from the heart, and also, for Gods sake. Whether soever thou
turn thy self, no rest shall thou find in any place but in modestly bearing
the rule of an other man. The ymagination and change of places has deceived
many. Every man has delight to do according to his own judgment, and
shows himself somewhat friendly to them which be of that mind that he is
of. But if God be among us, we must wholly give over our own opinion and
purpose, sometimes to enjoy the commodity of peace. For who has so good a
wit that he knows all things? Wherefore trust not to much to thine own
opinion: but hear also the judgment of other men willinglye. And in case thou
shall give over thine own judgment for Gods sake (notwithstanding that it be
good) and shall follow an other, thereby thou shall profit and come forward
the better. For I have oftentimes heard, that it is more safe to hear and
receive counsel, than to give counsel. For possible it is, that a man's own
judgment, To stand to much in his own opinion, although it be good,
betokens pride, and wilful stubburnesse.
and opinion may be good enough in a matter: and yet if the same will not obey
other, so long as reason, or the cause does require it, even by that token, may
he disclose and betray his own pride and wilful stubburnesse.

Of the avoiding of familiarity of words. The.x. Chapter.
TAke heed of the haunt of men as much as it is possible. For talk which does
commonly pass about worldely things, is cause of great hurt, although it
otherwise proceed from a mind that is simple and without evil meaning. For
being snared with vanity, we are quickly defiled: and many times it
happens that I do wish that I had held my tongue, and that I had not been
in prease and company. Now, if the cause be sought why we do so gladlye talk
together and babble one with another, (whereas nevertheless we seldom return
unto silence, without some remorse of conscience,) it shall be found to be this,
that we seek after comfort by often communication, and desire to relieve our
wearyed minds with sundry cogitacions, and so the more earnestly that we love
and covet every thing, or the more we perceive that every thing is against us,
so much it lyketh us the more to talk and think thereof, and that most
commonly in vain. For this outward comfort, causes no small hynderaunce
unto the inward and ghostly comfort. Therefore must we watch and pray, least
the time be spent in idleness: and in case it lyketh and be expedient for thee
to speak, speak profitable things. That ought most of all to fear us from
babbling, To much babbling causes sin, and hindeethr
both for that the custom of babbling is sinful, and also because it hyndereth
our coming forward to virtuous life. But it is not a little profitable to
become better and better in godliness, to use virtuous talk and communication
thereof, especially when men like one to the other in mind and spirit are
coupled together in God.

Of the attayning of peace and earnest desire of profiting. The.xi. Chapter.
WE might enjoy sound and perfect peace, except our heds were occupied with the
sayings and doings of other me^, which are no point of our charge: but how can
he live in peace any while, that entermedleth himself in other men's
affairs? That seeks for occasions abroad? That calls home himself either
little or seldom times: Blessed are the simple. For they do attain unto much
peace. And now, why have certain godly men been so perfect, and so addicted to
the contemplacion of heavenly things: namely, because they have earnestlye
endeavored to mortify all their earthlye lusts, and therefore have been able
to cleave fast, and freely to give themselves over to God with all the powers
of their soul. But as for us, we are occupied overmuch with the troublesome
affections of our mind, and are to much busied with frail and transitory
things. Seldom times also do we conquer even but one vice or sin: And as
for daily profiting and coming forward in godliness, we are not kindled
unto it, and therefore do we remain still cold and luke warm. Howbeit (if
being wholly mortified unto our selves) we were not kept back as men inwardely
entangled: undoubtedly it would come to pass, that we might be able to feel
divine things, and somewhat to make proof of heavenly matters. The greatest
(if it be not the whole) let does utterly consist in this: that we be not free
from the troublesome affections and desires of the mind, nor endeavor to walk
the perfect path of the godly. In case the least adversity in the world do
at any time chance unto us, we are very soon discouraged, and then do
betake our selves to such comfort as the world does minister. But if we would
labor with tooth and nail, to stick to our tackling, as it becomes valiant
soldiers, there is no doubt but we should see (even from Heaven) aid sent
unto us. Again, the same God is ready to help them that fight and trust upon
his favor, which procures us occasions to fight, to the intent that we may get
the victory. But if we shall put the perfection of a godly life in doing of
these outward things, our godliness shall then be soon at a point. Nay, the
Hatchet must be put to the very root, that being purged from desires, we may
attain unto a calm and quiet soul. If we should pluck up by the roots but
one sin every year, we should quickly be made perfect men.

Now, contrariwise it comes to pass, that we find our selves many times to
have been better and more pure from sin at the beginning of our repentance
and amendment of life, than we were after a great many years of our
profession. Whereby it happens, that whereas our heat and profiting ought
every day to be more and more, we think it a great matter if a man can
keep still a piece of his first zeal and earnestness. If we would strain
and force our selves somewhat at the beginning, it might be brought to pass
that afterward we should be able to perform all things with delight and
gladness. It is (no doubt) a pain to leave things that a man has used
himself unto: a more pain also to fight against a man's own will. But if thou
shall not conquer small and trifling things, when will thou be able to
vanquish and subdue the harder things? First of all, resist thine own
inclination, and forsake naughty custom, least perhaps it lead thee by little
and little unto greater difficulty and hardness. Would to God thou would
mark both how great peace thou should cause unto thy self, and joy unto
others in behauing thy self godly. Out of doubt, thou would then be more
careful to come forewarde in ghostly things.

Of the profit of Adversity. The.xij. Chapter.
IT is profitable for us to be kept down with calamities and adversities
sometime, because they oftentimes do call back a man unto himself, whereby he
may know that he lives here in banishment, and may not put his hope or
affiaunce in any worldly things. It is also expedient for us, that some
should speak evil of us, and have an evil and sinister opinion of us, though
our outward behavior and inward man be tolerable. For these things (I say)
do much God is the searcher of the heart.
make unto modesty, and keep us from ambition: for by this mean it is
wrought, that we so much the more seek for GOD (the inward witness) when as
we be outwardlye contemned of men, and not sufficiently credited or believed.
Therefore ought man so wholly to depend upon God, that it be not necessary Man
ought to depend wholly upon God.
for him to seek many comforts. For when a man of good meaning is pressed and
assaulted with adversity, or agrieued for his evil thoughts, then does he
understand that gods help is so much the more necessary unto him, without whom
he finds that he is able to do no good at all. Then is he sorry: then he
sigheth: then he prays to be delivered from this wretchedness which he does
suffer: then does it grieve him to live any longer, and he wishes for death,
that departing out of this tra^sitorye life, he might live with Christ. Then
does he right well perceive that a man cannot have perfect security and full
peace in this life.

Of resisting Temptacions. The.xiij. Chapter.
SO long as we are in this life, we cannot be without miseries and temptacions.
For which cause also it is written in Job, that man's life upon the earth is a
temptacion and warfare. Therefore ought every man to be careful about his
temptacions, and to watch with prayer, least the Devil find occasion to deceive
him, who never slumbreth, but always wandreth about, seking whom he may
devour. No man is so perfect and holy, but that he is sometime assaulted with
them, neither can we wholye be without them. For temptacions are oftentimes
very profitable unto one, though they be troublesome for the time, because a
man is pressed down, is purged, is instructed by them. All the godly that ever
were, have passed over their life in adversities and temptacions, and by them
have grown up unto virtuous life: and such as have not been able well to
brook them, the same have become Reprobats, and revolted. There is no calling
either so holy, or place so solitary, but therein are temptacions and
adversities. To be short, as long as a man lives, he is never safe wholly from
temptacions, because the same is in our selves, of which we are tempted, seeing
we are borne in concupiscence and lust. Temptacions come upon temptacions,
miseries upon miseries, and always have we somewhat that we must be are or
suffer. For we have lost the state of our felicity Now, whilst many men do
shun temptacions, they fall into more grievous temptacions. We shall not
conquer by running away only, but by patience and true modesty shall we be
made more strong then our enemies. He which outwardelye declining temptacions
only, does not pull them up by the roots: the same is so far from profiting
and coming forward, that temptacions, do so much the sooner assail him
again, and he is by so much in the worse case again. By enduring a little
and a little, (and that with patience) thou shall sooner by Gods help get the
maystrie, then with sturdinesse and importunity. Use counsel oftentimes in
temptacion. And if another man be tempted, show Comfort thafflicted as thou
would be comforted in affliction.
not thy self rough and rygorous unto him, but rather minister him comfort,
like as thou thy self would have comfort ministered unto thee. The original
of all evil temptacions, is inconstancy of mind and slenderness of faith or
trust in God. For like as a ship without stern is tossed too and fro with
winds, even so a lose fellow, and one that can but evil keep himself unto
that which he once determined, is diversely tempted. As the fire makes trial
of iron, so does temptacion make trial of a man. We many times know not what
we are able to do: but what we are, temptacion does make manifest unto us.
Most of all we must be vigilant or watchful at the beginning of temptacion.
For then is the enemy more easily conquered, if he be not suffered to enter
into the door of the mind, but be met without the Thresholde by the way, as
soon as ever he had knocked. Therefore full well did a certain Poet say.

Stop the beginning, so shall thou be sure,
All doubtful diseases to swage and to cure.
But if that thy Physic thou happen to slack.
Then help comes to late: the sick goes to wrack. Ovid.

For first of all, the bare cogitacion comes to thy mind: next a vehement
imagination: last of all, a delectacion, and wicked motion, and assent. Whereby
it happens, that by little and little the malicious enemy does enter in
thorowlye, whylst that he is not encountered withal at the beginning. And how
much the longer that every man is dull and slow to resist, The speedyer a man
does resist temotacions, the better.
so much both the weaker dailye does the same man become, and the enemy
likewise the more mighty against him. Some at the beginning of their amendment
of life, do suffer more sharp bickrings: other at the end: other are vexed
all their life long: some there are that be tempted but slightly, according to
the wisdom and equity of Gods providence, which wayeth the manners and
deserts of men, and dispenses all things before, to the salvation of his
elect. Therefore we ought not to despair, whilst we are tempted, but pray unto
God so much the more fervently, We ought not to despair in temptacion, but
pray unto God the more seruentlye, to help us in all temptacions and
adversities.
that he would vouchsafe to help us in all adversity: who no doubt will so
temper the event of such temptacion, (according to Paul's saying) as we may be
able to bear it. Wherefore, in all temptacions and adversities, let us humble
our minds to the mighty hand of God, which is able to keep and to lift up the
humble of heart. In temptacions and adversities, a man is tried how much good
he has done, and therein both the greater grace does appear, and also virtue
does become the more manifest: neither is it any great matter if one be godly
and zealous when nothing does trouble him: but if he show himself pacient in
the time of misery, then is there good hope that he shall come forward much Some
there are which get out safely from great temptacions, and the same again are
oftentimes overcome with small and daily temptacions, so yt (being so
discouraged) they never have confidence in themselves in the great temptacions
that are weak in so small and trifling.

Of taking heed of rash judgment. The.xiiij. Chapter.
Look upon thine own self: beware thou judge not of the deeds of other me^:
for in judging of other we do both labor in vain and are commonly deceived,
and do quickly sin or offend. But we always traueile fruitfully with the
judging of our own selves, and with the examining of our own selves. As we
fancy and are affected toward every thing, so most commonly do we judge
thereof: and quickly do we leese true and upright judgment, because we are
blinded with selfeloue. Howbeit, if we were always led with the love of God
alone, our wit repugning the truth, should not so soon trouble or disorder
us. But many times somewhat is hid inwardlye, or is also added without, which
draws us away with it. Many in their deeds do love themselves unawares,
and those same do seem to be so long of quiet and pacified mind, as things
do fall out according to their own hearts desire. But if things go otherwise
then they themselves do covet, they are easily moved and brought unto sorrow.
Discensions do arise many times and often between friends and countrymen, and
between the godly, and men wholly bent unto virtuous life, for the diversity
of judgments and opinions. For ancient custom is left with much a do:
beyond that that he sees, no man is willingly led. Therefore if thou shall
more stay thy self, either upon thine own reason, or upon thine own
traueyle, then upon that virtue which makes man subject unto Jesus Christ,
scarcely (nay not scarcelye neither) shall it come to pass, that thou may
be such a man as the light of Gods spirit may illuminate: For We ought to be
in subjection wholly unto God.
God will have us to be wholye in subjection unto him, and to climb above the
reach of reason with love enflamed.

Of the works of love. The.xv. Chapter.
THere ought to be no hurt done at all for any cause, or for the love of any
mortal man: but for the profit of the needy person, a good deed is now and
then to be let pass for a time, or to be turned into a better deed. For by
this means a good deed is not neglected, but is turned into the better.
Without Charity the outward work does nothing prevail: but whatsoever is
done in Charity, although the same be but small and course, it is made
altogether fruitful and profitable. For God does more behold with how great
love every thing is done, then how great the same thing is. Much does he that
loves much: Much does he that does something well: well does he that serves
the common profit more then his own will. Many times it seems to be
Charity which is rather carnalitie. For seldom it happens that carnal
inclination is away, a man's own will, hope of reward, desire of commodity. He
that True charity described.
is endued with true and perfect Charity, the same serves himself in
nothing, but studieth for Gods glory in all things. He does also repine at no
body, because he loves no private joy, nor will rejoice in himself, but
wishes to be made blessed in GOD about all good things. He attributes no
goodness to any man, but wholly acknowledges all things to be Gods, from
whom as from a fountain all things do flow, in whom at the last all the
godly do rest, with the enjoying of felicity. But if a man have but a spark
of true love, the same no doubt, feels that all earthly things are full of
vanity.

Of bearing with other men's faults. The.xvi. Chapter.
THose things which no man can amend either in himself or in another, he
ought to bear patiently, until such time as God do determine otherwise. Think
that perchance it is better so to be for thy trial and patience, without the
which our merits are not greatly to be weyed. Nevertheless, thou ought for
such lettes to make supplication unto God, that he would vouchsafe to assist
thee, that thou may take these things well and quietly. If one once or twice
admonished do not as thou would have him, fall not out with the same
party, but commit the whole cause to God, to the intent that that may be done
in all his servants, which is agreeable both to his pleasure and honor, who
knows well how to turn evil unto good. Endeavor thy self to be pacient in
bearing of all the vices and infirmities of other men, because thy self also
art diseased with many, which must likewise be suffered of other. If thou can
not fashion thy self to be such a one as thou would, how art thou able to
frame an other to thy mind? We desire that other men should be perfect, and we
in the mean time do not correct our own faults. We will that other men be
severely corrected, and we our selves refuse to be corrected. The immoderate
licenciousnesse of others does mislike us: we our selves in the mean time will
not suffer the foil. Other we will have to be brideled with laws, we our
selves do not suffer our selves any more to be kept under. By this it is
plain that we do not love another man as we love our selves. Truly if all
were perfect, what should there be that we should suffer at an other man's hand
for Gods sake? Now, it has so seemed good to God that we should learn one of
us to bear the burdens of another, in as much as no man is without fault, no
man is without his burden, no man is sufficient to himself, no man is wise
enough for himself: but that it is necessary for one of us to bear with
another, to comfort one another, to help one another, to instruct one another,
to admonish one another. Now is it more easily declared by occasion of
adversity, how virtuous and godly every man is. For the occasions do not
make a man frail, but do show what manner of fellow he is.

Of solitary life. The.xvij. Chapter.
THou must learn to break thy self of many things, if thou will maintain
peace and concord with other: If thou will stand uprightly, and come forward,
see thou think thy self to be but a banished man and a Pilgrim upon the
earth. Thou must be made a fool for Christ's sake, if that thou will lead a
godly life. The garment and shorn head make nothing to the He means not
Munkish life.
purpose: but it is the changing of our conditions, and the full mortifying of
our old Adam, that causes a man to be godly in deed. He that seekth any
thing else then mere God, and the salvation of his own soul, the same person
shall find naught else but miseries and sorrows for his labor. Neither can he
long time abide in quietness of mind which endeuoreth not to be the least of
others and to be subject unto all men. Thou have come into this life to be a
servant, and not to bear rule. Weete that thou art called to suffer and
labor, and not to pass thy time in idleness and vain tatteling or
communication. Men are here tried as gold in the furnace. No man can stand
upright in this life, but such a one as wysheth to keep down himself in his
heart for Gods sake.

Of the examples of godly Fathers. The.xviij. Chapter.
Behold the seruent and zealous examples of those godly Fathers in whom very
perfection and godliness of life did glister, and thou shall see how slender,
and in a manner nothing at all it is that we our selves do perform. Alack,
what is our life if it be compared with theires? Those godly men and friends
of Christ did serve the Lord in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness, in
traueyle and weariness, in watchings and fastings, in prayers and virtuous
cogitacions, in many persecutions and spytefull oblaquies or reproaches. How
many and how grievous miseries did first the Apostles suffer: after them the
Martirs, Confessors, Virgins, and in fine all the other that ever desired to
follow the steps of Christ? For they hated even their own souls in this life,
that they might keep the same for life everlasting. O how severe, how
unpleasant a life did those holy Fathers pass over in solitariness? How long
and grievous temptacions did they patiently abide? How many times were they
vexed of the enemy? How many and how fervent prayers did they offer unto God?
With how great severity did they show themselves continent and chaste? With how
great study and exceeding love did they travail to come forward in ghostly
things? how sharp war did they keep in taming of their vices? Of how
sincere and upright mind toward God were the same endued? Whilst the day
did last, they labored in their vocation: in the night time they gave
themselves to prayer unto almighty God: and yet whilst they were at labor,
they did not cease from the prayers of the mind: to be short, they employed
the whole time to profitable uses, and every hour occupied in the
contemplation of God, seemed but short: insomuch that for the very sweetness
they had to think on heavenly things, they did even forget the necessity of
regarding and looking to their bodies. They renounced all riches, authorities,
honors, friends, kinsfolk, neither did they covet to enjoy any worldly
thing. To be short, they scarsely applied necessary things to the maintenance
of their life, in so much that they were sorye also, through very necessity to
become slaves unto their bodies. Therefore they were poor in earthly things,
but in the favor of God and virtues they were very rich: and being needy
outwardly, were inwardly refreshed with the grace and comforts of God. They
were divided from the world, but very near and familiar friends unto God:
They were both in their own judgment of no regard, and in the sight of the
world despised persons and abiects: but of God they were accounted very great
and excellent. They were constant in true modesty: they lived in simple
obedience: they abode still in charity and patience, and did therefore profit
daily in the spirit, and had great favor at Gods hand. In fine, they ought to
be an example and spectacle to all godly persons, and more to provoke us to go
forward manfully, then the multitude of such as are but warm in virtuous life
ought for to hinder us. How great was the feruencie of all the godly at the
beginning of that holy profession of theirs? How great devotion of prayers? How
great emulation of virtue? How straight and severe discipline did reign among
them? How great reverence and obedience did flourish in them all under the rule
of their master? The monuments yet remaining do witness, that those men were
holy and perfect in deed, who subdued the world in fighting so stoutly. And
now he is accounted great, so that he offend no laws, so that he can
patiently bear the wrongs that are done unto him. O the sluggithnesse of our
time and state, that so soon do decline from the old zeal, and are weary
of life for faintness and warmenesse. Would to God the profiting in virtues
did not wholly sleep in us, which have many times seen so many examples of the
godly.

Of the exercises of one that is the child of God in deed. The.xix. Chapter
THe life of the godly man ought wholye to excel in all kind or virtues, that
he may be such a one inwardly, as he seems to the world outwardly: nay
rather, he ought for good cause to be much more inwardlye then he is seen
outwardly. For that God is he that does behold us, whom we ought highly to
reverence in what place so ever we be, and to walk in purity and cleanness of
life in his sight, after the manner of Angels. We ought every day to renew our
determined purpose of good life, and as though we were turned from sin unto
good life but this day first of all, even so to quicken and stir up our
selves unto earnest desire, and to say as follows: Help me, O my Lord and
God, in my good purpose, and holy worshipping or serving of the: and grant
unto me to make a perfect entrance and beginning this present day. For that
which I have hitherto done, is nothing at all. Great diligence is needful for
this our purpose of running and coming forward, in case we will rightly bring
to an end that thing which we have begun. For if he which takes this
business in hand valiantly, is yet many times tired withal: what shall that
man do, which begins the same but seldom, or inconstantly? Surely, the
forsaking of our purpose does chance diverse ways, and the least omitting of
spiritual exercises that can be, scarce happens without some hinderance and
loss. The determination or decree of the just depends upon Gods favor, and
not upon their own wisdom, unto whom they always trust, whatsoever they
take in hand. For man in deed does propose, Man does propose and God does
dispose.
but God does dispose. Neither is it in man's hands how the thing that he does
shall fall out in the end. If the acustomed exercise of our decree or purpose
be at any time let pass, either for pity or brotherly profit, the same may
soon be called back again: but if it be slightly given over for a time,
either for tediousness or necligence of mind, then is the same a great fault
in us, and is cause of hurt. Though we endeavor to the uttermost of our power,
yet shall we quickly offend in many things. Nevertheless, some certainty
must always be appointed, especially against those vices which be a let unto us
above the rest. We must as well search and set in good order and frame the
outward, as the inward things, because they are both necessary to our coming
forward in godliness. But if thou can not incontinently call for an
accoumpt of thy self, yet do it sometime at the least wise, and once every
day at the least: namely, either at the morning or at night. At night decree
with thy self what thou will do in the morning: At night examine thy manners,
how thou have borne thy self in words, in deeds, and in thoughts: for in
these things perhaps thou have oftentimes offended both God and the World.
Arm thy self against the wickedness of the devil, as becomes a stout
fellow. Bridle thy gluttonous appetite, and so shall thou Of Idleness comes
no goodness.
bridle all desire of the flesh the better. Be never altogether idle, but
always either read or write, pray or think, or do somethyng to the common
profit. We must have respect in using of the exercises and tamings of the
body, neither are they to be practiced of al men alike. They ought not to be
done abroad which are not common. For things private are exercised with more
safety at home. Nevertheless thou must beware least thou be slow in things
that be to be done abroad, and more ready to thy private things: but rather
having done thy duty and vocation, if there be any further leisure, restore
thy self home according as thy profession in godliness does require. All men
cannot have one kind of exercise, but diverse exercises, be convenient for
diverse persons. Again, diverse exercises do please according to the diversity
of times: as that some should more like on the holidaiest and some other
again on the working days. Some we have need of at the time of our
spiritual sight: some again in the time of our peace and rest. It does us
good to think upon some things whilst we are in heaviness. And some other
things it likes us to occupy our minds upon, whilst we are joyful in the
Lord. Good exercises are to be renewed oftentimes, especially upon the holy
days, as though at that time we were departing out of this life, and going to
the everlasting holydaies. Therefore ought we at that time to prepare our
selves with carfulness, and to show our selves more Godly, and to do Gods
commandments more straightly, as men that shall receive reward of our
traueyle at Gods hand ere it be long. But if our departure be deferred, let us
believe that we are not well prepared, and that we are yet unworthy of so
great glory that is to be given unto us at the certain and appointed time,
and let us endeavor to prepare our selves more diligently to our end. Blessed
is that servant (says Luke the Evangelist) whom the Lord at his coming
shall find watching. Know ye this for a certainty that he shall be made
chief over all his goods.

Of the love of solitariness and silence. The.xx. Chapter.
Seek for an apt and convenient time to be at leisure, and think oftentimes
upon Gods benefits: and letting pass curious things, be oftentimes reading
of such matters as the mind may rather be pricked or stirred up withal, than
occupied. For if thou shall withdraw thy self from superfluous communication,
and from idle gaddings about, and also from hearing of strange things and
rumors, thou shall find both leisure sufficient, and also convenient enough
for the exercising of good thoughts. Even so the godlyest sort did shun the
conversation of the world, (when they might conveniently) and did desire
rather to live seperatelye or apart unto God. A certain man said: As often as I
have been among men, I have returned home a man less than I was before. For
we have proof of this thing many times, when we babble together any long
time. It is an easier matter altogether to hold ones peace, than not to pass a
measure in his words. It Much talk causes sin.
is an easier matter to keep at home closely, than to keep him vprightlye
abroad from sinning. Therefore, who so strives to come to inward and
spiritual things, he must decline from prease and multitude with Christ Jesus.
No man comes abroad safely, but The properties of a good man.
he which keeps at home willingly. No man rules safely, but he which is
subject willinglye. No man commands safely, but he which has learned to
obey gladly. No man rejoices safely, but he which has ye testimonye of a good
conscience. No man speaks safelye, but he which keeps silence gladly.
Nevertheless, the security and quietness of the virtuous, has always been
full of the fear of God: neither have they been the less careful and humble
of spirit, although they did excel in great virtues and heavenly gifts. But
the security of the wicked does come of pride and haughtiness, and at length is
turned to the deceyuing of themselves. Never promise unto thy self safety in
all things, whilst thou live in this world, though thou seem godly and a
despiser of worldly things. Many times has it happened that they have been in
great danger for their overmuch confidence and presumption, which by the
judgment of the world were counted better than other men: By which it is
brought to pass that for many it is more profitable not wholly to be void of
temptacions, but often to be tempted, least perhaps they being to careless,
should be puffed up with pride, or least thereby they should run the more
licenciously to outward comforts. But if a man would never seek joy at the
world, if he would never make nor meddle with the world: Good LORD how
unspotted a conscience should he evermore retain and keep? If a man would
cut off all vain carfulness, and think only upon soul health and heavenly
matters, and put his whole trust in God only: O Lord how great peace and
quietness should the same party enjoy? No man is worthy of heavenly
comfort, but he which shall exercise himself diligently in the godly taming of
himself: which taming of thy self, if thou would come unto, get into thy
Chamber, and shut out the tumults or stirs of the world like as it is
written. Fonder ye upon these things in your Chambers closely and secretlye.
Thou shalt many times find in thy Cell or Closet, that which thou shall
forgo abroad. Thy Cell being continually frequented, wareth sweet: the same
again being negligently used, is cause of tediousness. But if at the
beginning of the amendment of life thou shall rightlye frequent the same, and
shall keep thy self therein, at length it will fall out that nothing shall be
more pleasant unto thee, nothing more full of comfort. In silence and
quietness does the Godly soul with silence does the godly soul learn the
mysteries of the scripture.
go forward, and does learn the mysteries of the Scriptures. In them he
finds whole fluds of tears, with the which he may every night wash and make
clean himself, to become so much the more familiar to his Creator, the
farther of he lives from all carfulness of the world. Therefore that person
that withdraws himself from his acquaintance and friends, is resorted unto
of God himself and of his holy Angels. It is better to live closely and to
have regard unto a man's own salvation, than with the contempt of himself even
to work miracles. Laudable it is to ye godly person seldom to go abroad, to
fly to be seen, to be unwilling also to see other men. Why desire thou
to see that which is not lawful for thee to have and enjoy? The world
perishes, and the desire thereof: the lastes of pleasure do allure to roauing
abroad: but after the time is once past, what good have thou gotten thereby,
unless it be deep repentance, and vain wandering about of the Soul? A merry
going forth is oftentimes cause of a sorrowful returning: and a joyful
Evening watch does cause a sad Morning. Thus the whole joy of the flesh does
enter in with a flatteryng countenance: but at length it nyppeth and stays.
What can thou see else where, that This contemplation is hadin natural
Philosophy.
thou may not behold here in thy Cell: Lo, where the Heaven and the Earth
and all the Elements are. For of these are all things created. What can
thou see any where that does long endure in his being is Perchance thou
think to be satisfied with such contemplation: but that shall thou never
attain unto. If thou could behold presently even all things that ever are,
what should they be else but a vain spectacle and sight? Life up thine e^^^
aloft unto God, and The duty of a christian man.
crave pardone for thy sins, and offenses, Give over vain things unto vain
persons, and busye thou thy self about those which GOD does command to
meddle with. Shut thy self close within thy house, and call thy beloved Jesus
unto thee. Abide still with him in thy self: for elsewhere shall thou never
find so great peace. If thou had not gone abroad, nor heard any rumors
of things thou should sooner have continued still in quiet peace. Now,
seeing that it does sometime delight thee to hear noueltyes, it falls out
that thou must be feign to bear the trouble and unquietness of the soul.

Of Chastising thy soul, and keeping the same in awe. The xxi. Chapter.
IF thou will any thing come forward, hold fast the fear of God, and be not
over dissolute or retchelsse, but keep in all thy powers under discipline: and
yield not thy self up to vain and transitorye joy of the world. Addicte
thy self to a correcting and chastinyng of thy soul, whereby thou shall find
godliness. Great is the commoditye of such chastisement and exercise, which
slothfulness and sluggerdy is went soon to destroy. A wonder it is that any
man can ever rejoice truly in this world, which considers and waieth
thoroughly his own banishment, and so many dangers of his soul. For the lack
of due consideration, and by means of our dullness we do not feel the
sorrows of our mind in our offenses: but many times do laugh with lightness,
when rather we had good cause to weep, if we did look well unto it. There is
no true liberty or substantial joy in any thing, saving in the fear of God
joined with a good conscience. Happy is the man that is able to cast away the
impediments and lets of all worldely things, and yield himself wholly to the
chastining of his soul. Happy is he that renounceth and puts from him
whatsoever may stain and burden his conscience. Fight like a man: Custom is
maistred with custom. If thou can persuade thy self not to meddle in other
men's matters, they likewise shall not have to do with thine. Procure not thy
self another man's charge, or inwrap not thy self with the causes of thy
betters. Have chiefly thine eyes always bent upon thy self, and admonish or
warn thy self more than all other of thy dear friends besides are wont. If
thou be boyde of the favor and good will of men, do not admonish thy self
with an evil will, but rather take it grievously that thou do not so well
and circumspectly behave thy self as it becomes the servant of God and the
person virtuous in deed. It is both more profitable and more safe for a man
many times to have few comforts in this life, especially worldely: for in that
we either have not, or do seldom feel such co^forts as God does minister:
we our selves are therefore to blame, which neither seek after the pricks of
conscience, nor yet wholly cast away vain and outward comforts. Weete thou well
that thou art not only unworthy of divine comfort, but also worthy of great
myserie. If a man be at any time pricked with the true sorrows of heart, it
comes to pass thereby that the whole world is bitter and yrkesome unto him.
The good man finds sufficient causes to be sorye and to weep or mourn: For
whether he consider himself, or else look upon an other man, he sees that no
body lives without calamity in this world: and the more deeply be
considers himself, so much the more grieuouslye hoth he sorrow. Now, the
causes of due sorrow and prick of conscience are our own sins and vices, in
the which we do so lie weltred and wrapped, that we are seldom times able to
behold the heavenly things. If thou would more oftentimes muse upon thy
death, than think upon longnesse of life, there is no doubt but that thou
would work the amendment of thy self the more earnestlye. Again, if thou
would thoroughly way in thy mind the torments that shall be in hell,
gladly I think thou would sustain labor and sorrow, and would not be
afearde of any severity and straightness applied to thy self. But because
those things are not suffered to sincke deeply into our minds, and for that
we are yet in love with flattering shows of the world, it happens that we
continue still to remain cold and slow, many times poor and needy of the
spirit of God, whereby our wretched body takes occasion quickly to complain
and moan. Wherefore make thy prayer unto God with humbleness of heart, that he
will stir up his heavenly sparks and motions in thy soul, and say thus
with that Prophet: Feed me, O Lord, with the bread of tears, and wash away
my Cup with mourning.

The consideration of man's miseries. The.xxij. Chapter.
THou art a wretch, whersoeuer thou be, and whither soever thou turn thy
self, unless thou turn thy self unto GOD. Wherefore art thou troubled or
disquieted when things frame not according to thy hearts desire? What is he unto
whom all things fall out as he wishes? It is not I, it is not thou, it is not
any man living beside: I say, there is no man living void of all calamity and
traueyle: no not the King, no not the Pope himself. Who is then in the best
case of all others? even he that is able to suffer some thing for Gods sake.
Most of them that are weakelings and frail do commonly say: Ah, see how
happily he lives yonder, how welthy he is, how mighty he is, in how great
honor he is, what a big man he is, what a well favored man he is. But look
thou upon the heavenly good things, and thou shall see that all these good
things of this mortal life are nothing to be accounted of, bring altogether
uncertain and burdensome, as the which we never do possess without
carfulness and fear. The felicity of man does not consist in the plenty of
such manner of good things: but rather a measure ought to be sufficient unto him
therein. For to live bent unto the earth, is very misery indeed. The more
divine or heavenly that every man does covet himself to be, so much does
this life become the more unpleasant unto him: to weete, the more he both
feels and clearly sees the offenses of man's corruption. For to eat, to
drink, to watch, to sleep, to rest, to traueyle, and to be subject to all the
other necessities of nature, is unfeignedly great misery and calamity to the
godly person, who coueteth to be set free and at liberty from all manner of
sin. For grievously is a man pressed down with the necessities of the body
in this life: and therefore does the Prophet make humble prayer in these words
to be delivered from them: O Lord, draw me out of my necessities. But
wretched are they that know not their own miseries: and again more wretched,
which do love this misery and mortal life, which some do so far embrace
(whereas nevertheless through their traueyle and carfulness they can scant
yet get themselves but necessary things) that if they might live here
evermore, they would pass nothing at all on the kingdom of God. O mad brains
and faithless persons, who The end of carnal things.
lie drowned so deeply in the earth, that (like wretches) they have naught
else in their minds but carnal things, and shall once at the length feel,
not without torment, how vile and nothing it is that they have loved so much.
But those good men of God and all the virtuous sort, as many as ever were
christ's friends, did not look upon those things that did please the flesh,
or that did make a goodly show for this present time, but with all hope and
greediness did breath to everlasting good things, and with their whole heart
were carried unto the highest and the invisible things, least they should be
drawn down to the lowest things through the leave of the visible. O brother, do
not despair in coming forward in godly things. As yet thou have time and
space: why then do thou put of thy purpose No time to late, to repent and
amend thy life.
from day to day? Arise and begin out of hand, and reason thus with thy self:
now is the time to be doing: now is the time to be fighting: now is the time
to repent and amend thy life. In roughness and adversity is the time to
deserve. Thou must pass through fire and water before thou come unto
refreshing and comfort: Except thou minister violence unto thy self, thou
shall not master sin. So long as we bear about this frail body of ours,
we can not live without irkesomnesse and sorrow. In deed we would feign have
rest from all wretchedness: but because through sin we have lost our
innocence, we have also forgone our true happiness and felicity. Therefore we
must hold us still unto patience, and awaite for the mercy of God, til such
time as unrighteousness pass away, and this mortality of ours be swallowed
up of life. Lord God, how great is man's frailty, which evermore Man's
frailetye prone unto sin.
is prone unto sinning? This day thou confessest thy sins, and having
confessed the same, to morrow thou co^mittest them again. Now presently thou
determinest to beware and take heed: and within an hour after, thy doings be
such, as though thou had not determined at all. Therefore great cause have we
to keep under our selves, and never to have any great good lyking of our
selves, which are so frail and unconstant. It may also be sone lost with
negligence which with much traueile has scantlye been attained by the help of
God. What shall become of us at the last, that do wax warm so soon? Woe be to
us that thus traueile unto rest, as though there were peace and security
already, when as no token of true godliness does yet appear in our conditions.
Surely we have need to be instructed unto good manners afresh again like young
beginners, if happily there be any hope of amendment and greater profiting in
heavenly things.

Of the meditacion of death. The.xxiii. Chapter.
Seeing thy life shall have an end Man's life compared to a flower.
so quickly, look well about thee. Man flourishes to day: to morrow he is no
where, and being taken out of the sight of the world, is by and by also
forgotten of the same, O blockishnesse and hardness of man's heart, which
thinking only upon things present, has no regard to that that shall come
after. Thou ought in such wise to behave thy self in all, both deed and
thought, as though thou were ready to die by and by. If thou had a good
conscience, thou would not much fear death. Better it is to beware of
sin, than to fly death. If thou be not in a readiness to Death not to be
feared, but sin to be eschewed.
day, how will thou be ready to morrow? The day following is uncertain: How
know thou whether thou shall live till to morrow or no? What preuayleth it
to live a great while, when we be so little amended in our lives? Surely long
life does not always make a man better: Nay oftentimes it increases sin.
Would to God we had behaved our selves well in this life but one days space.
Many do reckon the years of their amendment and repentance, when oftentimes
the fruit thereof is but slender. If it be a terrible thing to die, perchance
it is a more perilous thing to live any longer. Happy is he that has
evermore the hour of his death before his eyes, and frames himself every
day to die. If thou have ever seen a man dye, think that thou must pass the
same way to. Be in doubt in the Morning whether thou No man can warrant his
life one hour.
shall live till the Evening: And again, at night be afearde to promise thy
self life till Morning: and always be in such a readynesse, and live in such
sort, that death mays never find thee unprovided. Many die so, dainely, and
when they look not for it: for the son of man will come when we think not
of his coming. When as that last hour shall come, thou shall begin to think
much otherwise of the whole life passed, then thou did before, and shall be
in deep sorrow and heuinesse for that thou have been so necligent and so
slack. O happy and wise man, who endeavors now to be such a one in his
life, as he wishes to be found at the time of his death. For the perfect
contempt of the world, the earnest desire of coming forward in virtue, the
love of discipline or good form of living, the labor of repentance, the
ready mind to obey, the denial of himself, and the suffering of every
calamity for the love of Christ, are cause of great hope to die well and
happily. Thou art able to do many things well whilst thou art in health: but
being sick I know not what thou shall be able to do. For few are made better
through sickness, and they that drive of the amendment of their life until
that time, are seldom times made Gods servants. Better it is to repent, and to
live so now whilst thou may, as after thou may live for ever. Otherwise,
if thou forgo this occasion and opportunity, thou shall afterward seek for
it to late: and the time shall be when perhaps thou shall in vain desire to
have no more but one day and one hour to amend thy life. Therefore bestirre
thy self, and wey deeply from how great danger thou shall be rid: how great
a mischief thou may avoid, if thou always warily foresee death. Endeavor so
now presentlye to live, that at the hour of thy death thou may rather
rejoice than be afearde. Learn now to die to the world, that then thou may
live with Christ: Learn now to contemn all things, that then thou may
freely pass forward unto Christ: Subdue thy body now with repentance and
amendment of life, that thou may have assured confidence and trust in Christ.
Ah fool, wherefore do thou think that thou shall live long, seeing thou have
no warrant for one day here? How many have been deceived, and taken out of the
world suddenly? How many times have thou heard it spoken? He was slain with
the Sword: that man was drowned in the water: That man fell down and broke
his neck: He dyed with meat in his mouth: He ended his life in playing:
another with fire, another with sword, another with plague or pestilence,
another was slain of thieves? Thus death is the end of all: and the life of
men passes away like a certain shadow. Who shall help thee when thou art
dead, if thou forgo the occasion when thou are alive? Now, now I say, it is
time to be doing, whilst both thou art ignorant of the hour of death, and
may also safely look to thy self against the time to tome. Whilst thou
have time, heap up unto thy self immortal riches, and think upon nothing
else but upon thy salvation, and pass only upon heavenly things. Procure
thee friends now, that may receive thee when thou art dead into everlasting
tabernacles: Become a Pilgrim and stranger on the earth, as unto whom
worldely business does nothing belong. Have a soul free and lyfted upward
unto god, seeing thou have no long dwelling or aboade in this life. Dyrect thy
Prayers and daily sighyngs with tears unto that place, that thy spirit after
death may blessedly flit unto God.

Of the last judgment of God and punishment of sinners. The.xxiiij. Chapter.
IN all things have an eye to the end, and after what sort thou shall stand
before that severe Judge, from whom nothing is hid who neither is pacified with
bribes, nor allows unreasonable excuses, but does judge according to
uprightness and truth. O wretched and foolish art thou, O thou sinful man:
what answer will thou make unto almighty God, which knows all thy sins,
who sometimes fear the countenance of an angry man? why do thou not
look unto thy self against the day of that judgment, wherein no body can be
excused or defended by his Attorney? For every man shall have enough to
answer for himself. Now is thy labor profitable if thou list, now is thy
mourning accepted, now may thy sighing be hard, and thy repentance pacify
God, and purge thy self. And wholly is the pacient man purged after a healthful
sort, who receiving injury, is more sorry for the wickedness of an other man,
than for the wrong that is done unto himself, and gladly craves pardon for
his enemies, and forgyueth them with his heart, and does not slack or foreslow
the time himself to ask forgiveness of them: and sooner pittieth than is
angry, and oftentimes does use violence and compulsion to his own self, and
endeuoreth to make his flesh wholye subject unto the spirit. Now these things
are not to be driven off from time to time, but must be practiced in this
life, and that also quickly. Howbeit, we surely do deceive our selves through
the inordynate love of our flesh. I pray you what else shall that fire burn
than sins? The more thou shalt now favorably yield unto thy self, and
shall obey thy flesh, so much the more gryeuous punishment shall thou suffer
afterward, and so much the more plentiful matter shall thou heap up to thy
self to be burned. For look in what things every man has sinned, in the same
shall he be punished again, according to the greatness of the sin. There
shall the slothful be pricked with hot burning pricks. There shall the
Gluttons be tormented with bitter hunger and thyrst. There shall the lecherous
and lovers of pleasures be bathed in burning Pitch and stinking Brymstone.
There shall the envious howl out like mad Dogs, and every vice shall be
punished with his own torment. There shall the proud be overwhelmed with all
reproach and rebuke, and the covetous persons shall be vexed with most my
serable needinesse. To be short: there one hour of punishment shall be more
tedyous and paynefull, than was a long time here in the betteryng of our
manners. There the wretches have no rest, no comfort: but here yet is somewhat
a pawse of sorrow, and the comforting of our friends does quiet our hearts.
Wherefore be careful now, and be sorry for thy sins, that in the day of that
judgment thou may safely rejoice with the blessed. For then shall the just
stand with great constancy against those of whom they have been vexed and
oppressed: Then shall he sit as Judge, which now humblye submytteth himself
to the judgment of men: Then shall the poor and modest person be of great
faith and trust, whilst the proud be in fear altogyther: Then shall he
seem to have been wise in this life, which learned to be a fool and an
abject for Christ his sake. Then shall the remembrance of misery patiently
suffered, be pleasant, when as all the unrighteous in the mean time shall be
mute and silent: Then shall all the godly rejoice, and all the ungodly shall
mourn and sorrow: Then shall the man that before was vexed, more triumph and
rejoice, then if he had been brought up in continual dainties: then shall
course apparel glister, and fine garments be dimmed and disgraced: Then shall
the poor cottage be more praised, then is now the gilded Palace: Then shall
constant patience help more, then all the power of the world: Then shall
simple obedience be more extolled, then all the subteltie of men: Then shall a
clean and good conscience more rejoice a man, then learned philosophy: Then
shall the contempt of riches be of greater price, then the whole treasure of all
the world: Then shall godly prayer cause greater comfort unto thee, then the
eating of dayntie meats: Then shall thou more rejoice for keeping of silence,
than for long bablyng: Then thy Godly deeds shall be of more power, than
abundant eloquence: Then shall straight life and austeritie in correctyng of
manners be more pleasant, than all earthly delectacion. Wherefore, learn now
to suffer small trifles, that then thou may be able to be delivered from the
heavier burdens. Examine before in this life, what afterward thou can well
abide. And in case thou can not now bear so small things, how shall thou
be able then to suffer everlasting torments? And if now so little a pain do
make thee impacient, what will Hell fire then make thee? For surely thou may
not be twyse happy or blessed, both to enjoy pleasures in this life, and
afterward to reygne also with Christ in Heaven. And now, put case thou have
hitherto lived in continual honor and pleasures: what good should all these
things have done thee, if it had chanced thee to dye out of hand? Do thou
not see that all things are but vain, beside the love and the service of God
only? For he that loves God with all his heart, the same fears neither
death nor punishment, nor judgment, nor Hell: because perfect love does make
safe access to almighty God. But it is no wonder if he fear death and
judgment, which yet takes delight in sin. Notwythstanding it is expedient,
if love do not yet reclayme thee from evil, that the fear of Hell fire do
at least wise bridle thee. But he that refuses the fear of GOD, the same
person can not long continue in goodness, but runs quickly into the trappes
and snares of the Devil.

Of the zealous amendment of our whole life. The.xxv. Chapter.
BE watchful and diligent in the Man's duty toward God, and whereunto he was
ordained, aptly described.
service of God, and consider whereunto thou wast ordained, and for what cause
thou have given over the world: namely, that thou might live unto God, and
become an heavenly person. Therefore be fervent to come forward: For thou shall
shortly receive the reward of thy traueyles, neither shall there be any fear
or sorrow afterward within thy bounds or limits. A little whiles shall thou
now labor and so shall find great rest nay rather continual joy. If thou will show thy self faithful or nimble still in doing, God undoubtedly will
declare himself faithful and bountiful in rewarding. Nourishe inwardly a
good hope to obtain the victory: but retchlessenesse must be avoided, least
thou be blunt and dull, or else do wax proud. There was sometime a certain
man, which carefullye tossed between fear and hope, did humbly say thus,
whilst he was in praying: O that I knew certainly that I should persevere: And
forthwith he hard this answer from GOD within himself in his own soul: And
what then if thou did know it? Would thou willingly do it? Go to then
do now but as thou would the^ have done, and have thou no doubt of
perseverance. He being forthwith confirmed with this comfort, did commit
himself to ye will of God, and so ceased his careful doubtfulnesse, neither
would he curiously search, what should become of him, but rather endeavored to
seek out what thing was convenient unto the will of God, and acceptable and
perfect unto the same, to begin and finish well doing. Put thy trust in the
Lord, and do well, says the Prophet, and thou shall inhabit the earth, and
shall be fed with the plenty thereof. One thing there is that withdraws many
men from coming forward and from fervent correction of themselves: The
horriblenesse of the difficulty of it, and the traueyle of the fight and
combat. Surely they do most of all other come forward in virtues, which
endeavor with their powers to conquer most grievous things, and such as are
most of all contrary unto themselves. For every man does come forward so much
the better, and obtain the more ample grace of god, as that the more he
overcomes and subdueth himself by Gods help. But a like power is not in all
men to overcome and mortify themselves: howbeit, the same that shall the more
diligently ytch forward this work, it is even he that shall be sturdyer or
stronger to move forth effectuallye, (though he must bear the mo things
patiently) tha^ an other, otherwise well enough fashioned of nature, and yet
somewhat sluggish to virtue. Now, two things there are chiefly that make much
for men to the amendment of themselves: that is, to withdraw themselves
violently from those things, unto which our corrupt nature is prone: and
again, to apply our selves with tooth and nail unto that good thing whereof
we have need. Again, thou must especially take heed of those things, and
master them which do most of all, and most often mislyke thee in other men.
Find the means that thou may take commoditye and advantage of all things:
that in case thou see before thine eyes, or hear of any examples of well
doing, that be kindled and provoked to do the like. But if thou perceive any
thing worthy dysprayse, we ought to correct our selves and not other?
take heed that thy self do not the like: or if at any time thou have so
done, quickly endeavor to amend thy self. Like as thou have thine eyes bent
upon other men, even so have other men likewise their eyes bent upon thee.
How pleasant and sweet a thing is it to behold zealous and Godly
Christians well nurtured, and obedyent to the dyscipline of Christ? And again,
how we ought to follow our vocation or calling.
sorrowful and grievous a thing is it to see men living inordinately, and not
exercising those things where unto they are called? how greatly hurtefull is it
to forsake the purpose of thy calling, and to bend thy self to those things
which are no point of thy charge? Be myndfull of thy purpose or profession, and
set the remembrance of Christ crucified before thine eyes: and when thou
beholdest his life, be ashamed of thy self, ye have not all this while showed
thy self more diligent in following of Christ his steps, whereas
nevertheless thou have a long time professed a Christian life. Surely, if the
Godly person do practice himself attentiuelye and with bent study upon that
most holy life of Jesus, and the torments of his passion, the same shall there
plentifully find all things profitable and necessary for him: Neither is it
needful for him to seek for any better thing beside Jesus Christ. If Jesus
crucified might enter into our heart, how soon and sufficiently should we
become learned? A fervent and zealous Christian man does, and bears with
facy, litie that which he is commanded: but if the same partly be negligent
and but warm, he then is pressed down with calamities upon calamities, and is
vexed round about with anguishe and sorrows: because he is both void of
inward comfort, and also forbidden to seek after the outward comfort. And
whosoever at all does go out of the bounds of the discipline of Christ, the
same is subject to a gryeuous fall: and he that seeks for a more loose and
siacke life, the same is always vexed and tormented, because there is evermore
somewhat that may myslyke him. Set before thee rather that straight life and
full of Godliness of those holy Apostles and Disciples of Christ, and make thy
reckening to follow their steps: and as touching the good will of God toward
thee, put no doubts but he wll readily grant strength unto thee for those
things. By this means thou shall become full of strength and hope: By this
means thou shall with an heavenly gate so traueyle thither, that thou may
despise all worldely things. And would to God we had nothing else at all to do
and to trouble us, but to praise God with our whole heart and mouth, and to do
his commandments. Would to God we being free from all worldly affairs, would
care only for heavenly things: for after that man is once come to that point,
that he seeks for comfort of no worldly thing: then at the length it comes
to pass, that GOD does begin in deed to smatter and savor unto him: and that
he takes all things in good worth, howsoever they fall out: and neither in
prosperity is puffed up with gladness, nor yet in afflictyons is disgraced
with heaviness, but commits himself altogether with confidence unto God,
which is all in all, unto whom nothing perishes or dies, but all things do
live and are obedient at his beck or call, without any delay. Look ever to
thine end, and Carfulness and diligence ye way to virtue.
remember well that lost time shall never return again: thou shall never
attain unto virtue surely without carfulness and dilygence. And if it shall
chance thee to wax warm, thou shall still be in case worse and worse: but
if thou will apply thy work with a zealous Soul, thou shall find perfect
peace, and shall feel thy labor to be more slight, both for the favor of God
toward thee and also for thine own love of virtue. A fervent and diligent man
is ready to all things. It is greater labor to resist vices and troublesome
affections of the mind, than to sweat with bodily labors. And he that
auoydeth not small offenses, the same by little and little, falls into
greater faults. Thou shall always rejoice at night, if thou have bestowed the
day fruitefully: watch unto thine own self, stir up and admonish thine
own self, despise not thine one self, whatsoever at any time does happen unto
other men. So much good shall thou do herein, after as thou shall enforce and
compel thy self.

The second Book.
Of the Inward life of Man. The first Chapter.
THE Kingdom of GOD is within you: (says the Lord.)

Turn thy self with thy whole heart to the Lord, forsaking this wretched
world and thy soul shall find rest. Leare to contemn outward things, and
to give thy self to the inward things, and so shall thou see the Kingdom of
God to come into thee. For the Kingdom of God is peace and joy in the holy
Ghost, which is not given to the godless or wicked. Christ will come unto thee
to give thee his comfort, so that thou will provide him a dwelling place meet
for him within thee. For the whole beauty and bravery thereof remains
within: there is he willingly conuersaunt: he makes often repair to the
inward man. To the inward man he has sweet communication, acceptable
comfort, much peace, singular familiarity. Come of thou faithful soul, and
prepare thy heart unto this Bridegroom, to the intent he may vouchsafe to come
unto thee and inhabit within thee. For thus he says. If any man love me, the
same will keep my sayings, and I and my father will come unto him, and dwell
with him. Therefore give a place unto Christ, denying to all other any
entrance unto thee: If thou shall have him thy guest, The receiving of Christ
into thy heart is the grea test riches thou can obtain.
thou shall then be rich and welthie. He will look unto thee, and so
faithfully do all thine affairs, that there shall be no need for thee to put
thy hope in men, for men are quickly altered, and swiftly break friendship: but
Christ abides still by it for ever, and is a constaunt help unto his servant
unto the very end. There is neither great trust nor affiance to be put in a
frail and mortal man, though he be profitable and thy dear fryend: neither
must thou greatly be sorry, if the same at sometime withstand thee and gain
say thee. Possible it is that those which be on thy side to day, be to morrow
against thee, and so co^trarilye (because they are often altered like the
wind.) Put thy whole trust and confidence in the Lord and so demean thy
self that thou may fear him, and that thou may love him. He it is that
will handle thy cause aright and set the same in very good order. Thou have no
permament dwelling place and aboade in this life: but whersoeuer thou become
thou art but a forreiner and a traueiler, that shall never attain to rest,
until thou be nighly joined with Christ. Why do thou gaze about thee here,
seeing this is not the place of thy rest? Thy dwelling ought to be in
heavenly things, and all things earthly must be looked upon by the way
only: that is, how al things do pass and vanishe, and thou likewise with the
same. Behold them in such wise that thou do not cleave fast unto them, least
thou being entrapped, do perish. Let Man's thoughts ought to be directed unto
God.
thy thoughts be directed unto almighty God, and call upon Christ Jesus with
prayers without intermission and ceassing. If thou can not tell how to
occupy thy mind in the contemplacion of high and heavenly things, yet rest
or stay in the passion of Christ, and dwell gladly upon his wounds. For if
thou shall relygiouslye fly to those healthsome wounds and stripes of Christ,
thou shall feel a great strengthening in thy adversity, and shall not much
pass upon the contempt of men, but shall with facility bear their false and
crafty accusations. Christ himself in the world was taken but for an abiecte
among men, and was in the midst of his rebukes forsaken of his acquaintance
and friends, at his greatest need. Christ himself would suffer and be
despised: and will thou dare to complain and moan for any thing? Christ had
adversaries and evil reporters: and wylt thou have all men to be thy friends,
and speak well of thee? How shall thy patience be exercised, if no
aduersitye shall happen unto thee? If thou will suffer nothing that is
contrary unto thee, how wylt thou be the friend of Christ? Thou must suffer
aduersitye both with Christ and for Christ, if thou will reign with Christ. If
thou have truly entered but once into the bowels of Christ, and had but a
little tasted of the feruentcie of his love, thou would not only nothing
pass upon thine own commodities or incommodityes, but also would rejoice
at thine infamye or slander. For the love of The love of Jesus causes a man
to contemn himself.
Jesus causes a man to contemn himself. I say the lover of Jesus, and the
true inward man, and one void of inordinate desires, is able freely to turn
himself unto God, and being lifted up in spirit above himself, to enjoy the
same God quietly. He which wayeth all things as they be in deed, and not as
they be called or supposed, the same is truly wise, and rather taught at Gods
hand than of men. He that can tell how to live inwardelye, and little to way
outward things, the same does neither require places, nor yet look after
times, to practyse his religious or Godly exercyses. The inward man does
quickly call home himself, because he never outwardely shows what he is
altogyther. The outewarde labor is no iet unto him, or his necessary
business for the time: But rather as all things do happen, even so does he
apply himself unto the same. He that is ordered and framed inwardely aright,
the same passes not upon the wonderful and preposterous manners of men. Every
man is so much hindered and distracted as he draws business unto himself.
If thou were rightly fashioned and purged substancially, all things should be
profitable and commodious unto thee. Therefore do many things myslike thee,
and do oftentimes Manythings does mislike thee because thou art not fully
mortified.
disquiet thee, because thou art not yet fullye mortified unto thy self, nor
separated from all earthly and transitorye things. Nothing does so much stayne
and entangle the soul of man, as the impure love of the creatures. If thou
shall despise the comforts of the external or outward things, it will come to
pass that thou may the better behold heavenly things, and oftentimes
rejoice triumphantly within thy self.

Of Modesty and obedience. The.ij. Chapter.
MAke no great accounte who is on thy side or against thee: but So God be with
thee, care not who is against thee.
be occupied and careful in this point, how God may be with thee in all thy
doings, and how thou may have a good and an upright conscience: so shall it
come to pass that GOD will sufficiently defend thee. For no man's frowardness
shall be able to do him any hurt, whom he shall be willing to defend. If
thou shall skill to hold thy peace, and to suffer or bear patiently,
undoubtedly to shall behold the aid and succor of the Lord. He knows
when it is time to deliver thee, and therefore ought thou wholly to commit
thy self unto him. It belongs to God to help, and to deliver man from all
rebuke and shame. It does many times much good to keep us under the better,
that our vices should be known and reproved of other men. Whilst that a man
does humble himself for his faults, he does soon pacify other men, and
satisfies them that are offended with him with little adooe: GOD does defend
and deliver the humble person: He humbles himself to him that is humble, he
bountifullye gives many things to the humble, and aduaunceth him unto glory
after his thrusting down: To the humble he opens his secrets, and draws
and allureth the same sweetly unto him. Though the humble person be spitefully
used and slaundered, or brought into an evil name, yet is he of quiet and
pacient mind, because he stays himself upon God, and not upon the world.
Think not that thou have profited any thing at all, unless thou take thy self
for the veryest abject of all other men.

Of the good and quiet person. The.iij. Chapter.
PUrchase and procure peace unto thy self first of all: so shall thou be abie
at the length to set peace among other. A quiet person does more good than one
well learned: But the unquiet and contencyous brawler does draw even that
which is good into the evil part, and quickly believes A perfect man
interprets all things, to the best.
evil. A good and quiet man interprets all to the best. He that is of quiet
mind, the same has no evil suspicion of any man: but he that is not content
with his state or condition, but is tossed with diverse suspicions, the same
party is neither quiet himself, nor yet suffers other to be quiet by him.
Many times he speaks that which he ought not, and lets pass that which
were expedient to be done: He considers what is another man's duty, and yet
his own duty he passes not upon. Wherefore look thou specially to thine
own duty, and so shall thou best look unto the duty of another man. Thou
have good skyll to excuse and bear with thine own doings, and yet thou
admittest not the excuses of others. More reasonable it were that accusing
thine own self, thou should excuse another. If thou will be borne with,
do thou likewise bear Do as thou would be done unto.
with another. And behold how far off thou art yet from perfect love and
modesty, which can tell how to take displeasure and be angry with no body, but
only with himself. If is no great matter to deal with good and quiet
persons, because that thing is naturally pleasant unto all men, and every body
wysheth for peace, and loves them above the rest that are agreeable unto him.
But to be able to live quietly with the rigorous and froward, with those that
withstand us, or men of evil nature and crooked conditions: this is in deed
the point of a ioly and valiant fellow, and one worthy of high praise and
commendation. And some there be that both live at peace with themselves, and
also with other men. Some other that neither enjoy peace themselves, nor yet
suffer other to enjoy the same. Troublesome surely are they to other, but yet
to themselves, they are always more troubesome. Some again there be that do
keep still themselves in peace, and also endeavor to reduce other men to peace.
Howbeit our whole peace in this wretched life is rather to be placed in modest
patience, than it is in not feelng of adversity. The more a man knows how to
suffer adversity patiently, the greater peace does he enjoy, and is likewise
both conqueror of himself, and Lord of the world, and friend of Christ, and
heir of Heaven.

Of the sincerity of mind, and plainness of meaning, The.iiij. Chapter.
MAn is raised above earthlye things with two wings: to weete, with
simplicity and sincerity. Simplicity is in meaning or wit: Sincerity is
in affection. The first applies it self to God. This other takes hold of
him, and tastes what he is. No good deed shall hinder thee, if thou will have
thy soul free from al inordinate affections. If thou will intend and seek
after nothing else than the will of God, and the profit of another, thou shall
enjoy liberty of mind. If thy Soul were right and sincere, the whole World
should be a glass to thy life, and a book of godly doctrine. For there is no
creature so small and so vile, that does not represent unto us the goodness of
God. Now if thou had a good and pure soul, thou should see all things
without any impediment, and should understand them thoroughly. For the pure
soul does pierce both Heaven and Hell, and such as every man's soul is, even
so does it judge of outward things. If there be gladness any where, the man
of pure heart does enjoy the same. Again, if there be calamity and anguishe
any where, no body knows it better than he that has an evil conscience.
Like as iron being cast into the fire is rid from his rust, and is made glowing
hot altogether, even so the person turning himself wholly unto God, does put
off his dullness and is changed into a new man. He that is but warm, flies
from so small pains and procures outward comfort: but if the same have begun
once earnestly to master himself, and like a man to tread the path of
Godliness, it happens that the things which before he felt heavy, he does
now reckon but for flight and easy.

Of the consideration of a man's self. The.v. Chapter
WE ought not to much to credit our selves, for many times we lack both
natural gifts and wit: we are endued with slender light of understanding, and
do soon forgo the same through negligence. Many times also we do not mark
and perceive that we are in such blindness and ignorance. And again, many
times we offend: and besides, excuse the woorser sin, and sometime, provoked
with desire we think it a good affection. We find fault with other men for
trifles: and we our selves do let slip our own faults that be greater. Those
things that other men do unto us, we feel very soon, and make deep account
of them: But we do not mark and consider what other men do carry away at our
hands. Undoubtedly, if a man do well and rightly consider his own doings,
the same shall have small cause to judge otherwise than well of an other man.
The inward man prefers the care of himself before all cares: And he that
does diligently intend himself, the same does soon hold his tongue about
another man. Thou shall never become inward and Godly, unless thou will say
nothing of another, and behold thy self with especial regard. If thou will
give thy self wholly to thy self and to God, the things that shall happen
outwardlye, shall but little move thee. Where art thou become whylest thou art
not present with thy self? or after thou have dealt with all things, what have
thou profited, thy self being yet neglected? That thou may attain to
perfect peace and concord, necessary it is that thou have thy self only
before thine eyes, neglecting al other things. So attainest thou perfect peace
and concord. Therefore thou shall both much profit and come forward, if thou A
ready way to godliness if you give over all worldly care.
give over all worldely care: and again, thou shall much decay in godliness,
if thou shall set store by any worldely things. Let nothing be in admiration,
nothing great, nothing welcome, nothing accepted of thee, but that which either
is God altogether, or belonging to God: and whatsoever comfort is offered of
the creatures, reckon all that but for vain and unprofitable. The soul that
is in love with God, despises all things in the respect of God. The
everlasting God only, without measure, filling all things, is the comfort of
the soul, and true joy of heart.

Of the joy of a good conscience. The.vi. Chapter.
THe glory of a good man consists in the testimony of a good A good
conscience is the testymony of a godly man.
conscience. Have always a good and upright conscience, and thou shalt enjoy
continual gladness of heart. A good conscience is both able to bear
patiently a great many of things, and in the midst of his adversity to
triumph also with joy: but one having remorse of sin within him, is always
fearful and unquiet. Thou shall take thy rest sweetelye, if thy conscience
do not accuse thee. Never joy but when thou have done well. The wicked never
either enjoy true gladness, or have the feel of peace of conscience because
the Godless (as the Lord says) are boyde of peace: But if they affirm that
they do live in peace, and yet say that they are not to be invaded with
adversity, and that no man dare to do them hurt, believe them not. For the
wrath of God shall be so great upon them suddenly, that both their doings
shall be brought to naught, and their thoughts perish. It is no hard thing for
him that loves, to boast on calamity. For so to boast, is to boast upon the
care and prouydence of GOD. Soon ended is the glory that is either given or
received of men: and heaviness does always accompany worldly glory. The
glory of the good stands in their own conscience, and not in the mouth of
men. The joy of the just is both of God and in God, The joy of the just is of
God, and in god.
and their joy is of the truth. He that desires true and everlasting glory,
the same passes not upon temporal glory: and he again that either seeks
temporal glory, or not despises the same with his heart, that person utterly
loves not the heavenly glory. Great quietness of mind has he which passes
neither for praises, nor rebukes and slanders. He shows himself soon
contented and quiet with his own state and calling, whose conscience is
clear. Neither art thou the more holy if thou be praised, nor yet the
naughtier if thou be dispraysed. Thou art as thou art: and can not be called
greater then as thou art in the sight and judgment of God. If thou will
consider what thou art within thy Soul, thou will not pass what men do
speak of thee outwardelye. Man sees thy face and outward shape, God
beholds thy mind: Man wayeth thy deeds, God is only the searcher of man's
heart.
God considers thine intents and meanings. Evermore to do well and to
esteem little of himself, is the token of a modest mind. To admit the
comfort of no worldely thing, is singular synceritie and cleanness, and an
argument of inward says and trust. He that seeks for no testimony of
himself from any creature, there is no doubt, but the same has betaken
himself whollye unto GOD. For he is not to be allowed which commends
himself, (says Paul) but he whom God commends. To have to do with God in
our Soul, and to be tossed outwardly with no affection, is the state of the
inward man.

Of the loving of Jesus above all things. The.vij. Chapter.
BLessed is he that understands what it is to love Jesus, and to despise
himself for Jesus sake. For loving, the person beloved must be forsaken:
forasmuch as Jesus will be loved only above al things. The love of worldly
things is deceytfull and unstable: But Jesus is faithful and durable. He that
cleaves fast to a worldely thing, the same shall perish with the thing
subject to decay and corruption: but he that imbraceth Christ, the same abides
still for ever. Love him, hold thee still to his friendship, which (when all
men go from thee) will not forsake thee, nor at the length suffer thee to
perish. Thou shall sometime be pulled from men whether thou will or no,
wherefore both living and dying, stick fast unto Jesus, and commit thy self to
his promise, which (when all men fail) is only able to help thee. He it is
that is thy friend, being of that nature and property, that he can abide no
other friend, but does only challenge thy soul unto himself, and sittes as
King in the seat thereof. Now if thou had skill to cast away the society
and meddling in all worldelye things, Jesus would willingly come and dwell
with thee. Thou shalt in manner find it all lost, whatsoever thou have
bestowed upon any body besides Jesus. Trust not or stay not upon the wavering
Reed. For all men are grass, and their whole glory does vanishe like a
flower. Thou shall soon be deceived, if thou shall only bend thine eyes upon
the outward show If thou trust upon ye outward show of man, thou shall soon
be deceived.
of men. For if thou shall seek thy comfort and gain in other things, thou
shall oftentimes suffer detriment or loss. If thou shall seek for Jesus in
all things, truly thou shall find Jesus: but if thou shall seek thy self,
thou shall find thy self in deed: howbeit, to thine own, destruction. For
every man does more hurt unto himself, if he seek not after Jesus, than the
whole world and all his enemies can do besides.

Of the familiar friendship of Jesus. The.viij. Chapter.
Whilst Jesus is present, al things are in good case, and nothing seems
difficult or heard: but when he is once absent, al things are uneasy. When
Jesus does not speak in the soul of man, every comfort is but of little force:
when the same does speak but one word, mere comfort is felt. So Marye
Magdalene did rise from the place wherein she wept, as soon as her Sister Martha
did bring her word that her Master was come, and that he did call for her.
Happy is that hour in the which Jesus does call thee from tears unto the joy
of the spirit. How dry and hard art thou without Jesus? How foolish and vain
art thou if thou covet any thing besides Jesus? with greater loss, no doubt,
thou do so, then if thou should leese ye whole world. For what good can
the world do thee without Jesus? To be without Jesus is bitter death: To be
with the same Jesus, is pleasant life: If Jesus shall The absence of Jesus is
bitter death.
be with thee no enemy shall be able to do thee hurt. He that finds Jesus
finds a good tresure, or rather the chiefest goodness of al other. He that
forgoeth the same Jesus, forgoeth too too great a commodity. And why have I
said to great? Nay he forgoeth more tha^ if he lost the world beside. He that
lives without Jesus, is very poor: he that agrees well with Jesus, is very
rich: to be conuersaunt with Jesus, is a point of great cunning: and to be
skilful in keeping of him thy friend, is a point of great wisdom. Be modest
and pacient, In modesty Jesus is present.
and so shall Jesus be present with thee: Be godly and quiet, and Jesus shall
abide still with thee. Thou shall soon drive the same Jesus away and shall
forgo his favor, if thou shall turn thy self to outward things. Now, if thou
leese him by driving of him away, unto whom then will thou fly for comfort?
Or what friend will thou then seek for? truly without a friend thou can
not long live: and if Jesus shall not stand thy friend above all other, thou
shall be sorye without measure, being once forsaken of him. Therefore thou
do foolishly if thou trust to any beside, or rejoice in any other. Better it
is to have the whole world against thee, than Jesus If Jesus be with thee
care not for the whole world.
only. Wherefore of all those that are dear unto thee, let Jesus be the
dearest: Let other be loved for Jesus sake, and let Jesus be loved for his
own sake. Jesus Christ alone is singularlye to be beloved, who among thy
friends is only found good and faithful. For his sake and in him, both thy
friends and enemies ought to be dear unto thee, and the same Jesus must be
prayed unto for them all, that all may know and love him. Never covet to be
praised and loved singularly: for this belongs to God, who has no peer or
equal, neither wish thou that any man's mind should be addicted wholly unto
thee, nor be thou occupied in the love of any man: but let Jesus be both in
thee and in all good men, have a clean and free soul, and such as is without
all let of worldely things. For thou must be clean and bring a sincere soul
unto Jesus if thou will give thy self to contemplacion, and behold how
sweet or pleasant the Lord is: And surely thou shall never get up to that
gryce, unless thou be prevented and drawn with his favor, that all things
being abolished and wholly rejected of thee, thou may be coupled unto him
alone. For if Gods favor be the mean between man and Jesus, it happens that
man is able to do every thing. If the same favor have once departed from a
man, he by and by is poor and weak, and as If a man be without the favor of
Christ, he is both poor and weak.
it were one left only for torments and whipping: which things whilst they
chance, thou ought not therefore to be discouraged, or yet to despair, but
to have a good hope of the will of God, and patiently to bear all thy
mysaduentures unto the praise of Jesus Christ. For Summer follows after
Winter, and the day retourneth again after the night, and great cleerenesse
comes after tempest.

Of the lacking or being without comfort. The.ix. Chapter.
IT is no hard matter to despise worldely comfort, so long as Gods comfort is
present with thee: But to be able to lack both worldelye and Heavenly
comfort, and willingly to suffer the banishement of the soul for the glory of
God, and to be affectionate toward himself in nothing, nor yet to behold his
own merit or reward: this surely is a great matter, or rather the greatest of
all other. What great thing is it, if whilst the favor of God is with thee,
thou be cheerful and godly? Who would not wish for that hour as well as thy
self? Pleasantly does he ride, whom Gods grace does carry: and what wonder
is it if he feel no burden that is carried of the Almighty, and conducted of
the highest Guide? Gladly do we cleave fast unto the comfort of some creature,
and hardlye does man renounce and forsake himself: yea, much and long time
must he fight or strive, before he learn fully to master himself, and to
draw all his powers unto God. So long as he stays upon his own self, he
quickly falls unto worldely comfortes: but the true lover of Christ, and the
studious follower of virtues does not turn unto those comforts, nor seeks
after such delites of the senses, but rather for vehement exercises, and for
straight labors for Christ's his sake. Therefore if at any time spiritual
comfort be granted thee of God, receive thou the same with thanksgiving, and
weete thou that it is gods gift, and not thy deserving, and be not proud
thereat. Rejoice not to much at thy gift, nor wax proud vainly, but be
rather so much the more modest, and in all thy deeds also the more wary and
fearful. For the time of that comfort shall pass away, and temptacion shall
come after. Therefore when comfort If thou want the spirit of God dyspayre not
but look for help at Gods hands.
is taken from thee, despair not forthwith but look after help at Gods hand
with modesty and patience. For God is able to endue thee again with a more
ample gift, and greater comfort: Neither is this thing strange or unwonted
unto them that have once made trial of the way of God. For men of greatest
virtue, and the ancient Prophets have assaied and felt such alteration in
themselves. Therefore a certain man endued with the Spirit of God, said
thus. Whilst I was in so great felicity, I thought I should never have been
disgraced again.

And when the same felicity was once taken away from him, he adds what
then happened unto him, in these words: Afterward when thou did hyde thy
face from me, I was troubled.

And yet all this while he dispayreth not, but prays unto God so much the
more earnestly, and says thus: I have made mine invocation unto thee, O Lord,
I have made supplication unto the Lord.

At the last he has the reward of his supplication, and testifies that he
was heard, saying: The Lord has heard me, and taken pity upon me. But
wherein I pray you? Thou (says he) have turned my sorrow into mirth, and ridding
me from my sackecloth, have clad me with joy. Now, if these things have
happened to men of so great holiness, we abiectes and needye persons must not
despair, although sometime we be in cold, and sometime we be in cold, and
sometime in heat: forasmuch as the spirit comes and goes according to his
will and pleasure. And for that cause Job says: Thou set so much store by
him, that thou have a regard over him, and daily do care for him, and
make proof or trial of him every hour.

Therefore in what thing else ought I to have hope, or whereunto else ought I to
trust but only to that mighty mercy of God, and heavenly grace? For though
I have good men and godly brethren, and faithful friends, or books of holy
scripture, and trim communicatio^, or sweet songs and balades with me, yet do
al these things little profit: They like me but a little, if (being forsaken of
Gods spirit) I be left unto mine own need or nakedness. At that time there
is no better remedy than patience and denial of thy self according to the
will of God. Surely I never chanced to talk with any Godly person, from
whom the spirit of God has not sometime been withdrawn, or which has not
felt a decrease of his heat. Neither has there ever been any holy man so
deeply ravished and lightened in soul, but that the same has some time at the
least been tempted, either first or last. For he is not worthy the high
contemplacion of God, who for Gods cause has not been exercised with some
miserye. For the temptacion going before, is wont to be a token of the comfort
that comes after. For heavenly comfort is promised unto them which have
been tried with temptacyons. He that shall overcome, says Christ, to him will
I grant to feed upon the Tree of life. And Gods comfort is granted that
man may be more strong to bear out adversity. And temptacion does follow,
least he should be to proud of that good commodity. The Devil sleeps not,
neither is the flesh yet mortified. And therefore never cease to prepare thy
self to battle. For the unquiet enemies are both upon thy right hand and thy
left.

Of thankfulness for the benefits of God. The.x. Chapter.
WHy do thou seek after quietness, seeing thou art borne unto labor?
Yield thy self rather unto patience than to comfort: and to bear the Cross,
than to joy and gladness. For what worldly man would not willingly live
always in spiritual comfort, if he might evermore have and obtain the same?
which comfort excels all the daynties of the world and pleasures of the
flesh. For all worldelye delites are either dishonest or vain: but the
spiritual are only pleasant, only honest, only causer of virtues, and
inspired of God into pure minds. But these comfortes of GOD are such, that no
man can enjoy them at his own pleasure, because temptacion does no long time
cease. The false liberty of the soul, and the overmuch confidence of a man's
own self, does much withstand the heavenly help or comfort: and God does well:
which bestows the benefit of his comfort upon man: but man does naught, that
does not acknowledge the same wholly to come from God with tha^kesgiuing.
Herevpo^ it happens that Gods gifts can not flow unto us, because we are
unthankful to the giver, and do not pour back al things into the fountain
and spring again. He that is thankful, does procure a new benefit: and that
is withdrawn from the hawtie unthankful, which may be bestowed upon the
modest thankful. I would not have comfort, that should take from me the
pricks of awe, neither is that the cause of understanding of things, which
hoysteth me up into pride. For whatsoever is high, the same is not also holy:
neither is every desire pure: neither is the same healthful, whatsoever is
sweet: Neither is the same also acceptable unto God, whatsoever is dear unto
me^. I receive those benefits willinglye, by the which I may be made the more
modest and fearful, and more ready to give over and forsake my self. He that
is taught and chastised with benefits received at Gods hand, and the same
afterward be taken from him again, the same dares not to attribute any
goodness unto himself, but rather confesses himself needy and naked. Give
unto GOD that which is Gods, and ascribe to thy self that which is thine own:
that is to say, give thanks unto God for his benefits, and attribute sin
unto thy self: and for sin think that punishments are due unto thee.
Reckon thy self always in the lowest place, and so shall the highest be given
thee. For there can be no highest, without respect of the lowest. Those account
themselves for the least, whom God reckeneth for chiefest, because of their
godliness: and the more full of glory they be, so much the more humblye they
behave themselves, being full of truth, and heavenly glory, not desirous of
vain glory. It is not possible any way that they should wax proud, which
stand stayde upon God: and they which ascribe unto GOD whatsoever goodness
they have attained, the same do not covet after mutual glory, but desire that
which is of God only, and covet that God both in himself and in all other
holy men may be praised above all things, and evermore dyrect their doings to
that end. Wherefore, show thy self thankful in small things, and thou shall
be worthy to attain to greater things. Let even the least and most base
gifts be reckened of thee for very great and notable. For if the worthiness
of the giver be considered, no gift or quality ought to seem small or course.
For it is no small gift that is given of the high and mighty God, insomuch
that if he do give even punishments and stripes, the same ought to be welcome
unto us, because it makes for our salvation whatsoever he suffers to happen
unto us. He that desires to keep still the grace and favor of God, let the
same show himself thankful for the benefits given him, and pacient when the
same be taken from him, and let him pray that they may come again, and let
him be chary, and modest, that he forgo them not.

Of the small number of the lovers of Christ his Cross. The.xi. Chapter.
Jesus has now many lovers of his heavenly kingdom: howbeit, he has few
bearers of his Cross: he has many desirous of comfort, but few of calamity:
He finds a great sort partakers of his table, but few of his continency.
All men will rejoice with Christ, but few will suffer affliction with him.
Many follow Jesus even to the breaking of bread, but few follow him to
drink of the Cup of his passion. Many men worship his miracles, but few do
follow the Ignominy of his Cross. Many do love Jesus so long as adversity
does not happen unto them: Many do praise the same Jesus and give him thanks,
so long as they receive some comfort at his hands. If the same Jesus do hide
himself from them, and forsake them a little while, they fall either into
complaynts and moanings, or else into overmuch despair of soul. But they
which love Jesus for Jesus own sake, and not for any comfort that they receive
of him, the same do magnify and praise him, as well in the calamities and
anguishes of the mind, as in their greatest comfortes, ready to do no less
although he should deny and bar them of all comfort for evermore. So much is
the mere love of Jesus able to do, being blended with no private commodity,
or love of himself. Therefore, they are to be called hirelings, which do
evermore seek after comforts. Plain it is that they are rather lovers of
themselves than of Christ, which do always ponder their own commodities and
gain. How many are there of a great number that will serve God freely and
without al respects, or which are so spiritual, that they are left bare and
destytute of all worldelye things? I say again: who can find one poor in
spirit and naked of all worldly things? and that precious fellow that must be
fetched from the furthermost coasts of the world? Though a man do bestow
all his goods, he has yet done nothing: and though he chastise himself with
a straight and earnest repentance of his sins, yet is it but a small matter:
and though he understand all knowledge, he is yet a great way off: and though
he be endued with singular virtue, and most earnest zeal of religion, he has
as yet a great deal lacking: namely this one which is marvelous necessary for
him. But what is that I pray you? Namely, that forsaking al other things, he
forsake himself to, and departing wholly out of himself, do keep still no
pryuate or self love. When he has done all things that he knows should be
done, let him think that he has done nothing, and let him not esteem it much
that he may be counted great, but let him pronounce himself an unprofitable
servant in deed, like as the truth says: When you have done all things
which are commanded you: yet say you thus, we are unprofitable servant. Then
shall he at the length be needy and naked in soul, and shall be able to say
with that Prophet. Solitary and needy am I. And yet is no man richer then
he, no man more free, no man more mighty, which both knows how to forsake
himself and all other things, and to debase himself to the very basest
things.

Of bearing of Christ his Cross. The.xij. Chapter.
THis seems a hard saying to many men: Deny thy self, take up thy Cross
and follow Jesus. But much more hard is that saying in the latter day: Get
you hence ye curssed, into fire everlasting. For they which now willingly hear
and follow the saying of the Cross, the same then shall not fear that heavy
sentence of everlasting damnation. And this sign of the Cross shall be in
heaven, when the Lord shall come to judge the world. Then all the servants of
the Cross which have led a life agreeable unto Christ that was nailed upon the
cross shall come unto Christ the judge, with great faith and trust. Why then
doubtest thou to take up thy Cross, by the which thou go to a kingdom?
Salvation is in the Cross: In the Cross is life: In the Cross is aid
against thine enymies: there is infusion of supernatural pleasure in the
cross: there is strength of mind in the Cross: there is joy of spirit in
the Cross: in the Cross there is exceeding virtue: in the Cross there is
perfection of Godliness. To be short, without the Cross, there is neither
health of soul, nor yet hope of everlasting life. Therefore take up thy Cross
and follow Jesus, and thou shall go into life everlasting. He went forth
beareing his Cross, and died upon a cross for thy sake, that thou might
bear a Cross also, and covet to die upon the Cross. For if thou shall die
together with him, thou shall also live together with him: and if thou shall be
a companion of his passion, thou shall also be a companion of his glory For
that thou may understand thus much, al things do consist in the Cross,
and in dying, neither is there any other way unto life and true peace of
soul, than the way of the Cross, and of daily mortifing thy self. Whither
soever thou turn thy self, on which side soever thou cast thine eyes thou
shall find no way any where above or beneath, neither more high or more safe,
then is the way of the Cross. Although thou order and fashion al things
according to thine own will and judgment, yet shall it not be possible but
that thou must evermore suffer somethyng either willinglye or against thy will,
and always incur the Cross. For either thou shall feel pain of body, or
be tormented with grief of mind. Sometime thou shall be forsaken of GOD:
sometime thou shall be exercised of an other man: and (which is more gryeuous)
thou shall be tedyous and yrkesome unto thine own self many times: and that
so far, that thou may be delivered by no remedy or comfort, but that thou
must patiently bear the same so long as it is Gods will and pleasure that it
shall so be. For God will have thee learn to suffer misery without comfort,
and to submit thy self wholly unto him, that thou may become the more modest
in calamity. No man feels the passion of Christ so much in his heart, as he
unto whom it chances to suffer the like things. Therefore the Cross is
always ready, and tarieth for thee every where, neither can thou escape it
whether soever thou run. For whether soever thou go, thou caryest thy self
with thee, and shall always find thy self. Turn thy self upward, turn thy
self downward, turn thy self outward, turn thy self inward, thou shall
find the Cross any manner of way: and necessary it is that at all times thou
keep patience, if thou will enjoy peace of mind, and obtain a perpetual
Crown. If thou will wyllinglye bear the Cross, the same shall likewise bear
and stay thee, and shall bring thee to the desired end: namely, whereas there
shall be an end of suffering, which end undoubtedly shall not be in this
life. If thou shall bear it against thy will, thou shalt cause a burden unto
thy self, and shalt agreeue and way down thy self the more, and yet must
needs bear it for all that. If thou shall cast away one Cross, thou shall
surely incur another and the same perhaps more heavy. Do thou hope that
thou shall escape that, which no man living could ever decline or turn from?
Which of the Godly men in the world has there ever been without his Cross
and misery? Our Lord Jesus Christ was not an hour void of sorrow and
torment, so long as he lived in this world. For it behooued Christ to suffer,
and to rise again from death, and so to enter his glory: and will thou seek
any other way besides this high way of the Cross? The whole life of Christ
was a cross and torment: and will thou seek rest and joy unto thy self? Thou
wandrest out of the way, thou wandrest out of the way, I say, if thou seek any
other mean then the pacient suffering of calamities: because this mortal life
of ours is altogether full of miseries, and hedged round about with Crosses:
and the more every man has profited in godliness, into so much the more
grievous Crosses does he fall, namely when the pain of calamity does increase
the more through love. And yet does not this man of whom I talk, being
pressed with so manifold calamities, lack the ease of comfort, for as much as
he also feels that he takes plentiful commodity and friut by this Cross.
For whilst that he submits himself of his own accord unto the cross, it
happens that the whole burden of calamity is turned into the trust of Gods
comfort: and the more the flesh is ouertourned with calamity, so much the
more is the spirit strengthened with the comfort of the soul. And so much is
he sometime confirmed in the feel of calamity and adversity (to great is the
love of the similitude of Christ his affliction,) that he wishes not to be
void of sorrow and misery, because he believes that he shall be so much the
more accepted of God, the mo and the more grievous things that he can patiently
bear for his sake. Neither does that thing chance by man's virtue and power,
but through the benefit of Christ, which can do so much, and brings so much
to pass in our frail flesh, that the thing which man naturallye does always
abhor and fly, the same yet he attempteth and loves through the feruentcy
of the spirit. It is not in man's reach to bear the Cross, to love the
Cross, to tame and subdue the body, to fly from honors, willyngly to take
reproaches and despites, to despise himself, and to wish to be despised,
patiently to suffer al adversities and losses, and to desire no manner of
prosperity in this world. None of all these things can thou do of thy
self, if thou shall depend upon thy self: but if thou shall put thy trust
in the Lord, strength shall be given thee from Heaven: and the world, and
the flesh shall be subdued unto thy rule and dominion. Nay, thou shall not
fear the enimitie of the Devil neither, if thou be armed with faith, and
marked with the Cross of Jesus. Wherefore, apply thy self (like as it
becomes the faithful and good servant of Christ) to bear the Cross of the
Lord manfully, nailed upon the Cross for thy sake, through very pure love. Be
thou ready to bear many adversities, and diverse incommodities in this
wretched life: for so shall it frame with thee whersoeuer thou shall live: and
this condition must be suffered of thee altogether whersoeuer thou shall lie
hid, neither is there any way in any place to escape the misery of
calamities, and sorrows, but that the same must be patiently suffered. Drink
thou of the Lords Cup greedilye, if thou covet to be his fryende and partner.
And as touching the comforts, commit thou them to God: let him use them
according to his good will and pleasure. Be thou wholly given to bear
calamities, and reckon the same for very great comforts.

Neither are the calamityes of this life counternayling the glory to come that
we shall at the length enjoy, although thou were able alone, and no body but
thy self to suffer them al. After that thou art come so far forward that it
is a sweet and pleasant thing unto thee to bear aduersitye for Christ his
sake, then think that thou art in good case, which have already found the
kingdom of heaven upon the earth, again, so long as thou shall be grieved to
bear them, and shall fly from them, so long shall thou be in evil case, and
the avoiding or flying from calamity shall vex thee every where. But if thou
shall apply thy self to thy duetye, that is to say, to suffer and mortify
old Adam, thou shalt shortly be eased, and shall find peace. Although thou
be wrapped with Paul, even into the third heaven, yet have thou no warrantize or
assurance that thou shall suffer no manner of adversity. I (says Jesus) will
show unto him how much he must suffer for my names sake. Therefore it is
necesiary that thou do suffer, if it like thee to love Jesus, and to serve him
evermore. And would to God thou were worthy to suffer some thing for the name
of Jesus. How much glory shall arise both unto thy self thereby, and joy to all
the saints, and profit unto men? For patience do all men commend, though few
be willing to suffer. Surely there is great cause why thou should be willing
to suffer a little for Christ his sake, seeing thou suffer much more paineful
things to compass the world. And wot thou well this, that thou must live by
dying unto thy self, and the more that every man does dye unto himself, so much
the more does the same wax alive unto God. No man is apt or fit to comprehend
heavenly things, but he which shall submit himself to bear adversity for
Christ his sake. Finally, nothing is either more acceptable unto God, or more
healthful unto thy self in this life tha^ willingly to suffer for Christ: in
so much that if thou be put to thy choice, thou ought to desire rather to
suffer adversity for Christ, tha^ to be refreshed with many comfortes. For so
shall thou be the liker both unto Christ and to al his holy servants. Neither
is our merit and the coming forward in our duty consisting in plentye of
pleasures and comforts, but rather impacyent bearing of grievous euilles and
calamities. Now, if there had been any better way, or more healthful unto man
than to suffer adversities, no doubt Christ would have showed the same unto us
by his words and deeds. But now he exhorts his disciples and followers, and
all those that are desirous to do as he did, manifestly to bear the Cross,
and that in this wise: If any man will follow me, let him renounce himself,
and take up his Cross and follow me. Therefore al things being read over and
tried, let this be the conclusion of our talk: we must enter into the
kingdom of God by many calamities.

The third Book.
Of the inward communication of Christ with the faithful soul. The first
Chapter.
IWil hear what the Lord GOD speaks within me. Blessed be the soul, which
hears the Lord speaking within him, and receives the word of comfort at
his mouth. Blessed are the ears that receive the sound of that noise that God
makes unto them, and take no heed at all unto the noises of this world.
Blessed altogether are the ears which harcken not unto the voice that sounds
outwardelye, but hears the truth and speakeing inwardlye. Blessed are the
eyes which being shut unto outward things, are wholly bent upon inward things.
Blessed are they that pierce unto inward things, and do more and more endeavor
to prepare themselves by daily exercises to receive heavenly secrets. Blessed
are they that take it ioyefully to give themselves unto god, and to rid
themselves from all worldely let. Mark these things, O my soul, and shut
forth desires, that thou may able to hear what thing the LORD God does
speak in thee. Thy friend speaks these things: I am thy health and
salvation, I am thy peace, I am thy life: cleave first unto me, and thou shall
find peace. Let pass all worldly things, and seek for everlasting things.
For what are all temporal things, but only very deceites: Or what do all
the Creatures profit thee, if thou be forsaken of the Creator? Wherefore,
rejecting al things, make thy self accepted and faithful to thy Creator, that
thou may be able to attain unto true blessedness.

That the truth does speak within us without noise of words. The.ij. Chapter.
Speak Lord: for thy servant does hearcken, I am thy servant, give me
understanding, that I may learn thy laws and decrees. Incline my soul to
the words of thy mouth, because thy talk flows like unto dew. The
Israelites said to Moses in old time: Speak thou unto us, and we will hear
thee: but let not the Lord speak least we should die. Howbeit, I pray not
so, O Lord, I pray not so: but rather with the Prophet Samuel, do humbly and
earnestly beseech thee thus: speak on Lord: For thy servant does hearken.
And let not Moses or any other of the Prophets speak unto me: but do thou
rather speak unto me, O God, being the inspirer and gyuer of life unto all the
Prophets, who art able alone without them to instruct me. Whereas they on the
other side without thee can prevail nothing. In deed they may utter and
sound forth the words: but the spirit they do not give. They speak in
deed very trimlye: but if thou hold thy peace, they do not kindle and stir
up the soul. They teach the letters, but thou openest the meaning.

They speak forth the secrets: but thou vnlockest the understanding of the
things signified. They utter the commandments: but thou helpest to perform
the same. They show the way: but thou give strength to walk over the same:
they handle the matter outwardlye: but thou instructest and gyuest light unto
the minds. They water outwardly, but thou give the fruitfulness. They cry
out in words: but thou give understanding to the hearer. Wherefore let not
Moises speak unto me, but thou, O Lord my God, being the everlasting truth,
least I die and be made unfruitful: or least if I shall be admonished
outwardly only, and not also kindled or inflamed within, thy word being
heard, and not practiced, known, and not loved, believed, and not kept, make
but unto my punishment. Therefore do thou speak, O Lord, for thy servant does
give ear. For thou have the words of everlasting life. Speak unto me (I say)
that thing, which may bring both comfort unto my soul, and amendment unto my
whole life, and also may cause glory and immortal honor unto thee.

That the words of God are to be heard humbly: and that the same
notwithstanding be not pondred and weyed of most men. The third Chapter.
LORD. Son, hear my words, being words most sweet and pleasant, and such
as do excel all the wisdom of the Philosophers and wise of this world. My
words are spirit and life, and not to be wayed with man's wit and policy, nor
yet to be drawn unto vain pleasure, but to be hard with silence, and to be
received with all modesty and godliness.


SERVANT. Blessed is he whom thou instructest and traynest up in knowledge, O
Lord, and do teach thy law, that thou may help him in time of
trouble, that he perish not.


LORD. I both have taught the Prophets long since in old time, and even yet
also now do not cease to speak unto all men. Howebeit many are deaf and hard
hearted at my voice. Most men do more willingly hear the world, than God,
and do sooner obey the appetite and desire of their own flesh, than the will
of God. The world promyseth but temporal and small things, and yet is it
served with great greediness. I do promise exceeding great, and everlasting
things: and yet are the hearts of men heavy and dull. What is he that serves
and obeieth me in all things Satan Prince of the world.
with so great care, as the world and the LORD of the world are served? Be
ashamed of it: and if thou would know why, hearken and give ear unto me:
Many men do run a great journey for a little wages or hier: and there be
scarcely a few that will once step forward a foot to get everlasting life. A
vile reward is painefully sought for: men do shamefullye go to law together,
sometime for a small piece of money: and men doubt not both day and night to be
tried for a vain tryfle, and small promise: but it yrketh them to traueyle
(even the least thing in the world) for a good thing unchangeable, for a
reward inestimable, for honor exceeding, and for glory immortal. Therefore be
thou ashamed, thou slow and complaining servant, because they are more ready
and quick unto destruction, than thou art unto life: and do more rejoice in
vanity, than thou in truth. And as for them, they are disappoined of their
hope sometime: but my promise deceives no man, nor sends any man away
vnspedde of his erraunt, putting his trust in me. That which I promise and
prouounce in words, the same do I perform and fulfill in deed, in case a man
do persevere still unto the end in the love of me. I am the rewarder of all
good things, I am also an earnest searcher and tryer of all the godly. Write
my words in thy heart, and occupy thy self diligently about the same. For
they shall be very necessary in the time of thy trouble. The things that thou
understand not when thou read them, the same shall thou know in the time
of thy curyng and healyng. And after two sorts am I wont to cure and heal my
elect: that is, with temptacyon and with comfort: and the same I dailye scoole
two ways. First in fynding fault with their sins then with exhorting and
stirring them up unto the increase of virtues. He that has my words and
despises the same, he has that of which he shall be condemned in the last day.


A prayer by which heavenly doctrine and religion is called for. The.iiij.
Chapter.
SERVANT. O My God, which art my whole goodness: who am I, that I dare be so
bold as to speak unto thee? I am thy most pore slave, and vile worm, and
much more poor and more vile, than I either know my self, or dare tell unto
thee. And yet O Lord, be thou mindful even of this same A true description
of man.
thing, ye I am nothing, that I have nothing, and that I am nothing worth. Thou
only art good thou just, thou holy, thou art able to do all things, thou
perfourmest all things, thou fulfillest al things, leaving the sinful only void
and empty. Remember thy mercy, O Lord, and fill my soul with thy favor, which
wilt not God has made every thing to some use or end.
have thy works to be good for nothing. For how may I continue in this
wretched life, unless thy mercy and favor do strengthen me? Turn not thy face
away from me: Defer not thy curing of me from day to day: Withdraw not thy
comfort from me, least my soul do see me in thy sight like unto the earth
that is void of moisture. Lord teach me to do thy will: teach me to walk
worthilye and humblye before thee. For thou art my wisdom, and do both
know, and have known me perfectly, as well before that I was borne into the
world, as also before the world it self was made.


That truth and modesty in the sight of God is to be exercised. The.v. Chapter
LORD. Son, practice thou truth in my sight, and always seek me in
singleness of heart. He that exercises truth in my sight, the same shall be
defended from the invasions of evil, and him shall truth deliver from
deceivers and siaunderers of the wicked. Now, if the truth shall deliver thee,
thou shall be free in deed, and shall not pass upon the vain words of men.


SERVANT. It is as thou say, Lord: and let me be so dealt withal I pray
thee, to weet: that thy truth may teach me, may keep me, and may bring me
unto an happy end. Let the same deliver me from all wicked lust, and from
inordinate love: So shall it be brought to pass, that I may use great
liberty and freedom of soul toward thee.


TRVTH. And I will teach thee what is right, and what is acceptable unto me.
Call thy sins to remembrance with great sorrow and heaviness of heart, and
do thou challenge any thing unto thy self for thy good deeds. For in very
deed thou art sinful, and endaungered and inwrapped in many diseases of the
mind, which go evermore of thine own nature unto nothing, and soon
fallest, art soon overcome, art soon troubled, and thrown down headlong.
Finally, thou have nothing wherein thou may glory and boast, but rather many
things for which thou ought to set little by thy self. For thou art much
more weak than that thou art able to perceive the same. Wherefore see that none
of all thy works seem great unto thee. See thou think nothing of thy
loftiness, nothing precious and wonderful, nothing to be reverenced, nothing
high, nothing praise worthy, and to be desired in deed, saving that which is
everlasting. Let the everlasting truth please thee above all things, and let
thy exceeding vileness displease thee. Fear nothing so much, dispraise and
fly from nothing so much, as thy vices and sins, which ought more to myslyke
thee, then the loss of any manner thing besides. Some do not behave
themselves toward me purely and sincerely, but rather (being led with a
certain curiosity and arrogancy) do studiously search out my secrets and
high mysteries, neglecting themselves, and their own salvation. These folowers
do many times fall into grievous te^ptacions, and sins, for their own
curiosity and pride, because I am against them. But being timorous, do thou
stand in awe of the sentence and wrath of almighty GOD, and search not out
the works of the almighty, but search thoroughly thine own faults, either how
much evil thou have done, or else how much good thou have neglected. Some do
bear about their whole religion and Godliness in beekes only, some in
pictures: some in outewarde signs and figures: Other carye me in their mouth,
but not so in their heart. Contrariwise, there are, which being of perfect
understanding in mind, and pure in heart, do evermore breath and covet after
everlasting things, do hear of earthly things against their wills, do that
which nature necessarily requires with grief and sorrow: and these in deed
do feel what the spirit of truth does speak within them, as they which do
teach them to love heavenly things, despising the earthlye, and both day and
night do covet heaven, the world being contemned.


The praise of God, and thanksgiving for benefits: and likewise of the force
of the love of God. The.vi. Chapter.
SERVANT. I Praise thee, O heavenly Father, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which have vouchsafed to remember me needy Soul. O father of mercy,
and God of al comfort, I give thee thanks, which refreshest me, being unworthy
of al comfort, sometime with thy comfort. I praise and magnify thee evermore,
and also thy only begotten Son, and thy holy ghost the comforter, world
without end. Oh my Lord God, O the holy lover of me, when thou shall come
into my soul, I will rejoice with my whole heart. Thou art my glory, and the
rejoice of my heart: Thou art my hope and refuge in the time of my calamity
and trouble. But because I am yet of weak love and imperfect virtue, I reckon
it necessary to be confirmed of thee, and to be comforted at thy hands.
Wherefore, visit me oftentimes, and instruct me with holy discipline. Deliver
me from wicked affections of the Soul, and heal my mind from all the unruly
desires and vices: that being healed inwardly, and well purged, I may be made
fit to love, strong to suffer, constant to persevere. Love is a great matter:
no doubt, a great good thing: which (only) does make light each thing that is
heavy, and bears equally whatsoever is unequal. For it bears a burden
without any burden, and does turn all bitter things into sweet and sauorie.
The same Jesus (I say) being our Noble Love, does enforce to do great things
and evermore stirs up to desire the things that are more perfect. Love will
be above, and not kept still with any low things. Love will be free, and void
from all worldly affection, least her inward sight be hindered, or least it
be enwrapped either with some temporal commodity, or overcome with
incommoditie. Nothing is more sweet than Love, nothing more strong, nothing
more deep, nothing more broad, nothing more pleasant, nothing more full.
Nothing better either in Heaven or in earth: because it is sprung of God, and
can not rest but in God, above all the creatures. The lover flies, runs,
rejoices, is free, and is not holden: It gives all things for all things,
and has all things in all things, as the which rests in one highest thing
above all things, out of which flows and spryngeth all goodness. It looks
not upon his gifts, but turns it self unto the gyuer above all good
gifts. Love can not tell how to keep measure, but is feruente beyond all
measure. Love feels no burden, passes nothing upon pains, endeuoreth above
her strength, nothing at all waying whether the same be possible to be done
or not, forasmuch as it thinks nothing to hard for it self, nothing
unlawful. Therefore it is of force unto all things, and brings many things
to an end, if the lover do not give over and be tired. Love watches, and
sleeping does not slumber: laboring is not wearyed: pressed down, is not
oppressed: made afeard, is not troubled: but (like as the lively flame and
burning torch) does covet out upward, and does pierce through safely. If any
man do love, he knows what this saying means. The very ardent affection of
the soul is a great cry in the ears of the Lord, whilst it says thus: O my
God, O my love, thou art wholly mine, and I am thine altogyther. Bring forth in
me a plentiful love, that I may learn with the inward mouth of my hcart to
taste how sweet and pleasant a thing it is to love, and as it were being
molten, to swim in love. Cause that I may so burn in love, that I may over
come my self with the feruentey of my study and affection, Let me sing the
ballade of love, let me follow thee aloft my friend and lover, let me sing
thy praises with so great Love, that I may be swallowed up through the
feruentcy of affection. Let me love thee more than mine own self: Nay, let me
love neither my self, nor any man else beside (which does love thee in deed)
but both for thee, and in thee, like as the law of love shyning and casting
her beams out of thee, does command. Love is swift, sincere, godly,
delectable and pleasant, strong, pacient, faithful, wise, long suffering,
manlike, and never applying it self to her own commodity. For when a man is
given to himself, then does love fall away. Love is circumspect, modest,
straight, not dainty, not light, nor bent to vanities, sober, chaste,
constant, quiet, and temperate in all the senses. Love is subject and obedient
to his betters, always vile and despised in his own conceit, virtuous and
thankful toward God, full of confidence and trust, and always in hope,
even then when it self is lothed of God: Forasmuch as without grief and pain
there is no living in love. He that is not ready to suffer al things, and to
apply himself to the will of his friend and lover, ye same is unworthy to be
called a lover. In conclusion, a lover must embrace all hard and bitter things
for his friends sake, and not to be divided from him, because of adversity.


Of the trial of the true Lover, and how the enemy must be resisted. The.vij.
Chapter.
LORD. Son, thou art not yet a strong and wise Lover.


SERVANT. Why so Lord?


LORD. Bycanse thou leauest off thine enterprise for a small assault and
temptacion, and seek after comfort with over much greediness. A valiant
Lover stands still by temptacions, and does not credit the crafty
persuasions Man's joy in troubles.
of the enemy: and is so delighted with prosperity, that he is nothing
offended with adversity. The wise lover does not so much way the gift of his
Lover, as the love of the giver. The same rather considers the mind and
meaning, then the commodity and profit: and in respect of his friend,
neglects al his gifts. The noble Lover rests not in the gift, but in me
above every gift. Neither must thou forthwith discourage thy self, if at any
time thou think otherwise then well either of me, or of my Godly servants
against thy will. That good and sweet affection wherewyth thou art sometime
delighted, is the affection of present favor, and a certain foretaste of thy
heavenly Country, upon the which foretaste thou must not stay to much,
because it suffers alteration. But to fight against the wicked motions of the
mind, and to despise the intisements of the Devil, this (in deed) is the
work of virtue, and a thing worthy of great reward. Therefore there is no
cause why these absurd imaginations should so greatly vex and torment thee,
that art wont to arise of every trifling occasion. Persevere thou constantly
in thy purpose and enterprise. and be of a sincere mind toward God. Neither
is it an illusion that thou sometime art suddenly ravished aloft, and by and
by do return again to the old fond trifles of thy mind: which forasmuch
as thou rather suffer against thy will, than art the Author and causer of
them, and do struggle against the^ so long as they myslike thee, they are
rather profitable than pernicious. Weete thou that that old enemy does
thereunto wholly bend himself to let thy study in goodness, and to call thee
away from al exercise of godliness, to weete, from the devout Meditacion and
memory of Christ his passion, from the warding and keeping of thy soul, from
the firm purpose, to come forward in virtue. The wicked Note the sutteltie of
the Devil for two causes.
Feende minystreth great variety of thoughts to beat a weariness and
trembling fear into thee, to the intent he may revoke thee from prayer and
readyng of holy scripture. The humble confession of thy sins does mislike him:
and if he could, he would withdraw thee from the Communion. But believe him
not, nor pass not upon him, though he cast his subtle snares and trappes over
thee many times. When his suggestions are evil and filthy, turn them upon him
again, and say thus unto him. Be gone, thou unclean spirit, blush thou
wretch, and be ashamed thou vile beast: Thou wicked deceyuer, that do put
such things into my head, get thee hence from me. For thou shall prevail with
me nothing at all. For Jesus my fellow soldier will be present with me, and
thou shall be overcome shamefully. I had rather die, and had rather suffer any
thing in the world, then once consent unto thee. Hold thy peace and be still,
I will not now hear thee though thou make me to have a great deal of trouble.
The Lord is my light and saving health, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life: at whom shall I tremble: If whole armies come against me,
my soul shall not be afeard whilst the Lord does succor and deliver me. Fight
like a valiant soldier: and if through weakness thou take a fall at any time,
take a better heart unto thee again, having a good hope of my favor toward
thee, even greater then before: and in any wise beware of vain arrogancy and
pride, which is the cause that many men are led into error, and do sometime
fall into blindness and ignorance almost incurable. Let that fall of the
proud angels foolishly chalenging to much to themselves, cause thee to beware
and to live in continual modesty and humility.


Of modest hyding the benefits of God. The.viij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, it is both profitable and safe or sure for thee to dissemble the
affection of godliness, and not to extol the same in words, in craking thereof
somewhat insolentlye, or to advance the same above measure, but rather to
despise thy self, and to live in fear, as one that has the same vnworthilye
bestowed upon thee. Thou must not to earnestly cleave fast unto that affection
which may soon be changed into the contrary. Think with thy self, so long as
thou have Gods grace with thee, how wretched and needye thou art wont to be
without his grace: and reckon not, that the coming forward and profiting in
spiritual life does only consist in that point, to enjoy the benefit of
heavenly comfort: but also if thou modestly, temperately, and patiently, do
take the withdrawing of the same, so that thou do not saint and ware dull, or
slow at that time in the great desire of praying, nor suffer thy other
accustomed exercises to be wholly left and forsaken, but after the best sort
that thou art able and know, do that thing willingly which is in thy
power, and not utterly neglect thy duty, for that dryenesse or vexation of
mind which thou feel in thy self. For many if it be not so well with them
as they would have it, do become forthwith impacient or slothful. It is not
always in the power of man to rule and govern his own matters: but it
belongs to God, both to give and to comfort, both when he will, and how much
he will, and whom he will, and that always as it likes him best. Some being
uncertain and unstayed have cast themselves away from the study of godliness
bestowed upon them, whilst they endeavoring above their strength, do not
thoroughly consider their own corruption and wickedness, but rather follow
the affection of their mind, then the judgment of reason. Because these
fellows have taken greater matters upon the^, then it was gods will and
pleasure they should, they have quicklye lost the favor of God: and they which
had made them a nest in heaven, even those same became needy, vile, and
forsaken: to the intent that they, being pressed down and impouerished, might
learn to fiye, not with their own wings, but to stay themselves upon my
Feathers. They which are yet but beginners and unskillful of the way of the
Lord, unless the same obey the counsel of the wiser sort, they may soon
be deceived and thrown down headlong: and if the same have rather yielded to
their own opinion, then obaied the practiced and beaten soldiers, those are
in the greater danger, because they would not be retired from the opinion
that they had once conceived in themselves. It is seldom seen that one
seeming wise in his own conceyte, can modestly bear the commandment of an
other. Therefore it is better to have little wit with modesty, and slender
understanding of things, then for his abundant knowledge to stand to much in
his own conceyt. Better it is to have less, then having much to be proud. He
does not behave himself circumspectlye enough, which betaketh himself wholly
unto joy, forgetting his old needinesse, and the chaste fear of the Lord,
which fear is wont to stand in awe of leesing the benefits already
bestowed upon him. Surely that person is not Godly wise sufficiently, which
behaueth himself to desperately in the time of adversity and trouble, and
thinks and judges of me with less trust and confidence then he ought to
do. He that shows himself to careless in the time of peace, the same is
often to much discouraged and faynte hearted in the time of war. If thou
had always skill to show thy self modest and of a lowelye mind, and to
rule and govern thy spirits aryght, thou should not so soon fall into
danger and offense. It is a point of assurance, to cast what shall come after,
if the light shall depart after thou have conceived the spirit of fervor and
heat. And again, when the same has so chanced in deed, to think that the
same light may return again, being therefore of me withdrawn, that both
thou may be made the more wary, and I become thereby the more glorious. For
many times, such trial is more expedient, then if thou should always enjoy
prosperity, according as thou would have it. For the works of Godliness
and virtue do not stand upon that point, that thou should be full of
heavenly visions and comforts, or be skilful in learning or knowledge, or be
placed in a high degree: but if thou stay upon true modesty: if thou be full of
heavenly charity and love: if thou always study for Gods glory chastely and
sincerely: if thou set naught by thy self, but unfeignedly despise thy self,
and also rejoice more to be despised and pressed down of other, then to be
honored of the^.


Of setting little by a man's self in the sight of God. The.ix. Chapter.
SERVANT. I Dare speak unto my Lord, being my self but Dust and Ashes: and
if I should set somewhat by my self, yet do thou stand against me, and my
own sins do bear true witness against me: which witness I am not able to
gainesay. But if I, by thinking my self vile shall bring my self to nothing,
and (by casting Man cou^ting himself but dust, shall by grace ob taine the
savor of God.
all estimation of my self away from me) shall reckon my self but for dust, as
I am in deed, the^ shall thy grace be favorable unto me, and thy light approach
near unto my heart: and so shall it happen, that if I have ever set by my self
the least thing that can be, even that shall vanish away for ever, when I am
altogether pressed down unto nothing. Herein this case thou shall show unto
me what I am, what I have been, and from whence I have come. Namely, nothing,
and from nothing: who if I be left once unto my self, am forthwith nothing but
mere infirmity and weakness. But if thou have suddenly looked back upon
me, by and by I am made strong The love of God brings gladness.
and am replenished with new gladness. And great wonder it is to see that I
should so suddenly be lifted up aloft, when thou do so gently embrace me,
which am of mine own weight and pronesse always carried unto the lowest
things. Thy love freely preue^ting me, and helping me in so many necessities,
and defending me from grievous perilles, and to speak truly, snatching me
out of infinite euilles, is the cause of this thing. For I both have lost my
self in loving my self disorderly, and also have found both myself and thee,
in seeking thee only, and in loving thee sincerely, and with the same love
also have I the more plunged my self into nothing. For thou (O my most sweet
Lord) do bestow more God is more merful then either we desire or deserve.
things upon me, not only then I am able to deserve, but also then I dare hope
for: I will not say crave for. O my GOD, I give thee thanks, that though I be
unworthy of all goodness, yet thy nobility and infinite goodness does never
cease to do good unto the ungrateful, and to those that are turned far away
from thee. Turn thou us unto thee, that we may be thankful, humble,
religious, and godly, which art our health, virtue, and strength.


That we ought to drive all our doings to gods glory, as to the fardest end or
mark that we shoot at. The.x. Chapter.
LORD. Son, I must be thy highest and fardest end, if thou desire to be
blessed and happy. By this intent of thine shall thy wit be purged, being
wickedly prone many times to it self, and also to the creatures. For as soon
as in any thing thou studiest for thine own commodity, thou fallest and
wytherest as dry by and by in thy self. Therefore thou must refer and direct
all things to me only, because I have given al things: and thou know that
every thing does flow from me, as from the highest and most principal
goodness, and that therefore they are to be reduced unto me again, as to
their own fountayne^ and spring. As well the small as the great, as well the
rich as the poor, do draw lively water out of me, as out of a lively
fountain and they which serve me of their own accord, and after a free and
honest sort, shall be laden with benefits upon benefits. But if any will
glory out of me, or be delighted with any private goodness, the same shall not
obtain parpetuall and true joy with gladness of heart, but shall incur
diverse incommodities and anguishes of mind. Therefore ought thou to ascribe
and impute no goodness nor no virtue, either to thy self or to any man
living, but to acknowledge althings for Gods benefits, without whom man has
nothing. It is I that have given all thing, and it is even I also that do
challenge all things unto my self, by good right, and with great severity do
require giving of thanks. This is the truth, by which the vanity of man's glory
is chased away. And who so shall be endued with heavenly favor and true love,
the same shall neither be attached with envy, nor discouraged in heart, nor
shall be holden with the love of himself. For Gods love overcomes al things,
and displayeth or spreads abroad all the powers of the soul. Now, if thou
be rightly wise, thou shall rejoice in me only, thou shall put thy trust in
me only, according as GOD only is good, to be praised above all things,
and to be magnified in all things.


That it is a sweet thing to serve God and to despise the world. The.xi.
Chapter.
SERVAVNT. Now will I speak again, O Lord, and will not keep silence, and
will speak after this sort in the ears both of my God, and my Lord, and my
king, inhabiting the high heaven. O how great is that pleasure, O Lord, which
thou have reposed or The Lord cares for the righteous.
laid up for them that fear thee? not only for them that love thee but also
for them that serve thee with their whole heart. The sweetness of the
beholding of thee, is certainelye unspeakable, which thou give unto thy
Lovers: and in that point have thou specially showed forth the sweetness of
thy love, that when I had no being, thou then did make me: and afterward,
when I went far astray from thee, did bring me again into the way, that I
might serve thee, and did give me in commandment to love thee. O fountain
of continual love, what may I say to thee, or how may I forget thee, which
have vouchsafed to remember me: which contrary to all hope, have vied mercy
toward me thine own, and after that I was corrupted and perished, and have
won my heart unto thee with thy favor and friendship, when I did see no
pleasure at all? For which liberality of thine, what thanks shall I render unto
thee again? I will even serve thee. But what great matter is it to serve thee,
whom the whole world ought to serve? That rather seems great and
wonderful in thy sight, that thou vouchsafest to admit and take into thy
service so needy, so unworthy a person, and to choose him into the number of
thy beloved servants. Behold, all things are thine, whatsoever I have or
possess, and by which I do thee service. All good things comes of God.
But how is this, that thou do more serve me, than I do serve thee? See,
the heaven and the earth, which thou have made for man's commodities, are at
hand, and do every day whatsoever thou co^mandest them to do. Nay, thou
have made and ordained the Angels ordained for the us of man.
Angels also for man's uses. But the very greatest matter of all is, that thou
thy self have vouchsafed to serve man, and have promised that thou will give
thine own self unto him. For which thy infinite benefits, what thank shall
I yield thee again? I pray GOD I may be able to serve thee in all my life
long. I pray God I may be such a one, as may serve thee but even one day as I
ought to do. Thou in deed art worthy of al service, of all honor, and
everlasting praise. Thou in deed art my Lord, and I am thy simple servant,
which am bound to serve thee with all my strength, and never to be filled or
satisfied with thy praises. And surely so I will, so I do desire: and
whatsoever is wanting unto me, do thou vouchsafe to supplye it. Great honor,
great glory it is to serve thee, and to despise al things for thy sake. For
they shall carry with them great reward, that of their own accord have put
themselves in subjection unto this most holy service, and shall find the most
pleasant comfort of the holy Ghost, that have renounced and cast away
worldely pleasures for thy love sake. Great liberty of soul shall they
attain unto, that entering into the straight or narrow way for thy name sake,
have contemned all worldely carkes and cares. O acceptable and pleasant service
of god, by the which man is made free and holy in deed. O sacred state of
Godly service, which makes man equal to Angels, accepted of GOD, terrible to
Devils, and commended of all faithful. O service to be embraced, and always
to be wished for, by which, both the chiefest felicity is procured, and joy
gotten everlastingly.


That the desires of the mind are to be examined, and ordered. The.xij.
Chapter.
LORD. Son, there yet remain a great many things that thou must learn.


SERVANT. What be those, Lord?


LORD. That thou submit thy desire altogether to my will and pleasure, and be
not now a lover of thy self, but one coveting to do as I will and command.
Desires do kindle thee oftentimes, and vehemently enforce ordriue thee. In
this case, consider thou whether thou be moved with my honor, or stirred
rather with thine own commodity. For if thou covet ought for my sake, thou will take in good worth whatsoever I shall determine: but if there lie hid any
desire of private gain, even the very same it is that does hinder and way thee
down. Therefore, beware that thou rest not to much upon thy conceived desire,
without asking counsel of me, least perhaps it repent thee afterward, and
that do then displease thee, which at the first did like thee, and which thou
did seek after as the very best thing. For neither every affection that
seems good, is by and by to be followed, nor yet the contrary at the first
chop to be avoided. It is sometime also expedient to bridle good affects and
desires, least either thou pass measure with the importunity of mind, or be
an offense unto other through thine own unruliness: or whilst the same do
resist, thou as one troubled, suddenly do fall. Sometime it is meet to use
violence, and to fight against the appetie and desire, and not to make accoumpt
The flesh ought to be obedient to the spirit.
what the flesh would either have or not have, but rather endeavor that it may
be obedient to the spirit, whether he will or no: and that she may be so long
kept under and suffer bondage, until such time as she be plyant and ready
unto all things, and learn to be content with a few things, and to be
delighted with a simple state and condition, and not to mutter or grutch
against any incommoditie or adversity.


Of the manner of patience, and the fight against desires. The.xiij. Chapter.
SERVANT. WHy then, O my Lord God, as far as I do perceive, pacyence and
sufferance is very necessary for me. For many adversities are incident unto
this life of ours: in so much that when I desire peace by all means possible,
yet can it not be brought about, that I may lead over my life without war
and sorrow.


LORD. It is even as thou do say, son: Nay, I will not have thee to
seek after that peace, that is void of temptacions, or which feels not
adversities: but to think with thy self, that even then also thou have found
thy self peace, when as thou shall be searched and tried with sundry and
many turmoyling calamities of miseries, and adverse chances. Now, if thou will plead, that thou art not able to bear or suffer so many things, how then
shall thou be able to abide the everlasting torment of Hell fire? Of two
euilles the less is always to be chosen. Therefore, Of two euilles the least is
to be chosen.
study to take patiently for Gods sake thy present euilles, that thou may
escape those everlasting punishments that are to come. And think thou that
the men of this world, either suffer no evil at all, or little, or none? Thou
shall well find, that even those that are most delicate and fine, are not
without their incommodities. Thou will say peradventure: but these worldlings
are incyted with many pleasures, and obey their own will or sensuality: and
therefore make little account of their miseries. Put case al things happen unto
them as their heart would have it: how long will that endure and abide, trow
ye? Forsooth, those shall perish like dung, which in this life have such
wealth and abundaunce, in such wise, as no manner of remembrance of joys passed
shall remain. Nay, even while they be alive to, they do not enjoy them
without bitterness and grief, and fear. For look of what things they do
take pleasure, of the very same many times they receive sorrow: and reason
good they should so do: that they which intemperately hunt after pleasures,
should likewise attain unto the same not without tartness and trouble. I
wisse, they be all but very short, and false or counterfeyte, and inordinate,
filthy or dishonest: yet do not they see this through drunkenness and
blindness, but that they will needs purchase themselves death of the soul
like unto brute beasts, for a small or triflyng delight of this mortal life.
Wherefore, son, do not thou follow the sensual desires, but turn thy will
away from them. Be delighted in the Lord, and so shall he grant thee the
requests of thy soul. For if thou will be delighted in deed, and have large
and plentiful comfort of me: Weete thou that felicity and the ample reward
of comfort does consist in thy renouncing of all worldly things, and of these
feeble and weak pleasures: and the further thou shall pull thy self from all
solace of human things, so much the more sweet, and the greater comfort
shall thou find in me. But in deed thou shalt not attain unto those
comforts without sorowfulnesse and labor of fighting. For rooted custom does
stand against it: howbeit she shall be matched and maystred, with better
custom. The flesh will mutter against it: Howbeit she shall be bridled with
the feruentsye of the spirit. The old Serpent will stir thee forewarde and
sharpen thee: Howbeit he shall be chased away with prayers: And again, with
profitable labor a great entrance shall be stopped up from his temptacions.


Of obeying our betters according to the example of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The.xiiij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, he that withdraws himself from obedience, the Obedience to
thy superior required of God.
same withdraws himself from the favor of God: and he that seeks after
private things, does forgo the common. He that does not submit himself unto
his superior gladly and of his own accord, the same in so doing, declares
that he has not yet so wholly tamed and schooled his own flesh, but that it
does oftentimes wince and mutter against him. Wherefore, learn speedily to
submit thy self to thy superior, if thou covet to tame thy flesh. For the
outward enymie is the sooner maistred, if the inward enemy be once
overthrown. There is no more troublesome or worse enemy unto the soul than
thou art unto thy self, whilst thou do not agree with thy spirit. For thou
must practice an unfeigned contempt of thy self, if thou will be master over
flesh and blood: for as much as thou do yet love inordinately, and therefore
art afearde to commit thy self altogether to the will of another. But what
great matter do thou, thou do nothing, if thou become subject to another
man for Gods sake? Whereas I being that Almighty and that Highest, who have
made all things of naught, have humbly submitted my self unto man for thy
sake, becommyng the veriest underling and basest of all other, to the end that
thou might overcome this pride and hautinesse of thine, with that humility
and lowliness of mine. Learn to obey, thou dust: learn to depresse thy
self, thou earth and stime, and to put thy trust under al men's feet: learn
to break thine own will, and to show thy self subject unto all men. Wax
earnest against thy self, and suffer not pride or hautinesse to live in thee,
but make thy self so lowlye and simple that all men may go over thee and
tread upon thee like mire in the street. What have thou thou vain man, that
thou can rightly complain off? What is there, thou sincke of sin, that thou
can justly reply unto the^ that dispraise and deface thee, in as much as thou
have so oftentimes deserved hell torments by offending of God so many times? And
yet have I gently spared thee, having a care of thy soul, to the intent that
thou might always show thy self thankful for my benefits, my love
being once known unto thee: and being evermore bent unto true obedience and
modesty, might patiently bear the contempt of thy self.


Of considering the secret judgments of God, least we should advance our
selves to much in prosperity. The.xv. Chapter.
SERVANT. Lord, thou thundering against me with thy judgments, do shake all
my lims with fear and trembling, and do out of measure terrify my heart.
This do I ponder upon amazedly, that the very Heavens are not clean in thy
sight. And if thou have found sin in the very angels themselves, and have
not spared them, what shall then become of me? If the Stars themselves have
fallen from heaven, what may I (being dust) hope for? They have fallen down to
the lowest places, whose works did seem laudable and praise worthy: and they
that did eat the bread of Angels, those saw I to be delighted with Hogs
meat and draffe. Therefore Lord, there is no holiness, if thou once pluck
back thy hand: No wisdom prevails, if thou cease to govern: No strength
helps, if thou leauest to keep and preserve: No chastity is in safety,
unless thou defend it: No keeping of a man's self does profit, unless thy
holy watching go withal. For being once forsaken, we are drowned and do
perysh, and when thou do take care over us, then we live erected and lyfted
Man of himself inconstant: but by god confyrmed and strengthened.
up. We are in our own respect but unconstant: Of thee we be confirmed and
strengthened: we are but warm of our selves, and of thee we are kindled.
Surely, I must think of my self most humbly and basely, and must altogether
way my self at nothing, if that I seem to have any goodness in me. I say
again, that I ought to submit my self most lowlye unto those thy unsearchable
judgments, wherein I find that I am naught else but nothing of nothing. O weight
without mesure: O sea that cannot be passed through, wherein I find my self to
be nothing, but altogether of nothing. Where is then the covert of glory? Where
is then the confidence of glory for the which thou have bargayned? Al vain
glory is swallowed up in the gulf of thy judgments that All men mortal in
the sight of God. Isai. 29.
thou have of me. What are all mortal men in thy sight? Clay may boast it self
against the Potter, belike. Can he ware proud with vain praises, whose mind is
subject unto god in the truth? No, though the whole world do extol him, after
that the truth has once made him subject unto it: I say, he shall be moved
with no bodies praises, that has fixed his whole Man shall fade and consume
away, but the lord abides for ever. Psalm. 116.
hope in God. For even al they that do speak, are but nothing, and shall fade
away with the sound of their own words: But the truth of the Lord abides
for ever.


How we must be minded, and what we ought to say in such things as we desire
to have. The.xvi. Chapter.
LORD. Son, thus must thou say in all things: Lord, if it shall Job. 4.
please thee, let it be even so. Lord, if this shall be to thine honor, be it
done in thy name. Lord if thou see that this shall be expedient and profitable
for me, bring it to pass, that I may use it to thine honor: but in case thou
know that it shall not be for the health of my soul, but hurtful thereunto,
take this desire from me. For every desire is not of the holy spirit,
although it seem right and good unto man: but hard it is to judge whether a
good or a wicked spirit do enforce thee, to covet after this or that, or
whether thou be moved rather within thine own spirit? Many men have been
deceived at the last, which did seem to be stirred at the first with a good
spirit. Therefore we must always covet with the fear of God, and lowliness
of mind, whatsoever we ought to desire no thing, but with the fear of God.
comes into our heads, by occasion to wish for: and the whole matter must
be committed to God with unfeigned chiding of our selves, and thus must we say:
Lord, thou know whether of both is more expedient for me, do thou whether of
both thou will thy self. Give me that thou will, and as much as thou will, and
at what time thou will. Deal with me as thou know it meet for me to be
dealt with all, and as it likes thee, and as the thing may procure greatest
glory unto thee. Place me there where thou will, and deal freely with me in all things. I am in thy hands: turn me and toss me every way. Behold, I thy
servant am pressed unto al things: for as much as I desire to live (I pray God
accordingly and perfitely) not unto my self, but unto thee.


Pryaers to perform Gods will. The.xvij. Chapter.
SERVANT. Grant unto me, O most bountiful Jesus, thy favor, which may be
assistant unto me, may labor with me, may continue with me to the very end.
Grant unto me evermore to will and covet the things which are acceptable and
dear unto thee. Let thy will be my will, and let my will away follow thine, and
justly agree with thine. Let one willing and one nilling be common unto us
both, in such wise, that I may will or nill nothing, but that which thou
wyllest or nillest. Grant me to die unto al things that are in the world, and
to love to be contemned and not known in this world for thy sake. Grant me
(above all my wishes) to repose and rest my self in thee, and to have a quiet
and contented mind. Thou art the true God gives the true peace of ye heart.
Psalm. 4.
peace of the heart: Thou art the only rest: out of thee are al things
difficult and unquiet. In this peace, that is to say, in thee only being the
chiefest and everlasting goodness, will I sleep and take my rest.


That true comfort must be sought for in God only. The xviij. Chapter.
Whatsoever comfort I can wish No comfort in this world to be looked for, but
in the world to^ come.
for or imagine, the same do I not look for here in this world, but in the
world to come. Now, if I (alone) had even all the comforts that are any where,
and could enjoy all manner delicates and dainties: certain it is, that the
same could not long continue or endure. Therefore (O my soul) thou can not
Psalm. 9. 68. 72.
attain full comfort, and be perfitely refreshed, saving only in God, the
comforter of the needy, and the helper of the modest. Look a little while, O
my soul, look a little while after Gods promise, and then thou shall attain
plenty of all good things in heaven. Now, if thou will somewhat inordinately
covet these present things, thou shall leese the everlasting and heavenly
things. Let temporal things Use temporal things: and desire everlasting
things.
be in use and occupying: but let the everlasting things be in thy desire: Thou
can not be filled with any temporal good thing, because thou wast not
created to enjoy the same. Albeit thou had all good things that are
created, yet could thou not be blessed notwithstanding: Nay, thy felicity
consists in God the creator of all things. I mean not such as is thought so,
and praised of the folish worldlings, but such as the good and faithful
Disciples of Christ do look after, and such as the spiritual and clean of
heart, whose conversation is in heaven, do sometime foretaste in this life.
Vain and short is all man's comfort: blessed and true is that which is received
inwardly from the truth. The godly person both every where carry Jesus Christ
his comforter about with him, and does speak unto him in this wise: Lord Jesus,
be assisting unto me in all places and at all times. Let this be my comfort, to
be void of all man's comfort The sayings, of the godly.
with a good will. Or if thy comfort shall be lacking at any time, let thy will
and due trial of me be in stead of thy chiefest comfort unto me. For thou art
not he that evermore Psalm. 102.
art angry or make afearde.

That all carfulness is to be committed to God. The.xix. Chapter.
Son, let me deal with thee as I will my self: I do know what is for thy
profit. Thou imaginest as a man, and do so think in many things as thy
fleshly mind does counsel thee.

SERVANT. Lord, thou say truth: thou have greater care over me, than I
could have of my self. For he stands but after a sickle sort undoubtedly,
which commits not his whole care unto thee. Lord, use me as thou list, so
that my will toward thee do continue right and steadfast. For it can not be but
good, whatsoever thou shall determine of me. Therefore, whether thou will have
me to be in darkness still, I praise it: or whether thou will have me to enjoy
light, that do I also praise: Or whether thou vouchsafe to comfort me, I
praise it: or whether thou will have me to be pressed down with adversity, I
praise this also.


LORD. Son, so thou must be myuded in deed, if thou desire to have to do
with me: neither ought thou to be less cheerful to suffer, than to
rejoice, more unwillingly needy and poor, than full and welthie.


SERVANT. Lord, I will willingly suffer We ought to suffer willingly,
whatsoever does happen from the Lord.
for thy sake whatsoever thou wylt have to happen unto me: and I will receive
at thy hands alike, both good and evil, both sweet and sower, both joy and
sorrow, and give thee thanks to for all things that have chanced unto me.
Preserve me from all sin and so shall I fear neither death, nor Hell, and
so that thou do never turn me off or blot me out of the book of life,
there shall be no calamity that shall hurt me.


That the miseries of this life must be suffered patiently according to Christ's
example. The.xx. Chapter.
LORD. Son, I descended from Heaven God descended from heaven, and took our
myseries upon him, not of necessity, but of love.
for thy sake, and took thy miseries upon me: not for any necessity, but for
very love that moved me thereunto, to the intent that thou might learn
patience and sufferance, and might take temporal miseries without disdain
and grutch. From the hour of my birth, till such time as I ended my life upon
the cross, there were never sorrows wanting to be suffered. I took patiently
the great lack of necessary things: I oftentimes heard sundry complaints of me:
I took slanders and reproaches in good worth: I had unkindness for benefits:
Curssing and evil Heb. 12.
speakings for miracles: reproves and fault findeings for my doctrine.


SERVANT. Lord, for as much as thou have showed thy self pacient in this life.
(Wherein surely thou did most of al do the commandment of thy father)
meet and reason it is, that I wretch and sinful man should show my self
pacient according unto thy will, and should bear the burden of this mortal
life for my soul health sake, so long as thou will have it so. For though this
present life be left burdensome, yet has it been made already more light by
thy benefit, and both by thy example more tolerable and famous unto the
weakelings, and also by the footesteps of thy saints: yea much more full of
comfort also, then it was once in the old Law, when both heaven gate did
continue shut, and the way did seem somewhat hard to find, and so few did
pass to seek for the kingdom of heaven: Nay, also even those which then were
justified and in the state of salvation, could not enter ye kingdom of Heaven
before thy passion and the merit of thy precious death: How great thanks am I
bound to render unto thee, in that thou have vouchsafed to show the straight
and good way to thy everlasting kingdom, both to me, and to all them that put
their trust in thee? For thy way is our way, and through godly patience do we
earnestly traueyle to come unto thee our crown and rewarder, who unless thou
had gone before us, and had taught us, what man would have passed to
follow? How many would not only have bidden behind, but also a great way off,
except they had beheld and looked upon these thy notable examples. Lo, if when
we have heard so many of thy miracles and commandments, and yet are but
warm, how would it be then if we had not so great light to follow thee?


Of the bearing of injuries and wrongs and who it is that is pacient in deed.
The.xxi. Chapter.
LORD. Son, what is this that thou speak? Cease from complaint and
moan: consider both my passion, and the martyrdom of The passion of Christ
and the martyr dome of his Saints ought to be our comfort.
other saints. Thou have not yet resisted unto death. It is but little that
thou suffer, if thou be compared with the^, which have suffered so many
things, have been tempted so vehemently, have been afflicted so grievously, have
been tried and exercised so many ways. Therefore, other men's cases being Heb.
11. and. 12
more grievous, must be called to mind of thee, that thou may take this
more tolerable case in better part: or if thou do not think it so tolerable,
see that thine own impacience be not cause hereof: and in fine, whether it be
tolerable or intolerable, endeavor thou to take it patiently throughout. For the
better that thou shall setle thy self to be pacient, both by so much shall
thou deal the more wisly in the matter, and shall deserve the greter things,
and shall more easily bear thy case, as one not slouthfully framed ready in
mind and use thereunto. Neither shall thou thus say to thy self: I neither am
able, nor ought to bear this thing at yt man's hands. For he has both done me a
great displeasure or hurt, and slaundereth me with other things that I never
thought. In deed I can be content to bear that at another man's hands, that I
shall see good to be borne. This is the thought of foolishness, it neither
considers the virtue of patience, nor yet of whom it must be crowned and
rewarded, but rather wayeth the persons, and the wrongs done unto it. He is not
truly pacient, He is pacient that suffers al things of all men.
that will suffer but as much as he list, and of whom he lists: but the man
that is pacient in deed, makes no account of whom he is vexed and troubled,
whether he be his better, his equal, or his inferior: whether he be good and
godly, or else perverse and wicked: Nay, whatsoever adversity is done unto him
of any man living, look how much, and how oftentimes soever the same be done,
he receives the same thankfully as it were from Gods hands, and reckneth it
for gain: because nothing is so great or so small, if a man suffer the same for
Gods sake, but that it deserves reward. Wherefore be thou in a readiness to
battle, if thou will obtain the victory. Surely, without fighting, thou
shall never get the crown of patience. Now, if thou will not suffer, thou
refusest to be crowned, but if thou desire to be crowned, strive like a man,
and bear the fight patiently. For neither is rest gotten without labor, nor
yet victory procured without fighting. SERVANT. Bring to pass lord, that through
thy benefit, I may be able to do, that which me think, I am unable to do by
natural power. Thou know well that I (otherwise) of Man of himself but
weak.
my self can bear but little, and that I am soon cast down and discouraged,
eue^ with a light fall. Bring it to pass that al misery and adversity may be
unto me amiable, and to be wished for, for thy names sake. For it is very
helthful unto my soul to suffer, and to be vexed for thy cause.


Of the confession of a man's own infirmity, and of the miseries of this life.
The.xxij. Chapter.
Lord, I will confess unto thee Psalm. 13.
mine unrighteousness and infirmity or weakness. A small matter does many
times dyscourage me, and cast me into heaviness. Some time I determine to
hold my self stoutly and valiauntly: and by and by with a small chance of
aduersitye, I am in great trouble and sorrow. A most grievous temptacio^ does
grow of a most vile thing: and I that thought to my self that I did not behold
it, when as I did not feel it, even I the same do perceive that I am almost
overthrown sometime with alight and slender blast. Wherefore, O Lord, look
upon my humility and frailty, Psa. 9. and 24.
being perfitly known unto thee: have pity upon me and deliver me out of this
mire, lest being Psalm. 68.
drowned, I perish utterly. This thing does oftentimes vex me at the heart,
and makes me ashamed in thy sight, to think that I am so frail, and so weak
to resist my troublesome affections: which though they do not draw me wholly
to consent unto them, yet is the vexation of them grievous and painful unto
me: and it very much yrketh me to live every day in strife after such sort.
And hereby is mine own infirmity made plain and manifest unto me, because
wicked thoughts do much sooner invade me, than depart from me. Would Wicked
thoughts sooner invade man, than depart from him.
to God thou would look upon my labors and sorrows, O most mighty God of
Israel, and most desirous of faithful souls, and would prosper all my
enterprises. Strengthen me with heavenly strength, least old Adam my wretched
flesh, not yet wholye subject unto my spirit, do master or bear rule over
me, against which I must fight, so long as the breath is in this most wretched
body of mine, most wretched I say, because calamities and miseries are never
wanting therein, because al things are therein full of snares, and enymies. For
temptacions do follow temtacions: yea, also, whilst the first conflict does
Temptacio^s follow temptacions.
yet endure, diverse other do come in the neck of it, we not so much as
thinks of any such matter. Can then this life be loved, which has so many
bitter tastes, and is subject to so many miseries and calamities? Or yet may it
rightly be termed life, which causes so many deaths and plagues? yea, for all
that it is loved, and in the same do many men The world deceitful and vain.
1. loan. 2.
hunt after pleasures. The world is many times dispraised, because it is so
deceytfull and vain: and yet is it hardly forsaken, because the desires of the
flesh do hear to great a sway. For some things do allure to love it, other
some do allure man to despise it. To love it, the desire of the flesh and the
eyes does allure, and the pride of his life: The punishments and miseries that
do follow after are cause of the hate and irksomeness of the same. But alack
for pity, wicked pleasure does master the mind, being bent unto the world, so
that it is kept in delight with the ticklings of the senses, when as yet
neither it has seen nor tasted of the pleasantness of God, and the inward
sweetness of virtue. But they which utterly contemn the world, and endeavor
to live unto god, under holy discipline, the same are not ignorant of the
promised sweetness in God, to them that have wholly renou^ced themselves: and
again, do see how lamentably or grievously the world wandreth and how
diversely it is deceived.

That we must rest and repose our selves in God above all good things and
gifts. The.xxiij. Chapter.
REst thou always in GOD above all things, and in all things, O my soul. For
he is the everlasting rest of the Saints and God the comforter of those that
repose their trust in him.
godly men. Grant me, O most sweet and loving Jesus, to repose my self in
thee above all things in the world: above all health and beauty, above al
glory and honor, above all power and dignity, above all knowledge and wit,
above all riches and Arts, above al joy and triumphant rejoicing, above all
fame and praise, above all sweetness and comfort, above all hope and
promise, above all deserte and desire, above all gifts and offices, which thou
can give and pour forth, above all gladness and joy of voice, which the
mind is able to comprehend and feel: To be short, above al Angels and
Archangels, above the whole Army of heaven, above all God the creator, and
governor of all things both in heaven and earth.
visible and invisible things, and above all whatsoever thou art not, O my
GOD. For thou art, O my God, the best of all other: thou only art most mighty,
thou only art most plentiful and most full: thou only art most pleasant and
most able to cause comfort: thou only art most bountiful and most amiable.
Thou only of all other art most noble most glorious: In thee only rest all
good things, and the same perfect, both are, and have been, and shall be. And
therefore, it is both less little, whatsoever thou give unto me besides thy
self, or do utter unto me and promise as touching thy self, being not yet
seen nor fully attained unto. For my mind can not soundly take rest, nor be
contented sufficiently with that which is present, except it, passing by all
gifts and al worldly things, do repose it self in thee. O my most sweet
spouse Jesus Christ, a most pure lover, Lord of the whole world, would God I
had wings of true liberty to fly unto thee, and to rest my self in thee. O
Lord, when Psalm. 54.
shall it be lawful wholly to employ my wit, and to see how pleasant thou art, O
my Lord God? When shall I at the length settle all my powers Psalm. 33.
in thee, in such wise that for very love of thee, I may not now feel my
self, but thee only, after an incredible manner of seeling, and that not
known to every man? Now, I do many times sigh, and do bear my infelicity
with sorrow, because many evils do occur in this vale of miseries, which do
trouble me oftentimes, make me sad and pensive, darcken mine understanding,
many times do let, distract, allure, shackle and entangle me, that I may not
have free access unto thee, nor enjoy thy pleasant imbracements, being always
present with thy blessed spirits. Let so many sighs, so many painful cares of
mind, which I bear out in the world, move thee. O Jesus, the brightness of
glory everlasting, the solace of the wandering soul: my mouth is with thee,
void of words, and my silence does speak unto thee. How long does my Lord
God forslow his coming? Let him come unto me his poor soul, and make me
joyful: and stretching forth his hand, let him deliver a wretch out of all
perplexity of mind. Come, come, I say: For without thee, there shall be no
day, no nor no hour quiet, because thou art my joy, without whom my table is
void and empty. I am a wretch, and know not after what sort I am pressed
down, as it were, with imprysonment and fetters, until thou refreshe me with
the light of thy presence, and set me at liberty and show me thy friendely and
loving countenance. Let other men seek what they Nothing ought to be lyked or
sought for more then God and godliness.
list in the stead of thee: but as for me, nothing either likes or shall like
me else save thee. O my God my hope and everlasting salvation, I will never
hold my tongue: I will never cease to pray, until thy favor do return, and
thou speak unto me at home.

JESUS. Behold, I am here present with thee, because you have called upon me:
thy tears and desire of mind, and discouragment, and anguish have called me
unto thee in stirring me unto pity.


SERVANT. I O Lord, have called upon thee, as one desirous to enjoy thy
presence, being ready to refuse al things for thy sake. For thou did first
stir me up to seek thee: as touching which thing, I yield thee thanks, O
Lord, which have done so great a benefit unto me thy servant, according to
thy singular mercy. In fine, what needs many words, or what remains else
besides, saving that I submit my self very modestly unto thee, as one mindful
evermore of mine own unrighteousness and vileness? For no man is like unto
thee any where, in all those wonderful Psalm. 70. 85. and. 88.
things which are contained in heaven and earth. Thy works, O Lord, are good
above mesure: Genesis 1. Psalm. 18.
thy sentence is true, and al things are governed by the help of thy
providence. Wherefore, praised and glorified be thou, O wisdom of Psalm. 33.
and 148.
the Father: let both my soul and my mouth together with all the creatures of
the world praise and set forth thee.


Of the recounting of so many benefits of God The.xxiiij. Chapter.
OPen O Lord, the eyes of my mind, and teach me to live according Psalm. 118.
to the commandments of thy law. Cause that I may understand thy will, and
may recount with great reverence and diligent consideration thy benefits
bestowed, as well upon all men, as also upon me, that thereby I may give thanks
accordingly. Although to say the truth, I am not able sufficiently to praise
the least part of the same: and so much it wants that I am able to set forth
so many gifts and benefits bestowed upon me, that whilst I consider thy bowntie
and liberality, my spirit fails me through the greatness thereof. For what
thing soever we possess, either of Psalm. 118.
mind, or of body, either without, or within, both natural and against
nature, those same are thy benefits, and do commend thy liberality, bounty,
and goodness, of whom we have received all good things. Now, if one man have
received more or fewer gifts than another has, surely they are all thine: and
without thee, the least thing of all may not be had. Now if any man have gotten
greater gifts, the same can not boast of his own desert, nor extol himself
above other men, or triumph over him that has lesser gifts. For every man is
so much the greater and the better, as the same does the less attribute and
ascribe unto himself, and as he is the more modest and Godly in giving of
thanks: and look how much the more every man does think himself most vile
and most unworthy of al other, so much the fitter is ye same to obtain greater
things at thy hands. Again, if one have gotten fewer gifts, the same ought
not to be sorry, or to take it heavily, or to envy at him Modesty is ye use
of Gods benefits.
that is richer in gifts, but rather to behold thee, and most of all to praise
thy goodness, in that thou give thy gifts so ple^tifully, so willinglye,
without any respect or difference of persons. All things are of thee, and
therefore art thou to be praised in all things: and thou know what is
expedient to be given unto every man: yea, it is not for us but for thee to
judge why this man has less, and he more, which thoroughly perceiuest what
thing is convenient for every man. Therefore, O Lord God, I reckon and account
it for a great benefit also, to have but few things which may seem after
the fashion of the world to be praised and gloried in. And thus I determine
that man ought not only and to be vexed to sorrow for his own vileness and
lack of help, and to be discouraged in mind, but also to take thereof great
comfort and joy, because thou, O God do choose the naked and lowly, and to
such as are despised in the face of the world, to be thy familiars and
household servants. Thy Apostles themselves are witnesses hereof, which being
made chief of the whole world by thee, did show themselves so modest, so
simple, so void of all malice and guile, that they did not only refrain from
complainings, but also did rejoice to be taken up with reprochful words and
rebukes for thy name sake, and did most greedily embrace those things, which
other men do detest and fly from. Therefore nothing ought so much to ceere up
a lover of thee, and one that acknowledges thy benefits, as the knowledge of
thy will and everlasting decree, with the which he ought so to be content, and
so to accept and take it in good worth, that he desire no less to be the least
of all other, then another man desires to be the greatest, and do no less
take in good part and content himself with the lowest place, then with the
highest, and is no less willingly despised and abject and a seely soul of no
reputacion, then he is to be the most noble and greatest of al other, For thy
will, and the love of thy honor The will and love of God, ought to ouercom all
things.
ought to overcome all things, and to comfort him more, and please him more,
then all benefits, either bestowed, or to be bestowed upon him.

Of four things which do procure peace. The.xxv. Chapter
LORD. Son, I will now teach thee ye way of true peace and liberty.


SERVANT. Do Lord, as thou say: For it is welcome to me to hear this.


LORD. Endeavor, son, to do the will of another, rather than thine own
will. Have aiwaies liesser to have less than more. Always seek for the
lowest place, and desire to obey all men. Always wish and pray that Gods will
may altogether be done in thee. He that both these things, weete thou that he
enters into the bounds of peace and quietness.


SERVANT. Lord, this talk of thine, being but short, does contain much
perfection: and it is surely but small and slender in speaking, but yet both
full of sense, and plentiful in fruit. And if I did faithfully obey the same,
truly there should not be trouble and unquietness within me so soon: yea, so
oftentimes as I feel my self unquieted and grieved, I find my self to have
declined from this doctrine of thine. But thou, who art able to do al things,
and always love the profiting and coming forward of man's soul, increase
thy liberality toward me I pray thee, that I may be able, both to do as
thou biddest, and also to attain unto everlasting salvation.


A prayer against evil thoughts. The.xxvi. Chapter.
SERVANT. O My Lord my God, depart not from me: O my God, see thou help and
succor me. For evil and wicked thoughts are within me, and also fears that do
vex my soul: which thoughts by what means may I pass by, or break in
pieces, without harming my self?


LORD. I will lead thee the way, and will press down man's power, and the
prison door being opened, will declare and make manifest my secrets and hid
things unto thee.


SERVANT. Do so Lord, and chase all wicked thoughts away with thy
countenance. This is my only hope and comfort, to fly unto God must be
prayed unto with faith and constant patience.
thee in all calamity, to put my trust and confidence in thee, to call upon thee
from the bottom of my heart, and patiently to await for thy comfort.


Prayers to obtain the lightning of the mind. The.xxvij. Chapter.
Give light unto me, O good Jesus, with the brightness of thy everlasting
light, and disperse all manner darkness, as it were, out of the house of my
soul. Repress so many outwandrings, and beat down violent temptacions. Fight
for me stoutly, and overcome the wicked beasts, which are the desires of
allurements, that peace may be made, through thy power and virtue, and the
holy Hall, which is my cleansed soul, may ring and resounde with thy praises.
Command the winds and tempest, bid the Sea to be calm and quiet, bid the
blowing of the North wind to cease, and there shall be great calmness. Send
thy light and truth to give light unto earth. For I am but rough and vngaine
earth, till thou do give light unto me. Pour out thy favor from above: all
to be sprinkle my soul with thy heavenly liberality: minister water of
Godliness: which when the uppermost part of the earth is once watered, may
fetch out good, or rather the best fruit. Lift up my mind, being pressed down
with the weight of sins, and hang up my whole desire upon heavenly things, that
the sweetness of the heavenly felicity being once tasted of, it may be
tedious to think of earthly things. Deliver me or rather snatch me out of all
comfort of worldly things, nothing parmanent or durable. For no worldly
creature is able to alay and comfort mine appetite or desire at all. Join me
unto thee with the indissoluble bond of love. For thou only art sufficient for
the lover, and wout thee al things are but frivolous and vain.

Of the avoiding of curious inquiry how another man does live. The.xxviij.
Chapter.
LORD. Son, be not curious, or have superfluous cares in thy head. What
belongs this or that unto thee? do thou follow me. For what matter makes
it, what every man does or speaks? It is not necessary for thee to plead the
cause of other men: thou must give an account or reckning for thy self. Why
then do thou entangle thy self with other men's matters? I know all men, and
see all things, whatsoever are done under the sun: and know how it goes with
every man, what he thinks, what he would have, and whereunto his counsel and
meaning does tend. Therefore, all things are to be The mind must be drawn
from men's friendship, that unto God it may be most inward.
committed unto me: do thou practice and ensue peace, and suffer the unquiet
to moyle about what he list, that shall surely give account of all their doings
and sayings. For they can not deceive me. Let neither the shadow of a great
man, nor yet the familiarity of many nor the private friendship of men be
passed upon of thee. For these things do cause dystractions of mind, and
compass the same about with uncouth darckenesse. Truly I would willingly
utter my sayings unto thee, and would disclose my secrets, if thou would
diligently watch for my coming, and would open the door of thy soul unto
me.


In what things steadfast peace of mind and true profiting does consist.
The.xxix. Chapter.
Son, I have thus spoken: My peace I leau unto you, my peace I give you: not
as the world gives, do I give unto you. All men covet for peace: but al men
be not careful about those things which are requisite unto true peace. My
peace has to do with the modest, and with men of a soft and gentle spirit:
Thy peace does consist in great patience, and thou may enjoy the same at
large, if thou will hear me, and wilt follow my voice. Wherefore give good
heed in all things, what thou do or speak, and be occupied in this one
point, to please me, and to covet or desire nothing out of me. Thou may
judge nothing rashlye and without cause, concerning the sayings or dooyngs of
other men, nor entangle thy self in matters not committed unto thee. By this
means, it shall happen that thou shall be both little and Curiofitie is full
of trouble,
seldom disquieted. For to feel no manner of trouble at all, nor to have any
vexation of mind or body, is not for this present life, but for the state of
the everlasting rest. Wherefore think not that thou have found true peace, if
thou feel no grief at all: or that all is well, if thou suffer no manner of
adversity: or that all is perfect, if every thing happen as thou would have
it thy self: nor think that thou art any thing of price, or highly in my
favor, if thou live in great godliness and sweetness. Neither shall the true
Lover of virtue be known by these things, nor yet does the coming forward
and perfection of a man consist in these things. In what point then? Forsooth,
in offering thy self with thy whole heart unto the will of God, and in loving
thy self in no manner of thing great or small, neither in this life, nor in the
life to come: so that thou keep still in prosperity and adversity one
countenance continually with thanks giving, in waying all things with
vpryghtnesse and indifferency. Finally, if thou will show thy self so valiant
and of so strong faith, that though the inward comfort be withdrawn, thou will
yet prepare thy Soul to endure greater things, and wilt not report and praise
thy self for just and holy, it will then fall out, that thou may tread the
true and right way of peace, and that thou may have undoubted hope to see my
countenance again with joyful singing and melody. Now, if thou shall come
unto the full and perfect contempt of thy self, weete thou, that thou shall be
able to enjoy so much peace, as can be possiblye had in this mortal life.

Of the excellency of a free mind: and likewise that humble prayer is better
tha^ reading. The.xxx. Chapter.
THis truly is the work of a perfect man, Lord, never to release The
perfection and liberty of man.
the mind from the handling and occupying of the Scriptures, and heavenly
things, and in the mids of many cares, to pass over the life, as it were
without care, not after the manner of the dull and sluggish person, but in the
excellency of a free mind, cleaving to no worldly thing with inordinate
desire. I beseech thee, O my most merciful god, preserve and keep me from the
cares of this life, least I be overmuch inwrapped with the necessities of the
body, or least I be caught with the pleasures of those things which do hurt
the soul, or least I be discouraged as one that is harthbroken with griefs and
sorows. I mean not of those things, which the lightness of the world does
covet with tooth and nail: but of those myseries, which do grieve my mind with
the common penal infelicity of our mortality, and does hinder it, that it can
not enter into the liberty of the spirit, as often as it lists. O my God,
my unspeakable sweetness, turn al carnal comfort into bitterness, which
draws me away from the love of things everlasting, and allureth with the
beholding of, I cannot tell what present and delightful goodness. Let not
flesh and blood overcome me: Let not flesh and blood overcome me, O my God: let
not the world and the short glory thereof deceive me, let not the devil give
me a fall with his subtilty and craft. Grant me strength to resist, patience to
suffer, co^stancy to persevere. Grant me in the stead of all worldly comforts,
the most pleasant anointing of thy spirit: and in stead of carnal love,
pour into me the love thy name. Very meat, and drink, and clothing, and the
other necessaryes to the maintenance of our body are burdensome to a fervent
spirit. Cause that I may use such nourishments temperately, and that I be not
entangled with the over greedy desire of the same. In deed I may not cast away
al things because nature must be sustained. Again, thy holy law forbids to
covet all superfluous and most delightful things. For else the flesh Measure
is a most beautiful virtue.
would ware proud against the spirit. Between these two things, let thy
hand rule me I beseech thee, and teach me, that nothing be done overmuch.

That men are most of all hindered from the coming of the highest felicity
through the love of themselves. The xxxi. Chapter.
LORD. Son, thou must purchase the whole with the whole, and not keep back
any thing of thy self. For to give thee understanding of this, thy selfeloue
does more hurt thee, than any thing else whatsoever it be: and it happens
that according to that love and desire which thou have, every thing does more
or less stick unto thee. Now, if thou shall be endued with a pure, simple, and
temperate love, thou shall be void of the bondage of things. Desire not that
which thou may not have. Possess not that which may entangle thee, and
which may deprive thee of the liberty of the mind. It is a wonder that thou
do not utterly commit thy self unto me with thy whole heart, with all these
things which thou can wish for, or have. Why art thou consumed with vain
mournyng and pensiveness? why art thou tired with superfluous cares? show thy
self obedient unto my pleasure, and thou shall suffer no manner of loss or
hindraunce. For if to get thy self commodities, and to have thy wishes, thou will apply thy mind to the seeking of things and wylt covet to chang the place
wherein thou art, thou shall never attain quietness, nor be free from
carfulness. For in every thing there shall be somewhat to find lack off, and
in every place there shall be one or other to be thy adversary. Therefore, every
thing does help, when it is not gotten or plentifullye increased, but rather
contemned and cut out of the mind by the roots: which thing I would have to
be understood, not only of lands and riches, but also of the ambicion of
honor and desire of vain praise: All which do peryshe with the world.
Besides the place does little fence a man, if fervent spirit be wanting:
Neither does that peace which is outwardelye sought for, long continue, if it
lack the true foundation of the settled mind: That is, except thou No man is
made better without God, without whom disquietnesse of mind does always
increase.
shall stand in me, thou shall change but the place and not the mind. For an
occasion arising, and being taken, thou shall find not only those things
which thou do fly from, but also mo things too besides.


Prayers to attain to cleanness of mind, and the heavenly wisdom.
The.xxxij. Chapter.
SERVANT. Confirm me, O God, with the gift of thy holy spirit: grant me so
great virtue and power, that the inward man being strengthened, I may rid my
self from all unprofitable care, and langour or feebleness, and that I be not
drawn with the sundry desires of any thing, whether it be vile or precious:
but do account both my self and all other things for transitoris and
corruptible, forasmuch as nothing is continuallye permanent under the sun:
Nay, all things are but vain and torments of the mind. Who so takes these
things in such sort, it is he that has wit above other: Grant me, O Lord,
heavenly wisdom, that I may learn to seek and find thee above all things, to
savor and love thee above al things, and so to take other things according to
the order of thy wisdom, as they be in deed in themselves. Grant me both
wisely to decline from flatterers, and pacyently Highest or chiefest wisdom.
to bear mine adversaries. For neither to be moved with every blast of words,
nor yet to give an ear unto the flattering Mermayde: that in deed is perfect
wisdom, and so shall we safely go forward the way we have only begun.


Against ill speakers. The.xxxiij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, if any shall have an evil opinion of thee, or shall speak
evil of thee, do not thou take the same grievously: but rather think worse
of thine own self than he does, and believe no man to be more weak than thy
self. If thou will go the secret way of virtue of the mind, you shall not
greatly esteem flying words. It is no small wisdom to keep silence in
aduersitye, and to turn thy mind unto me, and nothing to be The fickle
judgments of men are little to be accounted of
troubled with the judgment of the world. Peace must not stay upon the saying
of men, with whom whether thou be well or ill reported, thou art not for that
cause another man. In me, in me I say, true glory and true peace does
consist: and the same shall enjoy it plentifully, that neither coueteth to
please men, nor yet fears to displease them. All unquietness of mind, and
distracting of the senses, does surely proceed from inordynate love and vain
fear.


How God must be called upon, and praised in adversities. The.xxxiiij. Chapter.
SERVAVNT. THy name be praised, O Lord for evermore, which would have me
tempted with this calamity, which surely I can not avoid, but must needs fly
unto thee to help me, and to cause that this thing may turn to my
commodity. Lord, now am I in calamity, and my mind is in ill case: Nay, I am
much vexed with my present chance. Therefore what shall I say, O most dear
father: I am in great perplexity. Deliver me from this hour, into the which,
no duobt, I therefore come, that thou might be praised, I being first so
greatly pressed down, and then afterward delivered through thy help. I
beseech thee, O Lord, that thou will vouchsafe to deliver me out of this
evil, being a naked soul, and ignorant which way I shall turue my self without
thy help. Grant me now O Lord, patience also: help me, O my God, and I will
take even the most grienous chances that shall happen unto me, without fear.
And what shall I say unto thee in the midst of these things? Lord, thy will be
done. I surely have deserved this evil and anguisy, and therefore must I bear
it, (I pray God I may do the same patiently) until such time as the tempest
being ended, more joyful seasons do follow on. Howbeit thy almighty hand is
able to remove and turn from me this temptacion also, and to mittigate the
violence thereof, that I do not wholly faint and give over, according as you have
many times dealt with me before time, O my God, according to thy mercy toward
me. And with the more hard adventure that I am oppressed, so much the more
sweetly shall I be refreshed with the help of thy mighty right hand.


Of craving of Gods help, and confidence to recover grace. The.xxxv. Chapter.
LORD. Son, I am the Lord, the strengthener of men in adversities, unto
whom thou may repair and resort, if at any time it go otherwise than well
with thee. But that most of all does hinder heavenly comfort, that thou
somewhat slowly do betake thy self to prayers. For before that thou pray
unto me earnestly, thou seek after many comforts all the while, and do
refresh thy self with outward things: and therefore if happens, that all do
but little profit thee, till that thou epsy me to be the same that do
deliver those men out of troubles, which have put their trust in me, out of
whom, there is no help neither substantial, nor counsel profitable, nor
remedy durable. But now taking courage unto thee again after the tempest, be
whole and strong in the light of my mercy. For I am at hand (says the Lord) to
restore all things, not only to as good case as they were at the first, but
also to renew them plentifully with the better. Is there any thing over hard
for me to do? Or am I like unto them, which do not perform their promises?
Where is thy faith? Stand steadfastly and with perseverance, show thy self a
man parient and valiant. Comfort will be with thee in his due time: Look
after, look after me, I say: I will come and I will cure thee. It is temptacion
that does vex thee, and vain carfulness which does make thee afeard: What
good does care of the chances to come, but that thou may heap sorrow upon
sorrow? The evil of the day present is sufficient for it self: vain and
unprofitable it is, either to be troubled or to rejoice about things to come:
which percha^ce shall never happen. But it is man's fashion to be deluded with
such imaginations, and it is the token as yet of a base courage, so soon to be
drowned with the intisment of the enemy. He forces nothing at al whether he
delude and deceive with true things or false things, and whether he give a man
a foil with the love of present things, or with the fear of things to come.
Wherefore, be not troubled in thy mind, or faint hearted: believe me, and put
thy We must stand stedfastlye against the te^ptacions of the devil with a
strong faith in God.
trust and affiance in my mercy. I am many times hard by thee, when thou
think that I am a great way off: and when thou supposest that thou have lost
altogether, even then many times is greater gain so much the more near at
hand. All things are not therefore lost though the matter fall quite contrary to
thy desire. Thou ought not to judge of the feel of present miseries, nor
when calamity does arise from some place, so to be moved and nypped in the
head withal, as though al hope of escape were taken away. Do not think thy
self altogether forsaken, if at any time I either have sent thee calamity for
a season, or yet have withdrawn my desired comfort from thee. For thus do men
go on to the kingdom of heaven: and surely, this is more for thy profit, and
for the profit of al other of my servants: that ye should be excited and
quickened with adversities, than if all things should happen unto you according
to your hearts desire. I am so well acquainted with the secret thoughts of the
heart, that I know it to make very much for thy salvation, that sometime thou
he left in God the highest physician sends no kind of troubles, but such as
brings salvation.
heaviness, least perhaps, being proud with prosperous success, you should
thereby think thy self that which thou art not. I am able to take away that
which I have given: and I can restore the same again when me lists. If I
have given it, it is mine own. If I have taken it away, I have not taken away
thine seeing every good and perfect gift is my gift. Therefore, if at any time I
send thee some evil and adversity, grutch not thereat, nor despair: even I
the same am able to ease thee quickly, and to turn all thy heaviness into
joy. But in that I deal so with thee, I am just, and much to be commended. And
if thou be wise, and do rightly consider this my deed, thou shall never with
such faintness be sorry for adversities, but rather rejoice, and give me
thanks: Nay, thou shall judge that this above al other things is to be
rejoiced at, that I afflicting thee with sorrows, do nothing at all spare
thee. As the father loved me even so love I you, said I to my most dear
Disciples, whom I sent not: I tell thee, to perishing and transitory joys, but
to great fights: Not unto honors, but unto infamy and slander: Not unto
idleness, but unto labors: Not unto rest, but to bring forth plentiful fruit
with patience. Remember these my words, O my good son.


The.xxxvi. Chapter.
Of despising of all things in the world, that the Creator may be found.
SERVANT. O My Lord, I have yet need of All (creatures) must be renounced, to
the end that we may possess the Creator.
thy far greater favor, to come unto that point, that neither any man, nor
yet any creature may be a let unto me. For so long as any thing does withold me
and keep me back, I can not fly freely unto thee. He desired to take his
flight freely, which said: Would God I had wings like a Dove, to fly away
into rest. What is more quiet then a simple eye? Or what is more free then he,
which desires nothing upon ye earth? Therefore, man must pass over all the
creatures, and bring himself to such a foredeale or forwardenesse, that being
ravished beside himself, he may see that thou the Creator art nothing at all
like to any of the creatures. And unless a man be delivered from all the
creatures, he can not freely apply himself unto heavenly things. For few
addicted unto the contemplation of Godliness, are therefore to be found,
because few know how to separate themselves wholly from vain and worldely
things: whereunto no doubt we have great need of Gods favor, to lift up our
mind, and to ravish us beside our selves. But unless we be lifted up in
spirit: and delivered from all worldly things, be wholly joined unto God, it is
a matter of no great importance, whatsoever either he knows or he has. He
shall be long time a Punye or underling, and shall lie upon the ground, that
does greatly esteem any thing besides the one, Almighty, everlasting goodness.
Whatsoever thing is not good, The wisdom of a man lightened from above is
better tha^ the knowledge of a learned and skillful Clarke.
the same is nothing at all, and to be reckned as nothing. There is, no doubt,
great difference between the wisdom of a man lightened from above and Godly,
and the knowledge of the learned and skillful person: and the doctrine which
flows from above, and from the heavenly fountain, is much more noble the^
that which is painefully sought for by man's wit. In deed there are many that
are desirous to contemplate: heavenly things: but such as do not study to
practice the things that are necessary thereunto. That is also a great let,
that men do stay insignes and sensible things: and small labor is bestowed
upon the perfect mortification of a man's self. I know not what the matter
should be, and with what spirit we are led, and what is in our minds that are
called spiritual, in that we apply our selves with all study and care to
corruptible and vile things, and yet do seldom or never think upon God
passes not up on external and sensible things, but upon the mortyfication of
the soul.
the business of our soul by gathering all our wits about us: And how is this
to, that after a small calling of our selves in, we forthwith burst out again,
and do not with straight examination way our works? We do not attend or take
heed wherein our affections are occupied, neither do we lament that all our
things are so impure. For the manners of all The spiritual man is chiefly
busied about spiritual thigs.
men are corrupted which in old time was the cause of so great a flood.
Therefore, when the affection is corrupted within, it is of necessity that the
action also that does follow, being the descryer of the lack of vigor and
force, should be corrupted. For the fruit of good life does proceed out of a
pure soul. Inquiry is made how much every man does: but with how great virtue
he does them, it is not so studiously wayed. Search is made whether Man's
judgment is blind.
one be rich, whether one be strong, whether one be fair and beautiful,
whether he be valiant, a good writer, or a singer, or a plowma^: but most men
say nothing of this: How poor he is in spirit, how pacient and gentle, how
godly and inward. The nature of the world does behold the outward things: but
grace does turn it self unto the inward things. The first is many times
deceived this other has a hope and trust in God, that it may not be deceived.


The xxxvij. Chapter.
Of the denial of a man's self, and the putting of all desire from him.
LORD. Son, thou may not attain unto liberty perfitely, unless thou
do wholly renounce and forsake thy self. All covetous men, and lovers of
themselves, men full of desires, curious, wandering and unconstant, evermore
desirous of pleasure, and not of Jesus Christ, and many times attempting
things that shall not stand or continue, are but captives, because all that is
not of god, is but vanishing, and shall perish. Here this short and perfect
sentence: Forsake al things, and thou shall find all things: Forsake thy
desire, and thou shall find rest. Reuolue and ponder this in thy mind: and
after thou have fulfilled all things, thou shall understand the meaning.


SERVANT. Lord, this is not one days work, or play of children, but therein is
briefly comprehended ye whole perfection of a godly man.


LODRE. Son, thou ought not to be turned away forthwith, or to discourage
thy self when thou hear this word Perfection: but rather be provoked to
higher things, and at the The perfection of a christian man.
leastwise to sigh after the^ with desire. Would to God thy case were such, and
thou were come so far, that thou were not a lover of thy self, but did
wholly obey my will and pleasure. Thus should it come to pass, that thou
should highly like me, and should pass over thy whole life with joy and
peace. Thou have yet many things to be forsaken, which, unless thou shall
utterly yield up unto me, thou shall not attain unto that which thou
requirest. I read and advise thee to buy gold of me that gloweth with the
fire, that thou may become rich: to weete, heavenly wisdom, treading down
all base and vile things. Cast away earthly wisdom, that is: cease to please
and flatter thy self after the fashion of the world. I have said that thou
must buy most vile things with precious things, and such as are highly
esteemed in the world. For that true heavenly wisdom, which does not much
challenge unto it self, nor coueteth to be greatly made off in the world,
seems but vile and course, and in a manner forgotten: which undoubtedly many
men praising with their mouth do yet far dissent in their life: and for all
that, the same wisdom is that precious pearl, which to many men is hid and
unknown.


Of the instabilitie of man's mind, and setting God before himself above all
things. The.xxxviij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, do not credit that affection wherein thou now art, because it
shall by and by be changed into another affection. For so long as thou live,
thou shall be subject to mutabilitie and change, whether thou will or no, so
as thou art sometimes glad and sometimes sad, sometimes quieted, sometimes
troubled, sometimes godly, sometimes contrary, sometimes diligent and
painful, sometimes slow and dull, sometime grave, sometime light. But this
wise man I spoke off, and one rightly schooled in spirit, does stand above
these chaungeable things, not considering what he thinks in him self, or
which way the wind of instabilitie does blow, but bending the whole purpose of
his mind to that end that he ought to do, that is to say, to the very best
end. For so it happens that the same man may abide unshaken, while the simple
eye of his meaning is directed vnme without intermission or ceassing, through
so many, so diverse and sundry euentes. And the more pure that the eye of ye
intent is, so much The pure intent of ye mind does cause constancy.
the more inconstantly do men walk in the midst of diverse storms. But that
eye is blind in many men, and does quickly look upon some pleasure lying
before it: so that it is seldom seen that he is wholly free from the stayne or
spot of self love. Thus did the Jews come in old time to Bethany, unto Martha
and Mary, not for Jesus sake only, but to see Lazarus. Therefore, the eye of
the intent must be cleansed, that it may be simple and straight, and to be
directed unto me beyond the reach of all things which do happen among, in
great variety.


That there is pleasure about all things, and in all things to one that loves
God. The.xxxix. Chapter.
SERVANT. BEhold my God, and al things. What would I have more? or what can I
wish more happy? O sauorie and sweet word: But to him that loves ye word,
and not the world, nor the things that are in word. My God, and all things:
to a wiseman it is enough: and to repeat the same oftentimes, is pleasant unto
thy lover. For whilst thou art present, all things are pleasant: whilst thou
art away, all things are painful and troublesome: Thou make a calm soul,
and great peace and plesaunt joy. Thou art the God is all things in all men.
cause that we have a good opinyon of all things, and that thou be praised
in all things. Neither can any thing long please without thee: Nay, that
any thing should be acceptable and sauorie, the presence of thy favor is
requisite and the same must be sawced and powdered with thy wisdom. What is
not sauorie and sweet unto him, unto whom thou art sauorye? Again, what
can cause pleasure unto him, unto whom thou art not sauorie? But the wise of
the world do fail in thy wisdom, and such as savor the flesh: because
death is found here and there very much vanity. But they which follow thee by
the contempt of worldly things, and mortifying of the flesh, are to be thought
wise in deed, because they are translated from vanity, to verity, from
flesh, to spirit. Unto these men God is sweet and sauorie: and whatsoever
there is in the world created, all that do they refer to the praise of the
Creator and maker. Yet is the There is very great difference between ye
Creator and his creatures, between the giver and his gifts.
taste of the Creator and the creature of euerlastingnesse, and of time, and
light uncreated, and light illuminated unlike, yea, and that far unlike to. O
everlasting light, and thou which do surpass al created lights, shine
clearly upon me: and with thy brightenesse peerce, purge, cheer, give light
unto all the inwards of my mind, quicken my spirit with her powers, that I
may stick fast unto thee with the song of triumphant gladness. O Lord, when
shall that blessed and desired hour come, wherein thou may fill me so with
thy presence, that thou may be al things in all things unto me. Surely, so
long as this shall not be granted unto me, I shall not have full and perfect
joy. The old man, not yet wholly crucified, not yet wholly mortified, does as
yet live within me, which makes me sorry: yet does it mightily covet against
the spirit, yet does it move war within me, and suffers not the kingdom
of my soul to be quiet. But go to, do thou help me which bear rule over
the Sea, and do settle the motions of the waves and surges. Disperse the
people that are desirous of war, and tread them down by thy force and
virtue: Show forth thy greatness, and make noble this right hand of thine.
For I have no hope any where, I have no refuge any where, saving in thee, O my
lord god.


That this life is never in safety from temptacion. The.xl. Chapter.
LORD. Son, thou shall never be without dangers in this life, but so long
as thou live, thou shall always have need of spiritual weapons. Thou art
in the midst of thy enemies: Thou art assaulted on the right and left hand.
Therefore, unless thou will defend thy self with the buckler of Constant
patience is that that gets vic torie.
wisdom on all sides, thou will not long time be without a wound. Again,
unless thou will fix thy mind upon me, to suffer all things for my sake with
a sincere will, thou shall be unable to continue this heat, or to attain the
reward of the blessed. Wherefore, then must ouergo all things like a man, and
must use a mighty hand against the things that are cast against thee. For
Manna is given to the conqueror: but much misery is left unto the sluggard.
Now, if thou seek after ease in this life, how will thou come unto the life
everlasting? Bend thy self wholly, not unto rest, but unto patience. Seek for
true peace, not upon the earth, but in heaven: not in men and other worldly
things, but in god alone. Thou ought to enterprise all things willingly for
the love of God, labors, sorrows, temptacyons, vexations, carckes,
necessities, infirmities, wrongs, obloquies, reproves, oppressyons,
reproaches, corrections, despisinges: These things do allure unto virtues: These
things The lover of god does bear and suck up most hard things.
do make trial of the yoonge Soldier of Christ: These things do make a
heavenly Crown: to this man will I pray for his short labor an everlasting
reward: for a reproach past, everlasting glory. Think thou that thou shall
always have spiritual comforts as thou would thy self? The state and
condition of those my saints was not such in The state of the true saints was
most troubelsome and tedious.
old time, but they did patiently abide many grievous things, and sundry
temptacions, and great destructions: wherein nevertheless, they did wholly show
themselves pacient, altogyther more trusting unto god, then to the^ selves
knowing that the adversity of this life shall not counteruaile their glory to
come. Wylt thou have that at the first chop, which many have gotten scarsely
at the length, after many tears, and trauails? look for the lord and show thy
self a man, and give not over thine enterprise for lack of faith, but bestow
both body and soul constantlye in the defense of Gods glory. I will reward
thee most bountifully, and will be assistant unto thee in all calamity.


Against the vain judgments of men. The.xli. Chapter.
Son, cast thy mind constantly The clean nesse of a man's conscience, does
pass all men's judge mentes.
upon God, and fear not man's judgment, so long as thine own conscience does
pronounce thee godly and innocent. It is profitable and blessed to suffer these
things, neither is the same grievous and painful to a modest mind, and to
one more trusting in God then himself. Many men do prate and babble many
things, and therefore little credit must be given unto them: and it is not
possible that al men should be satisfied. And though Paul did study to please
all men, and did show himself all things to all men, yet did he little reckon
to be counted so by man's judgment. He did what he could no doubt to the
profit and salvation of others: but he could not let himself The invincible
patience of the mind fixed upon God.
to be condemned and despised by other men's judgments, and did therefore commit
the whole matter unto God, who knew all, and defended himself with patience
and modestye against the slanders and cursed speakings of the wicked, and the
lawless liers. Nevertheless he answered sometime, least he should cause
offense to the weaklings, through his silence, Why should thou then at the
length fear to be condemned of a mortal man, who to day is alive, and to
morrow is no where? Fear God and thou shall not fear men. What hurt can He
that looks upon God does refrain from altercation of words.
any man do with his words or wrongs? He hurts himself rather than thee, and
cannot escape the judgment of God, whosoever he be. Have thou God before
thine eyes, and strive not with quareling words. If thou think thou be
oppressed presently with infamy undeserved, God is the delyuerer and rewarder
of the^ that suffer adversity patiently.
take not the same heauilye, or diminishe thy crown with impacience, but
rather look up unto me in heaven, which am able to deliver man from all rebuke
and wrong, and reward every man according to his doings.

Of the pure and entire yielding up of himself to the attaining of the
liberty of mind. The.xlij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, forsake thy self, and thou shall find me. See that thou
challenge nothing unto thy self, see thou have nothing peculiare and proper
unto thy self, and so shall thou be always a gainer. For over and above this,
thou shall have greater gifts given thee, as soon as thou shall yield up thy
self, never to look back again.


SERVANT. Lord how oftentimes shall I yield up my self, and wherein shall I
forsake my self?


LORD. Always, and at all hours, both we are made partakers of God by
renouncyng of our own will.
in small and great matters. I except nothing, but that I will have thee found
naked and made bare in all things. Else how could thou be mine, and I
thine, unless thou were spoiled of all thine own will, both within and
without? The more spedily thou shall thus do, so much the better shall it go
with thee: and the fullier No man but one renouncing himself, and made bare of
all things, and brought unto nothing, can please God and accord firmelye with
him.
and more sincerely that thou go about it, both so much the more shall thou
please me, and the more shall thou gain by it. Some in deed do yield up
themselves unto me: but yet they do it with some exception. For they do not
put their trust in me fully and wholly, and therefore endeavor to see and provide
for themselves: Other also at the first do yield themselves altogether: but
afterward when temptacion once knocks, they come to their old conditions
again, and therefore do very little profit in virtue. These men shall never
aspyre unto the true liberty of a pure heart, and to the most pleasant benefit
of my familiarity, unless an entire yielding up, and a daily offering and
sacrificing of themselves have gone before, without the which it happens not,
nor will be that thou may enjoy the coniunctio^ of God. I have said many
times unto thee, and now I say again: Forsake and yield up thy self, and
thou shall enjoy deep peace of mind. Give all for all, require nothing, ask
nothing again, abide in me merely and without sticking at it, and so shall
thou have me, and shall be free of mind, and void of darkness. Endeavor this,
pray for this, labor to wish for this, that being wholly turned out of thy
self, thou may being naked, follow Jesus naked, and mortified unto thy
self, live unto me for evermore. Then, both vain imaginations, and wicked
troubles, and superfluous cares depart away. Then also shall immoderate fear
be gone, and love inordinate die.


Of convenient dealing in outward things, and flying unto God in dangers.
The.xliij. Chapter
Son, thou must look unto this diligently, that in every place and outward
action and business thou have a free mind, and master over it self, and do
put all things under thy subjection, and not thy self under them, and be not
the slave or bondsman of thine own deeds, but a Lord, but a Ruler, but one
truly set at liberty, and an Hebrew, The sum of christian liberty.
translated into the lot and liberty of the children of God, who despising
present things do behold things everlasting, and look upon mortal things
with the left eye, but things heavenly with the right eye: whom temporal
things do not draw to cleave unto them: but they themselves do rather draw
them to serve their turn aright, according as they were made of God and the
chiefest workma^, who did leave no disordred thing in things of his creation.
Now, if in every chance thou shall not cleave unto the outward show of the
matter, nor behold the thing seen or hard within a carnal eye, but in every
thing shall forthwith enter with Moses into the tabernacle to ask counsel of
the Lord, thou shall All outeward things do deceive. with out the inward
counsel of God we must determine nothing.
sometime hear God make thee an answer, and shall return as one taught in
many things, both present and to come. For Moses did always repair to the
tabernacle in assoiling of doubts and questions, and he fled unto the help of
prayer to drive away the perils, and wickedness of men. Even so ought thou
to fly into the secret place of thy heart, in calling earnestly upon Gods help.
For it is recorded in the scriptures that Joshua and the other Israelites were
therefore deceived of the Gabaonytes, because they did not first ask counsel
of the Lord, but were deluded with the sweetness of words, as men light of
credit, under the show or pretense of godliness.

That man be not importunate in his business. The.xliiij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, commyt thy cause unto me always: I will frame the same aright.
Look for my decree and determination, and thou shall feel a profiting thereby.


SERVANT. Lord, I commit every thing unto thee with a good will, because my
thought The whole felicity of man does depend upon the obedience of Gods will.
does little prevail about it. And would to God I were not careful thus for
the chances to come, but did submit my self without stay unto thy will and
pleasure.


LORD. Son, man oftentimes desirous of some thing, does covet the same: and
then having once gotten it, he begins to be of another mind, because the
desires of one thing are not dureable, but force you to diverse and sundry
things. Therefore it is not the least thing of all to forsake himself in the
Reuouncing of a man's self in all things is the safest liberty.
least things: and the true profiting of a man consists in the denying of
himself, so that he that has done that once, the same is most free and in most
safety. But that old enemy, adversary to all good men, does never cease from
temptacion, but day and night works high treasons or deceytes, if perchance
he may The devil does not cease to tempt.
thereby throw down the unwary headlong into ye snare of guile. Wherefore,
watch and pray, says the Lord, lest you enter into temptation.


That man has no goodness of himself, nor that he can boast of any thing.
The.xlv. Chapter.
SERVANT. LOrd, what is man that thou art Psalm. 8.
mindful of him? What is the son of man that thou earest Romans 11.
for him? what has he deserved to be had in favor of thee? Lord what can I
complain of, if thou shall forsake me? Or wherein can I justly blame thee if
thou grant me for my requests? Surely, this may I rightly think and say to
my self: Lord, I am nothing, I have no goodness of my self, but being void of
all things, do ever tend unto nothing. And if I be not helped of thee, and
instructed of thee within my mind, I am made altogether warm and dissolute.
But thou, O Lord, art always one, and do abide one for ever more, always
good, just, holy because thou do all things well, justly, holyly, and order
them with wisdom. But I being more prone to reuolting then coming forward,
do never continue still in one state, because I am subject to the alteratio^s
of time. But when thou do stretch forth thy helping hand, I am by and by
refreshed, for as God does help without al help of man.
much as thou art able alone to help without help of man, and to strengthen me
so much, that my countenance may not now be changed into diverse things, but my
mind may be corrected and repose it self in thee only. Therefore, if while I
either desire the godliness of mind, or am moved upon some necessity to
seek for thee (when there is no body to comfort me) I could skill to cast al
human comfort from me, surely I might rightly hope well of thy favor, and
look for a new gift of comfort with joy and gladness. Finally, it is thy
benefit whatsoever does happen well unto me at any time. I am vain and a
wretched man, of no regard in thy sight, unconstant and weak. Therefore
whereupon may I boast, or why shall I desire to be reverenced; Forsooth I shall
boast but of nothing, and as for that, it is most vane. Ambition is in deed a
most pestilent and most vain thing, which draws a man away from true glory,
and spoyleth him of heavenly favor. For whilst a man stands in Ambition is a
most pernicious thing to man's salvation.
his own conceit, he displeases thee: whilst he gapeth after man's praises, he
is deprived of true virtues. But true glory and holy rejoice is to boast of
thee, and not of himself, and to rejoice in thy name, and not for his own
virtue, or to be delighted with any thing saving only for thy sake.
Therefore, let thy name, and not mine be praised: Let thy work, and not mine be
extolled. Let that holy name of thine be so praised, that I may have no praise
of men at all. Of thee will I boast gladly for evermore. Of my self will I
boast nothing, saving of mine own infirmities. Let the Jews desire mutual
glory between themselves: I will study for that which does only make for God.
Surely, all man's glory, all mortal honor, all worldly loftiness, if it be
compared with this thy everlasting glory, is vanity and folishnesse. O my
truth, my mercy, my God, blessed trinity, to thee only be praise, strength,
and power, honor, glory world without end.


Amen.
Of the contempt of mortal honor. The.xlvi. Chapter.
LORD. Son, think it no matter to thee, if thou see others honored and
extolled, and thy self to be despised and contemned. Lyfre up thy mind unto
me into heaven, and so shall thou not take it grievously to be contemned of men
in this world.


SERVANT. Lord, we are in blindness, and are soon seduced with vanity. If I
look rightly upon my self, I never have any wrong done unto me of any
creature: whereby it happens that I have no cause to complain worthily of
thee. But because I have sinned against thee both oftentimes and greeuouslye,
Every creature is armed to the destruction of man. Man except he take patiently
extreme nakedness and contempt, he can not be joined unto God.
the whole world upon good cause is sharply set against me. Therefore is
infamy and contempt due unto me: to thee is praise, honor and glory belonging.
And except I so fashion my self, to be despised and forsaken of al men, and
take it quietly to be had in no manner of reputacion at all, I can not either
attain unto a quiet and steadfast mind, or be lightened from above, or fully
joined unto thee.


That a man must not set his peace upon Men. The.xlvij. Chapter.
LRODE. Son, if thou shalt fix thy peace in any man living, because of thy
agreement and familiarity with him, thou shall be unsteadfast and unquiet. But
if thou shall repair to the everlasting immortal truth, thou shall not be
vexed with the departure or deceasse of thy friend. For man All things do
deceive: the only everlasting truth does make men everlasting.
is so much the nearer unto God, as he departs farther from all earthly
comfort: and does ascend so much the more highly unto God, as he descends
the more deeply into himself, and as he is the more vile in his own conceit.
But he that does attribute any goodness unto himself, the same is a let for
gods favor to have place in him, because the favor of the holy ghost does
always seek for a lowly mind. If thou know how to bring thy self
altogether into nothing, and to rid thy self from all love of the creature,
surely I should flow into thee with great bountifulness. But All the creatures
do hinder the sight of God.
whilst thou look upon the creatures, the sight of the Creator is withdrawn
from thee. Learn to master thy self in all things for thy Makers sake: so
shall it happen that thou may come unto the knowledge of God. Even the least
thing in the world, if it be loved and regareed inordinately, hinders one
from the chiefest felicity, and does defile a man with sin.


Against vain and worldly knowledge. The.xlviij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, be not moved with the fear and sharp sayings of men. For the
kingdom of God does The word of God is not a voice hard with bodily ears but
spirit and everlasting power being understood of the soul
not stand in talk, but in virtue and power. Consider my words, which both
kindle the souls, and give light to the minds, and make remorse of conscience,
and bring true and perfect comfort. Never read any thing with this intent, to
seem the better learned or the wiser therefore, but endeavor to mortify thy
vices and sins. For this shall stand thee in more stead, than the knowledge
of many hard and subtle questions. When thou have read and known many
things, yet at the last thou must come to one beginning. I am he that teach
men knowledge, and do procure more sharp understanding to little ones, than
can be taught of any mortal man: into much that they whom I speak unto, do
soon become wise, and do much profit in the spirit. Woe be to the^ that seek
many curious things at men, and pass little upon the way that teaches to serve
me. That time shall come when Christ the master of masters, the Lord of
Angels shall appear, to require accounts of all men, and to examine the
conscience of all men: when as he shall search Jerusalem throughout with
ca^dlelight The everlasting truth does shine over the Godly, even in one
moment like unto ye Sun.
and those things shall become manifest which have lain hid in darckenesse, the
filed finenesie of tongues then holding their peace. I am he ye in one moment
do so raise up the lowly mind, that he may understand mo reesons of the
everlasting truth, than another shall attain unto even with ten years study.
I teach without noise of words, without Truth brings peace.
multitude of opinions, without pride of ambicion, without fight of Arguments.
I am he that teaches to despise worldely things, to loath present things, to
seek and savor everlasting things, to fly honors, to bear offenses, to put
all hope in me, out of me to desire nothing, The lover of God and the renou^cer
of himself is soundly taught.
and to love me fervently above al things. For by loving of me a certain man
did so wholly learn heavenly things, that he could speak woonders, and did
more come forware in forsaking all things, than he could have done by any
subtlety of studies. But I utter common things to some: to some singular
things: to some again I appear pleasantly in signs and figures: to other, I
open my secrets God only of himself, and by him self, is the teacher of the
truth.
with much light. The saying or voice of Books is all one, which instructs
not all men alike. But I am the teacher of the truth within, the searcher of
minds, the understander of thoughts, the setter forward of deeds, and the
giver of so much to every man, as I do think right and reasonable.


Of not drawing outward things unto a man. The.xlix. Chapter.
LORD. Son, thou must in many things be ignorant and unskillful, and
account thy self but for a dead man upon the earth, and for him to whom the
whole world is crucified. For many things must The desire of peace without al
contencion.
be passed by with a deaf care, and those must be pondered and thought upon,
which do belong unto thy peace. It is more profitable to turn thine eyes from
those things which mislyke thee, and to let every man have his own saying, Let
a man call home himself from external things yt he cleave fast unto God.
than to follow contencious talking of words. If thou agree well with God, and
look upon his own judgment, thou shall bear it the bett(...)r to be
overcome in such things.


SERVANT. O Lord to what pass is it come? Behold a short damage or loss is
lamented, men travel and run for a little gain, and scantly are able to
come home again at night: but the spiritual loss is quite and clean
forgotten. Men apply themselves to this that profits little or nothing at
all: and negligently pass over that which is most necessary The entire man
does willingly rest himself in outward things.
of all. So greatly both a man wholly wast his time about outward things: and
unless he speedily repent, does willingly welter still in outward things.


That we must not believe all men, and that we soon fall and offend in
words. The.L. Chapter.
Help me O Lord in this calamity. For the aid of men is surely but vain.
How many times have I not found faith there, where I thought to have had it?
And again have there found it, where I would not have looked for it. So
greatly is that hope in men and vain, and in thee only, O God is the health of
the just standing. We give thee thanks, O Lord God, for all things which do
happen unto us weakelings and unstable, and which are soon deceived and
changed. What is he that can behave himself so warily and circumspectly in
all things, that the Every man is in danger to te^ptacions.
same does not sometime come into some snare and distress? But Lord, he that
puts his trust in thee, and does study to have a simple mind, he does not
offend so soon, or if he do fall into any calamity, with how great
diffycultie and distress soever he be wrapped and entangled, he is either
quickly delivered from it by thee, or else strengthened with comfort, because
thou do not forsake them at the last, which have their hope in thee. Surely,
faithful friends are rare, such as will bide still by a man in all kind of
adversities: thou, O Lord, you only art most faithful in all things, and there
is none like unto thee. O how wise was that holy soul which said: My mind is
confirmed, Ephe. 3. Collo 1. 1. Pet. 1.
and has his foundation in Christ. If it went so well with me, worldely fear
should not so soon trouble me, nor the darts of words move me. But who can
foresee all things? who can beware of evils that come after? Now, if Lack of
foresight does increase inco^modities and sorrows.
things fore seen, do yet oftentimes hurt one, how much more grievously will
things never thought on come near unto the heart? But why have I not better
looked unto my self, siely wretch? Or why have I believed other men so soon?
Howbeit, we are men, and that frail and brittle, though we be judged and
called angels of many. And whom shall I believe Lord? Whom but thee, which art
the self truth, and never deceyuest, nor can be dececeyued. For in deed,
all men are but liers, weak, unstable, frail, most of all in words, so that
it ought not forthwith to be believed rashly whatsoever pretends a color and
show of truth: whereby it happens that thou wisely have premonished to take
heed of men, and that every one of a man's household are his enemies and that we
must not believe them that say: Here he is, or there he is. I am taught to my
Thou must not believe any man rashly, nor blab out any thing vneduisedly.
cost, I pray God I be made the more warye thereby, and not the more foolish.
Be wary (says one) be wary, and keep it close to your self, that I tell you.
Afterward, when I held my tongue, and thought that the same was counsel, he on
the other side could not keep silence in that which he bade no words to be
made off, but forth with betraying both me and himself, went his ways. From
such counterfaites and unwary persons deliver me, O Lord, that I never fall into
their hands or commit such follies. Minister true and steadfast sayings unto my
mouth, and put far from me a wyly and deceitful tongue. For I ought altogether
to beware Math. 7. Luke 6.
that I do not the same to another man, which I would not have done unto my
self. How good and how quiet a thing is it to say nothing of others, and not
to believe all things without any respect, or readily to speak much and to
utter or open himself but to few, and always to seek for thee that know
ye minds, The chief religion in words, deeds and thoughts.
and not to be carried about with blast of words, but to desire that all
inward and outward things may be done according to thy pleasure and
commandment? How safe is it to the keeping still of the favor of God, to fly
worldly bravery, and not to coueth those things which with their gay show are
had in admiration: but rather to follow those things with all diligence, which
do bring amendment of life, and zeal of godliness? How many has virtue
known and over hastily praised, done hurt unto? Again, how many has so the
same done good to, being kept in silence in this frail life, which is said to
be nothing but te^ptacion and warfare.

Of putting thy trust in God, if thou be assailed with the darts of evil
tongues. The.Li. Chapter.
LORD. Son show thy self constant, and have thy hope set in me. For what
are words, but words? which flying through the air, do not hurt a stone, if
thou be guilty or sinful, see thou be willing to correct thy self. If thou
be guilty of no sin, endeavor to Invincible constancy in bearing slanders and
malicious surmises.
bear patiently slau^derous reports for Gods sake, and at the leastwise, bear
words sometimes, though thou can not yet abide the sharpness of strypes.
And why do so small things move thy mind, and disquieted it, but because
thou art as yet carnal, and have greater regard of men, then thou ought to
have? For because thou fear to be despised, thou will not be reproved for
thy faults, and seek for starting holes of excuses. But look somewhat
narrowly upon thy self, and thou shall well perceive that the world is yet
alive in thee, and a vain love to please men. For when thou refusest to be
bored and shamed for thy faults, thereby it is plain, that thou neither art
modest truly, nor the world truly dead unto thee, or thou to the world. But
give ear to my words, and thou shall not pass upon the words, even often
thousand men. Lo, if all things were spoken against thee that could be
imagined most maliciously, what hurt should they do thee, if thou would let
them be borne patiently, and would not way them any more then a straw under
thy feet? Could they take so much as one hear from thee? But he that is of a
base courage, and has not god before his eyes, that same is soon moved with a
taunt, or ill report. But he that puts his trust in me, and depends not
upon his own judgment, the same is void of worldly fear. I am the judge and
knower of al secrets: I know after what sort the thing was done: I know both
him that has done the injury, and him that has suffered the wrong done unto
him. This matter has risen of me, and by my sufferaunce it happens that the
minds of many men are disclosed and opened. I will judge both the guilty and
giltlesse: but first I was minded to search the^ both with a secret judgment.
Man's testimony does oftentimes deceive: my judgment is full of truth, and
shall likewise continue, never to be overthrown. And in deed the same is hid
for the most part and altogether perceived of few: but it never we must turn
neither to the right hand nor to the left, either in prosperity or
inaduersitie, either for disprayse or for praise.
either erreth or can err, though it seem nothing indifferent or just unto
fools. Therefore men must fly unto me in all judgment, neither aught every
man to use his own fantasy. As for the just man, he is troubled with no
adversity of Gods sending, or either passes greatly upon false reports, or
greatly rejoices for the reasonable excuses of other men in his own behalf.
For he that considers that I am he that searches the hearts and the raynes,
and that I judge not according to ye sight of worldly show and outward
apperance. For many times in mine eyes ye thing is found culpable that in the
judgment of men is laudable.


SERVANT. Lord God, a just judge, strong, pacient, which know the frailty
and corruption of men, do thou become my strength and whole affiance or trust.
Neither is my conscience we must clime above our conscience that we may
stand in the judgment of God.
sufficient for me: thou know the things unknown unto me, and therefore I
ought to submit my self in all reproof, and to take the same patiently and
quietly: which thing if I have not at any time done, forgive me favorably, and
bestow this benefit upon me again, that I may hence forth show my self
more pacient. For thy singular mercy is more profitable to the attaining of
pardon, then is the opinion of mine own goodness to the defense of my secret
and hid conscience. And though I be guilty to my self of no sin, yet am I 1.
Cor. 4. Psalm. 143.
not therefore to be quitte, because if thy mercy were set a side, no man
living should be judged for righteous in thy sight.


That all grievous things must be suffered patiently for the life everlasting.
The.Lij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, be not either brought The crown of life does co^ fort a stout
patience being conqueresse of most paynfull troubles.
low with travails which thou have taken in hand for my sake, or so greatly
discouraged with adversities, but that my pormise may strengthen and comfort
thee in all chances, which am apt yneugh to restore large rewards. Thou shall
not labor long in this life, nor shall always be vexed with sorrows. Tarry my
leisure a while, and thou shall see a speedy end of evils, and the time shall
come when al labor and turmoile shall cease. It is but trifling and short, what
soever has an end in time. Wherefore go forward as thou have begone, labor
faithfully in my vineyard: I will be thy reward. Write, read, sing, sigh, hold
thy peace, pray, bear out adversity like a man. The life everlasting is
worthy al these, yea, and greater fights, Peace shall come upon thee one day,
which is known unto the Being received into life everlasting, we may
possess joys that last for ever and ever.
Lord: and it shall not then be the day or night of this time that we live in,
but everlasting light, infinite brightness, firm peace, safe rest and ease.
Then shall thou not thus say: Would God I were delivered from the body of this
death. Nor yet shall thou cry thus. Alack poor soul, that must dwell in this
life so long. For both death shall be thrown down headlong there, and there
shall be health that shall never die: no anguishe, but blessed joy, sweet and
honest company. O that thou had seen the perpetual crowns of the saints in
heaven, and with how great glory they now also triumph and rejoice: which being
once despised of this world, were thought then even unworthy of their lives.
Surely thou would forthwith cast thy self down to the ground, and had
liesser even to obey all men, then to bear rule over but one man: neither
would thou covet the merry days of this life, but rather would rejoice
to be pressed with adversity for Gods sake, and would count it for very
great gain to be had in no manner of regard at al among men. Now, if these
things They that are saved by hope are shake with no impacience.
did like thee, and were suffered to sincke soin what deeply into thy mind,
thou should not dare so much as once to complain. Nay, all painful
things must be borne for everlasting life, I tell you. For either to attain or
to leese the kingdom of heaven is a matter of great importance. Lift up thine
eyes into heaven: behold where all my faints be present with me, who suffered
sharp battle in this life. Now they rejoice, now they take comfort, now they
are safe, now they take their rest, to abide with me in the kingdom of my
father for ever.


Of the day of euerlastingnesse, and the anguishes or troubles of this life.
The Liij. Chapter.
SERVANT. O Most blessed Mansion of the supernall City, O most clear day of
euerlastingnesse, which no night does darcken, but the highest truth does
always spread her beams upon: O day, always joyful, always safe, of state
never to be changed to the contrary. O would to God that that day The state of
life ever lasting.
had once shined over us, and all these mortal things were come to an end.
No doubt, the same does shine bright unto the saints with Let all things be
vile and of no reputation, for the hope and desire of everlasting light.
continual cleerenesse, but yet a far off, and as it were in a glass,
because they are yet but traueilers upon ye earth. The Citizens of heaven do
know how joyful those things be. The banished children of Eve do sighe:
for that this day of this time, both short and wicked and full of sorrows and
anguishes, is so bitter and so replenished with troubles: in which man is
defiled with so many sins: is entrapped or entangled with so many evils, is
vexed with so many fears, is occupied with so many carkes and cares, is
diversely drawn with so many curiosities: is inwrapped with so many vanities,
is compassed about with so many errors, is worn out with so many labors, is
thrust down with so many temptacions, is weakened with so many delicates and
dainties: is tormented with so great poverty, or lack. O, when shall there be
an end of these so many travails? When shall I at the length be delivered
from this wretched slavery of sins? When shall I be mindful of thee only, O
Lord? When shall I rejoice in thee at the full? When shall I (void of all
let) enjoy true liberty, without any grief, either of mind or of body? When
shall there be sound and perfect peace, peace without trouble, and safe peace
within and without. Peace substantial on all sides? O good Jesus, when shall I
see thee face to face? When shall I behold the glory of thy kingdom? When will thou be al things in all things unto me? Or when shall I lead All things do
afflicte us as banished me^, that God only may comfort us.
my life with thee in thy kingdom, which before al beginning thou have
prepared to them that are beloved of thee? I am left here as one succourlesse,
and a banished man in the land of mine enemy, where daily wars and right
great misfortunes do reign rifely. Comfort my banishment, mitigate my sorrow,
seeing that I breath unto thee with exceeding great desire of mind. For
whatsoever of this world is offered for comfort, the same is to me but a burden.
I am wholly desirous to enjoy thee: but I can not take hold of thee. I wish to
dwell upon heavenly things: but things temporal and my affections not
mortified, do thrust me down. I am willing to clime above al things with my
mind: but I am compelled to be in subjection to my flesh whether I will or
no. Thus I wretched man do fight and struggle The continual conflict of the
christian man.
with my self, and am tedious, or yrcksome unto mine own self, whilst the
spirit tends upward, and the flesh bends downward. How great strife or
fight do I suffer inwardlye, that whilst with my mind I am occupied on
heavenly things, by and by the trouble some multitude of carnal things does
come against me, being in prayer? O my God, depart not far from me, nor refuse
me not through wrath and anger. Dispearse, through the brightness of thy
lyghtning, all the imaginations that are ministered me of the enemy, and
disappoint the^ with thine arrows shot against them. Call home my senses unto
thee: make me to forget al worldly things, and quickly to cast away and
contemn the imaginations of vices. Succor me, O everlasting truth, that no
vanity may move my heart. Come unto me, O heavenly sweetness, for that thy
coming flies from al impuritie. Forgive me that thing also mercifully, Man is
distracted with diverse thoughts while he prays, insomuch that very few
departing from all the creatures into their chamber do fly pure and clean
unto God for succor.
and grant me pardon so often as I think upon any thing else beside thee in
prayers. For to confess the truth, I am wont very much to be distracted, and
many times am not there, wherewith my body I do stand or sit, but rather
there, unto which I am carried with my thoughts: There (I say) I am, where my
thought is: where my thought many times rests, there is that which I do
love. And yt which either delights me naturally, or likes me by the means of
custom, ye same does soon come unto my mind. For this cause thou, O truth,
have plainly said: Where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also. If I love,
Heaven, I ponder heavenly things willingly: But if I love the world I rejoice
in the behalf of the worlds prosperity, and am sorry for the adversities of
the same. If I love the flesh, I imagine fleshly things many times: but if I
love the spirit, it delights me to think upon spiritual things. For what
thing soever I do love, I do both speak and hear of the same gladlye, and
do carye the Images or representacyons of the same home with me in my head.
Surely, he is blessed, O Lord, which for thy sake does let pass In what things
the dentall of our selves and sound blessedness does stand
all worldly things, does use violence or compulsion to his own body, and does
crucify the desires of the flesh, with the heat of the spyrite, to the
intent that his conscience being quieted, he may offer unto thee pure or clean
prayers, and may be meet to live in the company of Angels, all earthly things
being excluded both without and within.


Of the desire of life everlasting, and how great good things are promised to
the^ that fight. The.Liiij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, seeing thou feel a desire of everlasting blessedness to be
poured into thee from above, and do covet to depart out of the tabernacle of
the body, that thou may behold my brightness without shadow of alteration:
Open thy mind, and receive this holy inspiration of mine most greedily. Give
exceeding great thanks to the almighty goodness, which does deal so
lyberallye with thee, does come to see thee so mercifully, does stir thee up
so vehemently, does ease or comfort thee so mightily, least thou should
fall down unto earthlye things through thine own weight and pronesse. For
Like as modestye does especially commend us unto God, even so we always do
increase therein.
thou shall not attain thereunto through thine own musing or endeavoring, but
by the only vouchsafing of supernall grace and of Gods countenance, to the
intent that thou may come forward as well in other virtues, as especially in
modesty or lowliness, and may prepare thy self to the bickerings to come,
and may endeavor to cleave fast unto me with all the whole strength of thy
soul, and may serve me with an earnest and ardent will.

Son, the fire many times burns: but smoke is always the companion of the
flame. Even so, some also do burn with desire of They are not admitted to the
heavenly kingdom which are not very poor in spirit and free from their
affections.
heavenly things, and yet are not free from the temptacion of carnal
affections, and therefore they do not those things altogether for Gods glory
only, to the bearing whereof they crave his help so desirously. Such is thy
desire many times also, whose sincerity notwythstanding thou pretendest to be
exceeding great. Neither is it little and perfect which is infected with
private commodity. Crave not for that which is pleasant and profitable unto
thee, but for that which is acceptable and glorious unto me. For if thou judge
aright, thou ought to prefer and follow my decree and law both before
thine own desire, and also before all things which are desired. I know thy
desire or lack and I have heard thy often sigthings. Thou would now be in
that glorious liberty of the children of God. The everlasting mansion, and the
heavenly country that is full of joy, does now delight thee: but the hour is
not yet come: Nay the time is yet otherwise: to weet, of war, of labor, and
of trial. Thou wishest to be replenished with the chiefest felicity: but thou
may not yet attain thereunto. I am he (says the Lord) whom thou ought to
awayte for, till the kingdom of God do come. Thou must be searched yet upon
the earth, and be exercised in many things. In deed, comfort shall be granted
thee sometime but full sacietie thereof shall not likewise be granted. Wherefore
show thy self constant and Patience (which in this case is not void of
comfort) has an invincible hope of the liberty and salvation to come.
valiant, both in doing, and also in suffering things contrary unto the flesh.
Thou must put upon thee the new man, and be changed into a another man: and
thou must many times do those things which thou would not do, and let pass
those things which thou would do. Other men's attempts shall come forward
well enough: but thine shall not so do. Other men's sayings shall be heard:
thine shall be counted for nothing, Other men asking, shall have: when thou
ask thou shall go without. Other shall be set out greatly with the praise of
men: Of thee no man shall say any thing at all. Other men shall have offices
committed unto the^ to govern: but thou shall be thought good for nothing. For
these causes, thine own Patience does struggle out of many trobles.
flesh shall sometimes teach thee, and shall abide great conflyctes: But thou
shall have great good thereby, if thou will bear it pacyently and say nothing.
With these and such like things is the faithful servant of the Lord wont to
be tried, whether he can deny himself and make himself pliable in all things.
And A very goodly kind of victory to ouercom his own will. according to the
example of Christ.
scarcely there is any thing in which it is so much for thy profit to be
mortified as in that, that thou may behold and patiently suffer those
things which are contrary to thy will, especially whilst things absurd and not
profitable in thy judgment are commanded: In which, because thou dare not
resist the power of thy Superior, unto which thou art subject, it happens that
it seems a hard thing unto thee to be at another man's beck, letting pass all
thine own will. But consider son, what fruit, how great reward in short
time shall follow these travails of thine, and thou will not be agreeued with
them, but wilt take right great comfort of thy patience. For in stead of this
short will of thine, which thou have now given ever of thine own accord,
thou shall have thy will for ever in Heaven. For there thou shall find
whatsoever thou will have, whatfoeuer thou shall be able to wish for. There
shall thou have plentye of of all good things without any fear of leesing them
again. There shall thy will (together with me) never desire any outward or
private thing. There shall no man resist thee: no man shall complain of thee:
no man shall let thee, The state of everlasting life is quiet and perfect.
but all thy wishes shall be had, and shall most plentifully fill the desire of
thy mind. There will I render glory for reproach, borne patiently, the
clothing of praise for sorrow and heaviness, a kingly seat for evermore for
the lowest or basest place in the world. There shall The fruit of faith shall
be rewarded with most ample benefits.
the fruit of obedience appear, the labor of repentance rejoice, modest
subjection be crowned gloriously. Wherefore, submit thy self now modestly to
the commandment of al men, and pass not who speaks or commands: but
especially endeavor this one thing, God does specially raise up and extol men
modestly, obedient and subject to others.
that whether some superior of thine, or some equal, or also some inferior shall
require ought at thy hands, or else shall but give a token to have thee do
something, thou take all in good worth, and study to do them with asincere
will. Let diverse men seek diverse things: Let diverse men glory in diverse
things: and let them be praised eue^ of an infinite number of men: rejoice thou
but in the contempt of thy self, and in the doing of my commandment, and in
looking unto my glory, and wish for that thing above all other, that either by
life, or by death God may always be honored in thee.


How a man being pressed down with euilles, ought to yield himself up unto
God. The.lv. Chapter.
SERVANT. I Give thee immortal thanks, O God my holy Father, for that those
things are done which thou will have to be done: and thou will have nothing to
be done, but that that is good. Let me thy servant rejoice in thee, not either
in my self, or in any other. For thou only art true joy, O Lord, you God is
our plenty, and sanctuary in affliction.
art my hope and crown, thou art my rejoice and honor: To be short, I have
nothing but that which I have received at thy hand, and that without any manner
of desert of mine at all: The miseryes and calamities of men.
thine are al those things, that either thou have given or made. I needy
soul, and turmoiled with travails from my birth, am sorry in my mind, and
that so deeply sometime, that tears do gush out of mine eyes, and that I am
altogether disquieted for the evils that are at hand. I long after the joy of
peace, I earnestly crave the peace of thy children, which are fed with the
light of thy comfort. If thou shall give peace: if thou shall pour forth joy,
I shall have a mind full of melody, and singe thy praises deuoutlye. But if
thou shalt withdraw thy self, (as thou art wont very often) I shall not be
able to run the race of thy commandments, but rather falling down upon my
knees, will strike my breast, because I am not now in so good case as I was
before, when thy candle giving light unto me from above, I was defended with
the shadow of thy wings against the evils that ran violently upon me. O just
father, and always to be praised: the hour is come wherein I thy servant
should be tried. O Father The earnestness of prayer.
to be loved, right it is that I should suffer something for thy sake in this
hour. O Father evermore to be worshipped, the hour is come, which thou
did foresee before all beginning: that I should so be overcome outwardly
for a short time, that inwardelye I No bitter adversity is sent unto us with
might always live with thee, and that I might be contemned, pressed down,
fail before men a little while, and be afflicted with evils and sorrows, out
the singular providence of God.
to the intent I might rise again with thee in the morning of new light, and
might be made bright in heavenly things. O holy father, thou have thus
determined, so thou would have it: and that has been done which thou have
commanded to be done. For this benefit is bestowed by thee upon thy lover or
friend, that he should suffer afflictions in this life for the love of thee, so
oftentimes as thou shalt suffer the same to be done unto him, and of whom
thou shall suffer it to be done, and after that sort as thou shall suffer it to
be done. For there is neither any thing done in the world The bountiful
providence of God bears rule over all things.
without thy purpose and providence, nor yet without a cause. And surely, it is
for my profit, O Lord, that thou have thrust me down, to the intent that I
may learn thy ordinances, and cast all loftiness and arrogancy of mind from
me. It is profitable to me to have been shamed, that I might ask comfort
rather of There is exceeding great profit of afflictions.
thee, than of men. Again also, I have learned thereby to fear thy
unsearchable judgment, which afflictest the just together with the wicked and
ungodly, and yet not without equity and right: I give thee thanks, which have
nothing spared to send me adversities, but have afflicted me with bitter
torments, sorrows, anguishes, both within and without: wherein to comfort me,
there is none found living under heaven: but thou only art he, O my Lord and
God, being the heavenly physician of souls, which both woundest and healest,
which leadest down to hell, and again, bring a man back from thence. Thy
correction does chastise me, thy rod does teach me: Behold most In invocation
and prayers, the renou^cing of my own will is necessary.
dear father, I do submit my self to the rod of thy correction: Strike at my
back and my neck, that I may bow my natural corruption under thy will: Make
me a godly and modest scholar, according as thou art wont rightly to do, that
I may always be obedient to thee at a beck. I commit my self and all that I
have to thy correction, seeing it is better to be corrected here now, than
hereafter in an other place. Thou know all, and every thing, and nothing is
hid from thee in man's conscience. Thou know the things to come before they
be done: neither is there any cause also why Self will being renou^ced, we
must wyllingly put our neck under the cross.
any man should tell or admonish thee of the things that are done in the
world. Thou know what is profitable for me to come forewarde with, and how
much adversities do help or prevail to wype away as it were, the rust of
sins. Use thy judgment and pleasure toward me, and despise me not for my
wicked life, which is better or more clearly known to no body. Nay, it is not
known at al to any man, but to thee only. Grant me, O Lord, to know those
things that are to be known, to love those things that are to be loved, to
praise those things, that do most of al please thee: to take in hand those
things which are precious in thy judgment, and to dispraise those Discerning
of spirits, and sincere judgment must be asked of God.
things which are vile in thy sight. Suffer not me to judge either with the
sight of my outward eyes, or to give sentence by the hearing of my unskillful
ears: but with true judgment to discern both visible and spiritual things,
and above al things to search out the pleasure of thy will evermore. Men's
senses are many times deceived in judging of things. The lovers of this world
also are deceived in loving visible things only. Is a man so much the better,
as he is accounted the greater of men? The deceitful, deceives the
deceitful: the The vanity of man's judgment.
vain, the vain: the blind, the blind: the weak, the weak, whilst he
extolleth or aduaunteth him: and he does him reproach in deed, whilst he
vaynelye prayseth him. For look Fraunces the Minorite^.
how great every man is in thy judgment, so great he is in deed, and no
greater, as one ryghtly said.


That we must rest upon base or course works, when we depart from the highest
works. The Lvi. Chapter.
LRODE. Son, thou caust not continue still in the most fervent desire of
virtues, and in the highest degree of beholding heavenly things, but that thou
must needs for original corruption, come down sometime to The Chri stian man
whether he will or no, does come down to the inferior burdens and necessities
of this mortal life.
the lower things, and bear also with weariness the burden of this mortal
life, whether thou will or no. So long as thou shall bear about a mortal
body, thou shall feel the yrckesomnesse and weight of thy body. Therefore thou
must often sigh and sorrow in thy flesh for the burden of thy flesh, because
thou art not able without ceassing for a time to dwell still upon spiritual
studies and heavenly contemplatio^. In this case it is expedient for thee to
fly unto the base and outward works, and to recreate Godliness has his be
ginnings, procedings and perfections.
thy self in good deeds, and to awayte with sure confidence and faith, till I
come from above to visit thee, and patiently to bear thy banishment and
dryness or dullness of mind, til thou be visited of me again and delivered
from all anguishes. For I will make thee to forget thy labors, and thoroughly
to enjoy inward rest. I will open unto thee the Field of the Scriptures, that
thou may begin to run through the way of my commandments with a ioly
cheerful mind, and may say thus: The calamities of this world are not to
be compared with the glory to come, that shall be given unto us.


That man ought to think himself worthy, not of comfort, but of stripes.
The.Lvij. Chapter.
SERVANT. LOrd, I am not worthy of comfort, or of any spiritual care of thine:
therefore, thou declarest thy self but righteous unto me, whilst thou forsakest
me being helpelesse and void of comfort. For though I should pour forth a
whole sea of tears, yet should I not be therefore worthy of thy comfort. Nay
rather, I am worthy of naught else but stripes and punishments, which have
offended thee so grievously so many times, and have done amiss so often in so
many things. Therefore, if the matter be wayed accordinglye, I am not worthy of
the least comfort that is. And yet thou merciful and gentle God, which wilt
not have thy works to perish, to declare and show forth the richesse of thy
goodness toward the vessels of thy mercy, do vouchsafe to comfort me
without any desert of mine, above all man's reach. Neither are thy comforts like
unto men's bablinges. And what God does at length comfort the humble by his
mercy after that they are brought to extremity.
have I done, that you should endue me with any heavenly comfort? Surely, I
remember that I have done no good at all, but that I have always been both
prone unto sin, and slow to amendment. Which thing is so true of it self,
that if I should deny it, thou can show the contrary, and no man is able to
stand in my defense. What have I deserved by my sins, but hell and fire
everlasting? Truly, I do unfeignedly confess that I am worthy of all mockery
and contempt, and that it is not seemly for me to lead my life among thy
godly servants. Truly, I am hardly persuaded The description of true repentance.
so to do: but because it is true, I will so do, that I my self may reprove
mine own sins, to the intent that I may the sooner obtain thy mercy. And
what shall I sinful man, and one fuil of all reproach say unto thee? Surely, I
have nothing else to say, but this one thing: I have sinned, O Lord, I have
sinned: have mercy upon me: Forgive me, suffer me a little while to lament my
calamity, before I flit into the land that is dark and covered over with the
dryrinesse of death. And what else dooest you require of the sinful and
wretched man, but straightly to punish and thrust down himself for his
faults? For in the true punishing of a man's self, and pressing down of the
soul, hope of pardon comes forth, the troubled conscience is reconciled to
God, the lost favor of God is recovered, man is kept from the wrath to come,
and God, and the penitent soul of man, do one meet an other with a holy
kiss. I say, the humble sorrow of sins, that the sinful man has, is an
acceptable sacrifice Sacrifices and acceptable repentance unto God are
spiritual. 1. Pet. (...).
unto thee, O Lord, and of far more sweet smelling savor, than is the
perfume of Frankincense. The same is that sweet ointment with the which thou
would have thy holy feet to be enoiled, who never despisest the afflicted
and the pressed soul of man. This is the place of refuge against the wrath of
the enemy. In this is corrected and rinsed whatsoever is corrupted and defiled
any other way.


That Gods favor has nothing to do with those men whose minds are earthly.
The lviij. Chapter
LORD. Son, my favor is more precious The favor of God because it is
spiritual and everlasting yea, and passes al understanding has nothing
mingled with earthlye comfort.
than that it can abide to be joined with outward things. Therefore
whatsoever is a let to the same, thou must cast it away from thee, if thou
desire to be endued therewithal. Seek for a place of solitariness, love to
dwell by thy self alone, seek for no man's communication, but rather pour
forth devout prayers unto God: that both thy mind may be stirred up and
quickened, and thy soul guilty unto it self of well doing. Set nothing by the
whole world, and prefer thy study applied to God before all outward
things. For thou can not both apply thy self unto All transitory things
must be diligently renounced that we may see Gods everlasting enherita^ce.
me, and also be delighted with things transitory. Thou must depart from thy
acquaintance and dear friends, and thy mind must be called away from all
worldly comfort. Saint Peter does admonish the Disciples of Christ even so to
behave themselves in this world as strangers and traueylers. O how great
faith and trust shall the person that shall dye have, whom the desire of no
manner of thing does keep still in the world. But to have a mind There is
chiefest affiaunce in death to
thus secluded from all things, belongs to a man that is not sick: neither
does the sensual man, know the liberty of the inward man. Surely, if he will
have himself to be made those that are dead unto sin and the world.
spiritual, he must renounce both things far often, and hard by, and must
beware of no man more than himself. If thou shall once conquer thy self
perfitely, thou shall the more easily subdue all other things. For to triumph
over a It is the perfect victory to triumph over a man's self.
man's self, is perfect victory. For he that has himself subject unto
himself in such sort, that both his appetite is obedient of reason, and his
reason obedient unto me in all things, this man is both the conqueror of himself
in deed, and also the Lord of the world: to which grice, if thou desire to
come, thou must begin like a man: and the hatchet must be put to the root,
that thou may cut out and pluck up by the root the secret and inordinate
love, both of thy self, and of all private and carnal goodness. For of this
man's inordinate love of himself, Self love, the root of al mischief must be
pulled up that continual peace may follow.
all only does depend, whatsoever by a man must be grubbed up, which
mischief being overcome and subdued, great peace and continual calmness
shall follow after. But because few do endeavor to dye perfitely unto
themselves, and to depart out of themselves, fully, it happens that most of
them do abide still enwrapped in themselves, and cannot be carried up in spirit
above themselves. But he that desires to be conversant with me freely, he must
No man enters in to familaritye with God, but he that does wholly mortifye
himself and renou^ceth all creatures.
needs slay and mortify all his wicked and inordinate affections, and not
cleave desirously to any creature through private love.


Of the diverse motions of Nature and of Grace. The.Lix. Chapter.
LORD. Son, mark diligently the motions of Nature and of Grace. For they
be moved after so subtle and contrary a manner the one to the other, that they
can sca^tly be discerned but of the spiritual man, and one altogether lightened
within. Al me^ in deed do covet the thing which is good, and do pretend some
good thing in their sayings and deeds, and therefore are many deceived with
that show and countenance of a good thing. Nature is subtle, and draws,
intrappeth, deceives many men, and always will have her self to be the
proposed end of her doings: But Grace behaueth Nature and all things that
seem best to the outward apperance do deceive.
her self plainly, and declineth from all kind of evil, uses no deceit, and
does all things plainly for Gods sake, and rests in him unto the end.
Nature refuses to die, to be kept under, to be overcome, to obey, to be
subject. Grace studieth to mortify her self, resists her appetite, desires
to be subject and to be overcome, and will not use her own liberty, loves to
be kept at commandment, and desires Grace is simple, sincere, and without
malice.
not to bear rule over any man, but is ready always to live, to remain, to
be under God, and to be in subjection with lowliness to al worldly things for
Gods sake. Nature studieth for her own commodity, and considers what The
praise and virtue of Gods grace. We must utterly renounce nature.
gain may grow unto her by another: but Grace does consider rather, not what
is profitable and commodious to it self, but what is profitable unto many men.
Nature is gladly honored and magnified: but Grace gives al honor and glory
unto God. Nature is afeard of reproach and contempt, but Grace rejoices to be
used reprochfully for the name of Christ. Nature loves ydleyesse and ease of
body: Crace not knowing how to be idle, embraces labor willingly. Nature
coueteth after curious and beautiful things, and abhors the vile and gross
things: Grace is delighted with simple and base things, despises not things
misshapen, nor refuses to be clad with old rotten rags. Nature beholds
transitory things, rejoices at worldely gains, is sorry for loss, and is
provoked to impacience with every reproachful word: but Grace has regard of
things everlasting, does not cleave unto corruptible things, is not troubled
with loss nor provoked to anger, with words somewhat spyteful and roughe,
because she has placed her treasure in heaven, where nothing is corruptible.
Nature is covetous, and more willingly receives then gives, as loving her
private commodity: but Grace is bountiful and liberal, flying her private
profit, content with few things, judging it more blessed to give than to
take. Nature is prone unto the creatures, to flesh, to vanity, to gaddings
about: but Grace does alure to God and to virtues, bids the Creatures adue,
flies the world, hates the desires of the flesh, represseth gadding about,
and is ashamed to be seen abroad. Nature seeks for outward comforts, by the
allurements whereof, she may be quieted: but Grace seeks comfort in God
alone, and delights it self in the chiefest felicity above the reach of all
visible things. Nature does all things because of private gain and commodity,
and nothing for naught: she always looks either for equal or greater
recompense or else for praise and favor for her good deeds, and desires that
her deeds and gifts be greatly wayed and set by. But Grace seeks for no
worldely thing, nor requires any other reward or recompense for her self,
then God alone, nor coueteth mo things necessary to this life, then so much as
is needful to the attayning of life everlasting. Nature reioiceth in the
multitude of friends and kinsfolks, bosteth in nobility and greatness of
stock, smyleth upon the mighty, flattereth the rich, and does sooth up their
sayings, that be like unto her self. But Grace does love even her enemies
also, and is not proud with the multitude of fryendes, nor has the place of
her birth, and noblenes of blood in admiration and reverence, unless perhaps
the greater virtue and godliness did there appear. The same does more favor
the poor than the rich, does more lament the case of the innocent and
harmless man, than of the mighty: rejoices in the behalf of him that is
true, and not of him that is deceitful: does always exhort most of all to
follow all those gifts that are best, and to express the son of GOD in
virtues and good life. Nature does quickly complain of need and poverty.
Grace bears lack constantly. Nature refers al things to hirself, and
strives and contendeth for her self: but Grace refers al things unto God,
from whence she took her beginning, ascribes no goodness unto hirselfe, is
not arrogant, nor contencious, nor prefers her own sayings before other
men's, but submiteth her self in all search of truth unto Gods wisdom and
judgment. Nature is greedy to know, and to hear strange mysteries and and
secrets: she is a boster of her self, and desirous to make proof of many
things with her senses: desires to be known, and to do those things, by
which she may get praise and admiration: But Grace does not employ to labor to
understand strange and curions things, because all that does proceed and take
his beginning of that ancient corruption of ours, whereas in deed no strange
thing is durable upon the earth. Therefore it teaches a man to keep down
vain delight, to refrain from ostentation and braging, modestly to hide
things praise worthy, and things to be had in admiration for their
excellency, and out of every thing and knowledge to seek for the fruit of
profit, and the praise and honor of God. She will not have her self nor her
things to be praised, but desires that thanks should be given vn-God for his
gifts, who gives all things upon The more Nature is mortified, so much ye more
is the spirit quickened and made conformable unto God.
mere love. This Crace is a light set above Natures reach, and a certain
singular gift of God, and properly the mark of the elect, and the pledge of
everlasting life, which lifts up a man from the love of earthly things, to
the love of heavenly things, and of carnal makes him spiritual. Therefore the
more sharply that Nature is pressed down and overcome, so much the greater
Grace is poured into it, and so much the more is the inward man reformed daily
with new gifts, according to ye image of God.


Of the corruption of Nature, and of the power and strength of Gods Grace, The
Lx. Chapter.
SERVANT. O Lord my God, which have created me like unto thy image, grant me
that benefit (which thou have declared to be so necessary for me, and of so
great force unto everlasting life) that I may overcome my nature, so corrupt
and sinful, that it draws me to sin and to destruction. For I feel in my
flesh the law of sin, that fights against the law of my mind, and
compels me in many things to obey mine appetite, so that I cannot withstand
her assaults, unless that thy most holy Grace do help me, being ardently
poured into my soul. I say again, I have need of thy Grace (and the same
great) that Nature may be overcome, always prone to evil from the beginning
of my life. For Nature being fallen and corrupted through sin by Adams fault,
the punishment of this great blemish has come over al me^, so that Nature
hirself, which was created good and right by thee is accounted now for the vice
and weakness of the corrupt nature, because the motion that is The natural
man does after a certain sort dyscerne outward things, being otherwise
altogether without judge meant.
left unto it, does draw unto evil and to the infeor things. For as touching
that slender force, which abides still therein, the same is as it were a
certain spark, raked up in the embers. This is that natural reason compassed
about with a black darkness, so yet nevertheless, that it can as yet
discern and judge good and evil, truth and falsehood, although it be not able
to perform whatsoever it approves nor enjoys as now perfect light of truth,
nor yet the soundenesse and health of his affections. Hereby it comes to
pass. O my God, that I am delighted with thy law, as toughing the inward man,
knowing that thy commandments are good, just, holy, and reprove al evil and
sin, and teach that it should be avoided. But with my flesh I serve the law
of sin, whilst The description of man that enters into the new birth and
as yet is not wholly new borne.
I obey appetite more than reason. Hereupon it comes that I have a will ready
enough, but I find not power and ability to make performance. Hereof I
determine many times to do many things well: but because Gods favor is
wanting, which should help my weakness it happens that I leap back
again, and am tired, for a small fighting against my seife. Hereupon it
happens, that in deed I do acknowledge the way of perfection, and do
plainly enough see what belongs to my duty: but being pressed down with ye
weight of my corruption, I cannot arise unto the more perfect things. O how
necessary is thy grace for me, O Lord, both to make entrance into that which
is good, and also to go forward therein, and to bring it to perfection. For
neither am I able to do ought without ye same Grace: and again, when the same
Grace does confirm and strengthen me, then am I able to do all things in
thee. O the right heavenly Grace, without the which no merits of man, no gifts
of Nature are to be had in any price or regard. The beginning of our salvation
stands upon the mere grace of God, the going forward and the end is
everlasting life.
Arts are of no force: riches are of no force, beauty and strength is of no
force: wit or eloquence is of no force with thee, O Lord, without Grace. For as
for Natures gifts, they are common as well to the good as to the bad: But Grace
is a gift peculiar unto the elect, with the which who so are endued, they are
accounted worthy of everlasting life Without grace the greatest and most
beautiful things are vile and of no reputacionin gods sight.
To be short, it is of so great price, that without it, neither the gift of
prophecy, nor the dooinge of miracles, nor ye most hid understanding of secret
things are any thing at all to be esteemed. Nay neither faith, nor hope, nor
all the other virtues are acceptable unto thee without love and grace. O
blessed Grace which make the poor in spirit to be rich in virtues, and
make the lowly and humble minded man to be wealthy in good things. Come to
me, come down to me: Replenish me early with thy comfort, least my soul do
fail me for very weariness of mind and dryness. I beseech thee, O Lord,
vouchsafe me of thy grace. For the same is sufficient for me, though ye other
things be not had, which Nature does desire. I say again, if the same be
assistent to me, I will fear the evil of no temptacion at all, of no
calamity at all. This is my strength, this brings counsel and health. The
same is both mightier then al our enemies, and more wise then are al wise men
in the world. She is maistres of truth, teacher of discipline, light of the
mind, comfort of anguishes, the chaser away of sadness, the taker away of
fear, the nurse of religion and godliness, the moother of tears: Without it,
what am I, but a dry stick, and an unprofitable and vile block: Therefore O
Lord, let this thy Grace alwayce both go before, and come after, and let that
bring to pass that I may always apply my self unto well doing, through
Jesus Christ thy son.


Amen.
We ought to deny our selves, and to follow Christ by his Cross. The.Lxi.
Chapter.
LORD. Son, the further off thou shall No man but he that wholly renounceth
himself is joined unto God.
depart from thy self, the nearer thou shall approach onto me. Like as to
covet nothing outwardly, is the cause of inward peace: even so to forsake
himself, inwardelye, does join a man unto God, I will have thee to learn a
perfect denial of thy self in my will, without any gaynesaying and complaint.
Follow me, I am the way, the truth and the life. Without way there is no
traueyling: without Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, not suddenly
and at once, but by steps or gryces. John. 14.
truth, the way is unknown: without life we live not. I am the way, by which
thou must go, the truth which thou must believe, the life which thou must hope
for. I am the ready way, the truth never deceiving, the life without end. I am
the most straight way, the highest truth, the true life, the blessed, the
increated or unmade. If thou will persevere in my way, thou shall know the
truth, and the truth shall so deliver thee, that thou may attain everlasting
life: If thou will get life, obey my commandments. If thou will follow the
truth, believe in me. If thou wylt be perfect, sell all things: If thou will
be my Disciple, deny thy self: If thou will attain to the blessed life,
despise the life present: If thou will be exalted in Heaven, thrust down thy
self upon the earth: If thou will raygne with me, then be are my Cross with
me. For the servant of the Cross only do find the way of blessedness and
true light.


SERVANT. O Lord Jesus Christ, forasmuch as thy way is narrow, and hateful to
the world, make me with thee to despise the world. For the servant is not
greater then the Lord, nor the (...) above his Master. Let thy servant be
exercised in thy way seeing that my saving health and true holiness is there
to be found of me. Beside that whatsoever I either read or hear, the same
does not fully refreshe or delight me.


LORD. Son, seeing thou both have read and know al those things, thou
shall be blessed if thou will practice and perform them. He that both
knows and does my commandments, the same loves me, and I will likewise
love him, and will open my self unto him, and will cause that he may sit with
me in the kingdom of my father.


SERVANT. Lord, bring to pass therefore that these things may happen unto
me, The anguishes of death must be supped up of a man in ye cross and he must
stand steadfastly to it as one invincible.
which thou have said and promised, I have received a Cross at thy hands: I
will patiently bear the same even to the very death, according as thou haste
enjoined unto me. Surely the life of the Chrystian man is a Cross: but by
this way, men go into Paradise. We may not go back again, or leave off our
enterprise.

To it now cheerfully Brethren, let us go on together. Jesus will be present
with us. For Jesus sake have we taken up this cross. For Jesus sake let us
persevere and continue in the cross. The same Jesus shall be our helper, which
is both our guide and leader, and goes also before us. Behold our King,
which shall fight for us, does go before us. Let us follow like men: Let no
man be stricken with fear, let us be ready manfullye to dye in battle, and
let us not stain our glory by running away back again from the Cross.


That man be not overmuch discouraged, if at any time he have fallen into any
offense. The.Lxij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, patience and humbleness Patience and humility or lowliness of
mind, in adversity is better than comfort or god linesse in prosperity.
of mind in adversity does more please me, then much comfort and godliness
in prosperity. Why art thou vexed with so small a thing spoken against thee?
which though it were greater, yet ought you not to be moved to impacience.
Pass not upon this thing: it is neither first nor strange, nor it shall not be
last if thou live longer. Thou art man like enough, so long as no adversity
does come against thee: yea, thou can give good counsel to other, and can
tell how to confirm and cheer them up with thy words: but when sudden
calamity is at thy door, then art thou destitute of counsel and strength.
Consider how great thy frailty is, which thou make proof of many times, in
small and trifling matters. Howbeit, both these things, and al other like unto
these, do make for thy salvation. Cast these things out of thy mind,
according as thou know thou must do: But if they nippe thee, endeavor that
they either cast thee not down or do long time keep thee troubled: and if
thou can not take them joyfully, at the least wise bear the^ patiently. But
if thou hear such things unwillingly, and do feel indignation in thy
self, repress and keep in thy self, and suffer nothing once to come one of
thy mouth, whereby the little ones should be offended. By this means shall it
be brought to pass, that both this affection may be forthwith settled, and the
greese of the mind wax sweet, the favor of God returning to thee again: I
am yet alive (says the Lord) ready to help thee, and to comfort thee more
then I was wont, if puttyng thy trust in me, thou will call upon me devoutly.
Be of a more pacient mind, and prepare thy self to greater sufferaunce. Thou
must not therefore be discouraged, if thou see thy self to be oftentimes
afflicted, and grievously tempted. The description of a man entering into the
new birth, and not yet soundly newborn.
Thou art a man and not a God: Thou art flesh, thou art no Angel. May thou
be able always to abide still in one state of virtue, when the same has been
wanting both to ye Aungel in heaven, and to the first man in Paradise, as the
which did not long remain in perfect case? I am he that will both raise up the
mourners unto health, and will lift up unto my dignity those men that do
acknowledge their own infirmity.


SERVANT. Lord, I give thee thanks for thy sayings, which to me are more
sweet tha^ honey and the honey comb. What could I do in so great calamities
and anguishes, unless you did strengthen me with this thy holy talk? So that
I may at the last come unto the haue^ All things that are most painful and
troubleso^e, onght to be taken quietlye without al vexation.
of salvation, what matter makes it what and how great things I do suffer:
Give me a good end: grant me a happy departure out of this life: be
mindful of me, O my God, and direct or setle me in the straight way of thy
kingdom.


Amen.
Of leaving the deeper things and the hid judgments of God unsearched.
The.Lxiij. Chapter.
LORD. Son, beware thou do not dispute about high matters, and the hid
or secret judgments of God: why this man is thus forsaken and left to
himself, that other man is increased with so great favor: this man so much
tormented, that man so highly advanced. These things do surmout man's capacity,
neither is any reason of disputacion full enough to search out the bottom of
gods meaning and purpose. Therefore, if at any time the enemy do minister these
things unto thee, or else some curious persons ask thee the question, make
answer with that saying of the Prophet: Thou art just, O Lord, and thy
judgment is right. And likewise that saying. The judgments of the Lord are
true, and agreeable to equity. My judgments must The equality of the state
in the kingdom of God must be left unto God himself, who is all in all.
be feared, and not discussed, as they which do pass man's understanding and
capacity. Desire not so much, as to search or dispute about the merits of the
saints and Godly, who shall be more holy or greater then other in the kingdom
of heaven. For these things do many times cause unprofitable debates and
contentions: do also mainetaine pride and ambicion, whereof aryseth enuyinges
and dissentions, whilst one stryueth prowdly that an other is holier than the
rest. The desire to learn these things, and the searching of them out are
fruitless: Nay rather do displease the godly sort. For I am not God of
dissension, but of peace, which peace consists in true modestty, and
lowliness, not in arrogance and pride. Some for the affection of love do cast
more favor unto these, then to those: but they do it rather upon their carnal
affection, then that God is so affected. I am he that have created all the
saints, that have endued the same with gifts, and have given them honor: I know
the merits of every man: I provoked them with most pleasant gifts and
benefits: I knew that they were to be loved, before the beginning of the
world: I did choose them out of the world, and not they me: I called the^ we
my favor. I drew them to me with my mercy: I led the^ through Love respects
not the person,
diverse temptacions, and did pour upon them notable comforts: I gave them
perseverance and did crown their patience. I know both the first and the
last: I embrace all men with love incredible. I am to be praised in all my
saints jointly, and to be magnified and honored in all particularly, above all
things: which saints being appointed by me to salvation, I have so gloriously
lifted up without any of their deserts going before. Therefore, he that
despises even the least of my servant, the same does neither honor the
great, in as much as I have made as well the small, as the great: so that he ye
does derogate from any on of ye saints, the same does both derogate from me and
from all the parteners of the heavenly kingdom. For they are al but one in the
bond of love, thinking all one thing, willing all one thing, and also loving
al one another with mutual love, Nay rather (which is a much more high matter)
they more love me than themselves, and their own merits. For being ravished
above Perfect love. 1. John. 2. 4.
themselves, and drawn beside the love of themselves, they do go forward
altogether unto the love of me, and do repose themselves in the fruition
thereof, in so much that nothing can turn the^ from it, or thrust them down, as
the which being full of everlasting truth, do burn we the fire of
unquenchable love. Therefore, let the carnal and sensual men leave of to
reason about the state of the saints, which know not to do ought else but to
love their private ioies. Many as yet by their natural affection and worldly
love, are bent to these or to those: and even as their judgment is in ye
inferior things, so do they likewise imagine of the heavenly things. Without
doubt it cannot be uttered in words in how great vnlikelynesse in those things
do differ the one from ye other, which the imperfect men do think with
themselves, and which the men that by God are lightened, do behold as made open
unto them from above. Wherefore, beware Son, that thou occupy not thy self
somewhat curiously about those things, which pass the capacity of thy wit:
but rather apply thy self unto that, that thou may be found even the least
in the kingdom of God. Now, in case a man did know who were accounted more
holy or greater than other in the heavenly kingdom, what should the knoledge
thereof avail him, unless he did humble himself so much the more unto me,
and rise up higher unto the greater praise of my name? He does a much more
acceptable thing unto God, which does think upon the greatness of his sins
and the slenderness of his So much as thou know, so much thou do.
virtues, and how far of he is from the perfection of the saints, then he
which reasons about the greatness and lowness of the saints and godly. They
do not boast of their merits, which do ascrybe no goodness at all unto
themselves, but acknowledge that all comes from me, which they have, because
I have bestowed al those things upon them, according to my exceeding great love
of Godliness, and surely they are environed with so great love of Godliness,
and so great joy of mind, that no glory at all, no manner of felicity is
wanting unto them. The more high in honor and glory that all the saints are, so
much the more The more high that God does make a man so much the more modest
and the more near unto God and the more beloved is that man made.
modest and the nygher, and eke the more dear the same are unto me. And for
this cause that same in the Apocalips is written: That they did cast their
Crowns before God, and with a groueling countenance before the lamb did
worship him, living for evermore. Many do seek who is greatest in the kingthe
kingdom of God, and cannot tell whether that they themselves shall be
reckened in the number of those that are least. It is a great thing to be the
very least in Heaven, whereas all be great: for all shall be called, and shall
so be in deed, the children of God. God is all in all, who gives to every man
his penye that labors in the Vinegard. Math. 20.
The least shall grow into a thousand, and the hundredth person that shall be
punished of me, shall dye a young man. For when the disciples asked who should
be greatest in the kingdom of God, they had this same answer: Unless ye be
altered in manners, and become like unto the little ones, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore who so shall humble himself like to this
little child, he shall be greatest in the Kingdom of heaven. Woe be to them
that disdain to submit themselves with the little ones: for the gate of the
Heavenly Kingdom is to low for them to enter in at. Woe be to the rich also,
that have their comfortes here in this World. For when the poor do enter the
Kingdom of GOD, they shall stand without, crying and howling. Keioyce ye
lowly and meek. Triumph, ye poor: for the kingdom of God is yours, in case
ye do obey the truth.


That all hope and trust must be fixed in God alone. The.Lxiiij. Chapter.
SERVANT. Lord, in whom is my trust set in this life, or what is my greatest
comfort among all things that are under the cope of heaven? Art not thou, O my
Lord GOD, being endued with infinite mercy. When was I either in good case
without thee, or in evil plight, whilst thou wast present with me? Surely I
had lieffer to be poor for thy sake, then to be rych without thee: and had
rather to be a traueyler with thee upon the earth, than without thee to
possess heaven. Where thou art, there is heaven: And again, where thou art
not, there is death and Hell. Thou art my longing and wish: and therefore do I
reckon it necessary to sigh, to cry, and to pray unto thee. In fine, I can
fully put my trust in no man, to help me in mine necessyties when time
requyres, but in thee only, O my GOD. Thou art my hope: thou art my trust:
thou art my comforter, and in all things most faithful. All men do apply
themselves unto their own affairs busily: but thou desire nothing saving my
salvation and coming forward, and unto me turnest all unto good. And whereas
thou do throw me abroad unto sundry temptacions and adversities: all that
do thou appoint out to my commodity and profit, who art wont to make
trial of thy beloved children after a thousand ways: in which proof and
trial of thine, thou ought no less to be beloved, than if thou should
replenish me with heavenly comfortes. Therefore, O Lord GOD, I place my whole
hope and refuge in thee: in thee do I settle all my calamities and sorrows.
For whatsoever God being immutable and euerla sting, all creatures are subject
to alteration and change.
I do behold without thee, all that do I find to be but weak and unstable.
For neither fryends can do one good, nor strong men help at need, nor wise
give profitable counsel, nor books of the learned comfort, nor any abundance
of wealth deliver, nor hid place defend, except thou thy self be present, do
help, strengthen, comfort, instruct and keep. For all things that seem to
make to the attaining of peace and felicity, are nothing at all in thy
absence, and in effect do bring no manner felicity. Therefore art thou the end
of all good things, and the top of life, the depth of all speech: and to have
a hope in thee above al things, is the most sure comfort of thy servants. I
have mine eyes cast upon thee: in thee I trust, O my God, the Father of mercy.
Make happy and make holy my soul with heavenly felicity, that the same may
become thy holy habitacio^s, and seat of everlasting glory, and that no soil
or filth be found in thy temple to offend the eyes of thy majesty. According
to the greatness of thy goodness and multitude of thy mercy, look thou upon
me, and give ear to the prayers of thy needy servant, living a great way off
in exile in a wild and savage Country. Defend and preserve the Soul of thy
poor servant, in the midst of so many dangers of this life, and direct me
with the guiding of thy favor, through the way of peace, into the country of
everlasting bryghtenesse.


FINIS.
A short and pretty Treatise touching the perpetual Rejoice of the godly even
in this life.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the sign
of the Star. Anno. 1568.

Hieronymi Wolfij Carmen ad Lectorem
SI quis ab assidua premitur grauitate laborum.
Commoda letitiae perpetis vnde petat?
Ipsa vetat natura malis gaudere, dolores
Sieve sedent animo, corpore sieve sedent.
Sieve ea dispereunt, per quae traducere vitam
Cogimur, absque quibus mors magis apta foret.
Sed quis in immenso tam foelix cernitur or be,
Quem non fortunae praegrauet acre iugum?
Spes, metus, ira, dolor, luctus, frustratio, culpa,
Innumeris agitant pectora fessa modis.
Vndique tot cingunt horrenda pericula vitam,
Vt locus effugij vix superesse queat.
Haec inter quae laetitiae datur ergo facultas?
Materiam potius quisque doloris habet.
Praecipue tamen his seges est infausta querendi,
Non ficta Christum qui pietate colunt.
Saeuit in hos semper tenebrarum dira potestas.
Corpora, fortunas, pectora fraud petens.
Quae si fraud minus valeat, iam Martis aperti
Praelia terribili mole cruenta ciet
Armat in hos, quoscunque potest, requiete negata.
Quid mihi laetitiae nomina vana refers?
Number paradoxa iuuant, quibus olim Stoica lusia
Secta, Poetarum ceu furiosa cohors?
Dij meliora: sumus very sine fraud colentes,
Nec sine re nobis nomen inane placet.
Sunt tamen haec, fateor, crassae minus obuia blebi,
Quae defixa gerit lumina semper humi.
Nil nisi quod videant oculi, quod brachia tangant.
Brutaque precipiant corpora, credit enim.
Sed quibus in coelos men's est errecta, Deumque,
In Christo summum qui posuere bonum:
Hi nos vera loqui syncero pectore, norunt:
Munere ^etitiae nam didicere frui.
Quippe graui munit nos experientia test:
Huic est praecipue semper habenda fides.
Quae nisi te doceat nostri decreta libelli,
Haud mirer, moueant si mea verba parum.
Sed faciat deus, vt pietatis amore subactus,
Gaudia magnanimus non peritura geras.
Sic quoduis leave fiet onus, dolor omnis abibit.
Semper erit ciuis men's generosa poli.
(...)
(...)

(...).

(...)

(...),

(...).

(...)

(...)

(...),

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...),

(...),

(...),

(...)

(...),

(...),

(...)

(...).

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...).

Of the Rejoice and gladness of the Godly, even in this life
IN as much as man's frayletye lies open continually to so great miseries,
paynefull labors and calamities: and seeing that (as one says) it is left for
all men, to pass over so great euiles or troubles in this mortal life, as
there is none but woteth it well enough: surely we may justly marueyle what it
should mean, that the holy Apostle of GOD, blessed Saint Paul, in his first
Epistle written to the Thessalonians, byddeth us to rejoice always. For thus,
among other matters, he says: Be glad always, pray incessantly, give
thanks in all things. And in deed, if a man call to remembrance that
contynuall wrestelynge together that men have with the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil, if he look upon the heavy torments of conscience touching
his dyssolute life past, and the anguyshes, the cares, the fears of his mind:
if he consider the most grievous feel of Gods wrath, and the inward mournings
for sin: if he think of the judgment day to come, of the Lords judgment
seat, of the punishment of the godless in Hell (to let other things pass
beside,) the same person may suppose that the Apostle does in a manner but in
vain exhort us always to rejoice and be glad. For what leisure can we have,
to joy among so infinite eeuils as do enuiron or compass us about, and among
so many rough storms and heavy haps, as betide us. Nevertheless, if we
remember that the Apostle gives charge to the Godly alone in this place, and
to them that cleave fast to him with full affiance, who in so great troubles of
this mortal life, and in so manyfolde chances of worldly affairs and
turmoiles, have nothing at all but God in whom they can well and willingly
repose themselves: then shall it appear, that he did admonish his
Thessalonians of such things, both truly and also necessarily. Touching which
point, I will briefly put forth, if it seem good, that shall come now to
remembrance, and will entreat of the continual joy of the godly here in this
life, in as few words as I can deuile.

First and foremost therefore, we must needs grant that Paul speaks not
of vulgar or common joy, and such as happily the Natural man, (as the Apostle
does term him) dreameth off. For this joy or gladness is not of sufficient
worthiness for the Christian man. And if perhaps there be such, yet is it
altogyther common between them and the wicked: and is neither durable and
continual, but transitory, and many times interrupted with infinite carkes and
cares, neither clear and sound, but most commonly impure and defiled. Besides
this, ye Apostle does much less speak of that gladness which the Covetous
worldling has of his riches and hourdyng up of money: the Ambicious man of
honors: the Proud and hawtie person of his Nobility: his power and sway, his
wealth and puissaunce the Soldier of his pray and booty: the voluptuous man
of his sweet delyghtes and sensual pleasures: the Lecher of his lusts: the
Vserer of his bonds or bills of debt: the Kiotour and one plunged in all kind
of superfluity and excess in his delectacions of all sorts, in his tables
garnished and set forth with diverse dishes, his gorgious and very great
furniture: the Surfettour in his gulling in of Wine: the Glutton and one borne
to bellycheare, in gourmandise: the Sluggard or lazy lubber in idleness and
sleep: the Envious or spiteful repiner in an other man's misery: the Testie
and wrathful person in revenge. These are joys indeed, I deny not: but they
are the lewd joys of the mind, as a right excellent Poet says: and they are
not true but deceytefull, not pure and clear, but mingled with unpleasantness
among: not permanent, but such as last for The time of our life compared to
eternity is not a moment: quia infiniti and infiniti nulla est porportio.
a moment. For I will not meddle now to show that they are the cause of
infinite mischiefs, and most an end always draw with them as their
companions, anguishes of body and mind, disquietnesse, restless business,
cares, heaviness, mourninges, and do both exceedingly annoy the body, and
also without end prick the soul, and suffer it not to pause and take rest or
comfort freely: so far they are from bringing about any manner of way, either
to diminishe heaviness that by chance comes of other causes, or to rid them
quite, and drive them away: or else to work, that men shall have no feel and
pain at all of the evils that do betide them. Beside this also, the end of
such joys is everlasting damnation. For unto this point belongs the saying
of our savior in Luke the Evangelist: Woe be to you rich men, which have your
comfort. Woe be unto you that are full because ye shall be hungry. Woe be to you
that laugh now, because ye shall mourn and weep. And likewile, which that
rich man in the Gospel, determynyng in his heart to live a deintie and happy
life henceforth, and being minded now to take his case, to eat, drink and to
be merye, does hear at the word and will of God: Thou fool, this night shall
they fetch thy soul from thee. To conclude, that example of the Glutton in
Luke, clad in purple, does make to this purpose, who using every day to feed
gorgyously, is afterward, when he departs the world, tormented in the
flames of Hell fire. Therefore Paul does not entreat of such joys as the
welthy, the mighty, the lofty and proud, and such other as live dainetily in
this life, and are wanton, and do still, as a man would say, keep it
holydaye, as S. James speaks it, have. Of what kind of joy then speaks
he? Even of that joy, no doubt, which of the same Paul is rehearsed up among
the fruits of the spirit in the Epistle to the Galathians: and such again as
that is, whereunto the Apostle exhorts the Philippians, when he bids them
to rejoice in the Lord always: or such likewise as that is whereof David in
the Psalmist has so oftentimes made mention, as when he says: Thou have given
joy in my heart. And, Let all men rejoice that put their hope in thee, let them
triumph or rejoice exceedinglye evermore, because thou do defend them. Let
all men be glad in thee, which love thy name, because thou blessest the just
man, O Lord. And likewise, I will be glad and rejoice excedinglye in thee, I
will sing unto thy name, O thou most high. And: I do put my confidence and
hope in thy mercy, my heart leapeth for joy in thy saving health: I will sing
unto the Lord, who gives good things unto me. And moreover: Rejoice in the
Lord, and triumph ye just, and glory all ye that be right of heart. And
again: Triumph ye just in the Lord, praise becomes the right. And
furthermore: Rejoice ye just in the Lord, and confess to the memory of his
holiness. What manner of rejoice this is, in the Lord, it is a very hard
matter to declare, and a thing that will busy a man to do it. Howbeit through
the help of God we will prove what we can say therein.

Therefore whosoever being regenerate or borne a new in Christ, does put the
whole hope and affiaunce of attaining salvation in the promised mercy of God,
only for Christ the mediator, and already is fully and wholly persuaded, that
God the father is merciful and pacyfied with him, his sins being remitted
and forgiven for Christ, and with a certain and sure hope of immortality
after this life and of everlasting bless, does walk on in his vocation to the
end honestly, holily and godlily, the selfsame man undoubtedly resting upon
this same fatherly good will and and love of God toward him for Christ, does
who it is that always reioiceth in the Lord.
always rejoice in the Lord, neither can there any thing of so great importance
at any time happen among, that can vex that man, and cause him to take
thought. So exceeding great is that spiritual joy or gladness of the godly
person in the Lord, whether it be in prosperity, or whether it be in
adversity. For whatsoever it be that has happened, he in all things
perceyueth and acknowledges the fatherly mind of God toward him, and no less
is glad in the Lord in times of heaviness, than in prosperous times. For he
knows well enough, that what evil so ever there be, the same is sent from God,
and that without Gods providence there happens nothing at all. Therefore will
he have his own will to agree and be conformable unto the will of God: and he
refuses not to bear patiently and suffer whatsoever it pleases God he
shall: and he takes in very good part what so ever has happened. He knows
that all things do turn unto good, to such as be Godly and fear the Lord.
He knows that those are reproved, corrected, and chastised, whom the Lord
loves. He knows that every son is scourged of the Lord whom he receives.
He knows that he is touched with such vexations, to the end he should
repent and amend, that he should make his invocation and prayer unto God the
more fervently, that he should despise wordly things utterly, and travail to
the heavenly things with the greater desires and sighs. He knows that the
Godly are tried with adversity, as gold is with the fire: and that the same is
given of God, as it were for a matter to keep his obedience in exercise. He
knows that the affliction that endures but a moment, and is but light, does
work in us a glory that is everlasting, and more heavy than al poise or
weight, as the Apostle says: and that the troubles of this present world are
not worthy to be compared with that glory that shall be revealed toward us.
Therefore he rejoices, even in the midst of his calamities and afflictions,
he acknowledges the goodness of God, being merry and cheerful, he gives the
Lord thanks for all things. Even thus forsooth Paul, the blessed Apostle of
God reioiceth always in the Lord in so many vexations, travails, adversities,
so many miseries, so huge euilles, as he patiently bears for the Gospels
sake. Even unto this time (says he) we are both a hungry and a thirst, and are
naked, and are beaten or buffeted with fistes, and do go up and down without
any certain dwelling place, and do labor working with our own hands: being
reviled, yet we bless: being evil spoken of, yet we pray: we are become as
one would say, the excrements of the world, being the refuse of all things,
even unto this day. The same Paul says: Now I rejoice over my afflictions
for you, and I supply that which was wanting of Christ's afflictions in mine
own flesh.

The Apostle also in another place does declare this same joy of his: Blessed
(says he) be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the father of
mercies, and God of al comfort, co^forting us in all our affliction, to the
intent that we may comfort them that are in any kind of affliction, through the
comfort wherewith God does comfort us etc. To this purpose makes that place: As
it were sorrowing and yet always rejoicing: as it were poor, and yet making
many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things: And again, I was
filled with comfort, I am full and abound excedingly with joy in all our
affliction. The same Paul writing to the Thessalonians, says: You also have
become followers of us, and of the Lord, receiving the word with much
affliction, with joy of the holy ghost, in so much as ye have been an example
to all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia. See thou here how with ye
affliction of the Thessalonians, he knitteth the spiritual gladness of the
same. And to this belongs that which is in the Epistle to the Hebrews:
whereas it does testify that the believers at Jerusalem did hear tell of the
spoil of their goods with joy or gladness, And now how great cherefulnesse, how
great gladness, how great boasting in the Lord do we take at Paul's words:
whilst he reckeneth up his travails, stripes, prisonments, stonings,
shipwrackes, watchinges, hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, finallye infinite
perilles, often deaths. And whiles at the end he adds. Wherefore I please
my self (says he) in infirmities, in reprochful words, in necessities, in
persecutions, in anxieties for Christ. For when I am weak, then am I strong.
Likewise our Savior Christ himself also bids them to rejoice and
exceedingly to be glad, whosoever for the Gospels sake, and for the
confessing of his name are afflicted. And why so, I pray you. Because (says
he) your reward is plenteous in heaven. Hereupon also Apostles being beaten
ye (as it is in s. Luke in the Acts) what do they. They went (quoth he)
rejoicing from the sight of the counsel, for that they were accounted worthy
to suffer Contumely for the name of Jesus. Hence comes that exceeding great
triumph of the Martyrs in their extreme passions and torments, which was not a
token of any desperate fierceness in the mind, or lack of feel in the
body, but of the virtue and power of Christ dwelling within them, as Paul
speaks it. Howbeit, some man will say, it is a sweet thing, and full of
comfort to suffer for Christ his sake, so that a man may well have cause to
rejoice at such a time. But what? Is it possible for any man to rejoice in
these calamities and miseries, which do happen to us for some other cause? To
answer the matter briefly and in few words: The very true christian man in the
common and usual troubles of this life, in sorrow, sickness, weakness of
the body, in banishment, need, poverty, mourning, loss of children, loss of
dignity, in the perils and travails of all sorts, men's wrongs, unfortunate
success in counsales, losses and detriments of things, if we will judge
thereof aright, does always rejoice in the Lord, and that sincerely without
doubt, and even from the very bottom of his heart. For when he knows for
certayntie by the doctrine of the Gospel, that God is favorable and well
pleased with him for Christ's sake, when he knows that his sins be forgiven
him through Christ, when he knows that he is reconciled unto God, adopted or
chosen to be the son of God, and that the inheritance of life everlasting is
promised him: with this same only thing he is in such wise delighted, and
hereof takes so much most true pleasantness, so much joy and gladness, that
whatsoever calamity does happen in this life, it is quickly overwhelmed with
the exceeding greatness of this same joy, and does scarslye seem to be any
thing at all, in so much that if the world being dissolved, might fall upon
him, as a certain Poet writes, yet should the weight of it slaye him being
no whit afearde thereof. For so far it is from the Christen or godly man to
fear, to quake or tremble, and abhor even death it self, or not to rejoice
thereat as often as it comes to remembrance, that rather he wishes for it with
all his heart: which only he is persuaded not to be the end of life, but the
beginning of everlasting bliss, not continual destruction, but a short
passage out of this world unto the father. Therefore he desires both to be
dissolved with the Apostle, and with Simeon to be dimissed in peace. So
exceeding great is the joy in the heart of the godly man, through the knowledge
of God, and of his son Jesus Christ. Has he by some mishap lost his goods or
children? He cries with Job: The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken
away: blessed be the name of the Lord. Is he kept under with poverty and
need? He answers himself out of ye Apostle: Having food and wherewith to
be covered, let us content our selves with the same. Is he taunted or taken up
without his desert? He remembers Christ, who being rayled at, did not reply
evil for evil again, as saint Peter says. Does he receive some grievous
and notorious injury? He remembers that saying of Paul to the Romans. Not
revenging your own quarrels, beloved. And again: Leave revenge unto me, and
I will requite, says the Lord. Is he afflicted with intolerable torments of
some disease or sickness, or with some other euilles? He cries with David:
Thou art just, O Lord, and thy judgment is right. Is he forsaken of his
acquaintance or friends? He calls to remembrance that saying out of the
Psalms. My father and my mother have forsaken me: but yet the Lord has
received me. Briefly in all troubles, miseries and calamities, the godly man
has very great co^fortes set before him in ye free goodness, mercy and
clemency of God, and from hence always has unspeakable joy, does ask in
prayer, look for the mitigation or asswaging of them, or if it shall so please
God, full deliverance from those evils wherewith he is laden and kept down. He
knows that God both has commanded himself to be prayed unto in the time of
trouble and calamity, and that he has promised his aid and help, and that
also he looks for a thankful heart of such as are delivered. Trusting unto
these things, he cries with Abacuch: O Lord in thy wrath remember thy mercy.
And with Hieremye: Correct us, O Lord, but in thy judgment, and not in thy
fury. And thus in very good hope of the goodness of God, he rejoices
woonderfully, and does not only betake himself unto Gods mercy, but also
yields himself unto Gods will, as one ready both to do, and also to suffer
whatsoever God will have him.

But as the trust of Gods mercy for Christ's sake cannot stand or join
together with a naughty and corrupt conscience: so cannot that joy neither,
whereof the Apostle speaks, be at any time remaining in a mind guilty of
fault or sin. Therefore wheresoever there is a bent determination or purpose
to commit sin, there is there no manner of joy at all in the Lord. And
truly is that said of Plautus the Comicall Poet: There is (says he) nothing
more wretched and miserable, tha^ is an evil conscience. Hereby it is plain,
that the Apostles admonition or warning, evermore to rejoice in the Lord, does
belong only to the godly sort, which with fear and trembling do travail to
their salvation. For these men, because they put all their trust in Gods mercy,
and are fully persuaded that God is favorable and pleased with them for
Christ's sake, and that not only their sins are forgiven and remitted them
of the: heavenly father, but that they also are received into the favor and
friendship of God, and that more is, into kindred and co^sanguinitie, and are
made the sons of God by adoption, the heirs, I say of God, and the
brethren and fellow heirs with Christ: because the godly, I say, do
steadfastly believe, they do always rejoice in the Lord, even in the midst of
their troubles and calamities, what ever they be that chance, either common or
private, specially seeing they are not ignorant, that God has a care over
them, as Saint Peter does witness. This rejoice in the Lord seems to be the
chiefest portion of felicity and happiness in this life, and the very chief
or principal goodness which the godly sort alone do Summum bonum. (...),
quietness, security. hearts ease.
enjoy and take fruition of. The heathen Philosophers dreamed upon an Euthumie
or happiness of mind: but touching this joy of the godly minds, they were
not able so much as to suspect or think of any such thing. For of what sort
that is, the only Christians, being taught by Gods word, do know: and those
especially which are ordained (as Luke says) to everlasting life, and whose
names are written in the book of life of the Lamb, which was slain from the
beginning of the world, as it is said in the Apocalips. For while these do
always rejoice in the Lord, they have even in this mortal life also a certain
taste, feeling and smacke of the blessed state that shall be in the life to
come, whereby it happens, that they being ravished as it were besides
themselves, do seem in a manner to the world through euermuch joy, to be
pieuish or melancholic: to weete, while they be mute at the reproachful
checkes and taunts of other men, do pray for them that curse them, do Here is
not meant such fond patience as. S. Fraunces used.
love and bear good will to their enymies, whiles they do good to them that
hate them, pray for them that hurt and persecute them: to such as strike one
side, offer ye other: whiles to one taking away the cloak they leave him their
coat also: and give to every one that asks: and lend to one another,
hoping for no commodity thereby: whiles many times they refrain from wine, do
fast, sigh, are sorry, weep, continue all night in prayer, by lying on the
ground, by watch, by study and by other means do tame their flesh, and do
keep their body occupied after, a servile sort, as the Apostle says: and who
can well rehearse or reckon up all the other tokens of a certain foolishness,
as it were, or brain sickness in them? For the world can not judge
otherwise of such men, but that they altogether are besides themselves, and out
of their right wits that thus demean themselves. And surely it cannot be
denied, but that such men they are most commonly, that do always rejoice in
the Lord. The same do neither desire riches, nor seek for honors and
promotions, nor follow pleasures. They neglect their own commodities, they
procure the commodities of other men: being in manner less careful for
themselves, than for others. They embrace modesty for stoutnesse: baseness or
ignobilitie for glory: austeritie of life for dainties. They despise those
things that the world sets great store by: and set great store by that
which it despises, and makes no account off. They in manner give all that ever
they have to the poor, and that which is given to the poor, they think it
given to Christ himself. Such are they therefore, that rejoice always in the
Lord. And in deed, by the judgment of the world, as I have said, they seem
almost foolish, whiles they so do: but if thou behold the judgment of God
himself in his word, thou shall find that they alone are the wysest of all
other men. The thoughts of such me^ are always, not on earthly but heavenly
things: not upon temporal things, but on things everlasting: not upon human
affairs, but about Gods hestes and commandments. For out of these does arise
that continual joy in the Lord. Therefore while other men are tormented with
ye cares of this life, they do sweetly solace themselves with most pleasant
thoughts, and think themselves present among the companies of angels, far
otherwise than the world thinks of them. Their cogitacions are always busied
in the mystery of man's redemption, in that Lamb which was slain from the
beginning of the world, in ye forgiveness of sins revealed and promised by
almighty God for the deliverer to come: in that seed of the woman dreading
down the head of the serpent, in the seed of Abraham, which is Christ, as the
apostle says: in that Prophet, of whom Moses makes mention in Deuteron.
briefly, in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: promised unto the fathers, and
already given unto us: that is, in him only to whom all the Prophets do
bear witness, that who so ever does put trust of his salvation in him shall
obtain forgiveness of sins by his name: who came into the world to save
sinners, to seek out and save that which was lost, to give his life for the
redemption of many: who was sent to bring the glad and wished message or Gospel
unto the poor and afflicted: to heal the contrite of heart, to preach
deliverance to the captive, to comfort them that mourn, to deliver the
oppressed: who, in fine, is our advocate with the father, our enterpretour and
pacifier between God and men, the throne of grace, the high bishop and the
greatest priest to make intercession continually for us: ye propitiacion for
the sins of the world: our hope, life, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. The consideration of these things abandoneth heaviness out of the
minds of the Godly, and makes them to rejoice at all times more than one
would believe. And now how great gladness do they at large enjoy, whiles
they set before their eyes the holy Catholyke, apostolyke, right believing,
true Christian Church or co^greation? whiles they remember that communion or
fellowship of saints, which being even from the very beginning of the world
after the promise given touching the Messiah or Savior to come, does continue
on still even to this day: spread first abroad in the fathers and Prophets,
afterward in the Apostles and Martyrs, then by and diverse degrees and orders
of Christians, professing all one faith, displayed throughout the whole world?
Whiles they way and consider that Christ the son of God, our Lord and
Redeemer, does rule this same spouse or congregation of his with his word and
Gospel, does help it with the holy Ghost, and defend and maintain it
continually against the Devil? whiles they plesantly and sweetly remember,
that they are adjoined unto this fellowship of the Godly and true Christian
congregation by faith, will, meaning, invocation, prayer, and by confession:
which has the son of God for head and principal, Angels for defenders,
the holy Ghost for a sanctifier, the godly and chosen of all ages for
companions? I say, whiles they remember that they are the members of the people
of God and mystical body, whose chief captain is Christ? Whiles they
occupy their heads about thinking upon that most blessed familiarity in time
to come, with all the Saints in the kingdom of Heaven, unto the which they
travail and labor tooth and nail with exceeding great desire? Therefore how
great joy think thou that they have large fruition of, whiles they are
fixed upon these and such other cogitacions? And surely it behooued Christians
always to occupy their minds about such things, and being as it were
astonished with the consider atio^ of them, to brast out into the praises of God
into Psalms and Hymmes, into spiritual songs, singing and making melody in
their hearts unto the Lord, giving thanks always for all things unto God ye
father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle teaches. And
because the Godly do this contynually, what wonder is it if they always
rejoice in the Lord? And what then is there that can ever make heavy and sad,
can trouble, or faare one that in such wise rejoices? Is it the breach of the
law? But the Apostle does comfort us: Christ (says he) has he redeemed us
from the curse of the law, becoming himself a curse for us. Is it sin? But
S. John does comfort us: If any man have sinned, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiacion for our sins.
Is it death? The Godly wot full well that it is the gate of life everlasting,
and a certain passage out to this world unto the Father. Is it the wrath and
the judgment of God? But we are reconcyled unto God through Christ, as Paul
says. Is it Satan? Christ has conquered him already, and has triumphed over
him being conquered, as says the same Paul? Is it hell fire, and the
tormentos of hell? Nay, Christ when he had overcome hell, did open a way unto
Heaven to the Godly. And in the Prophet Osea the Lord says: I will be thy
death, O death, I will be thy destruction, O hell. Likewise David also in his
Psalms does testify, that Christ did lead Captivity captive, when he
ascended into heaven: that is as much to say, did as a man would say, lead
the enymies of mankind prisoners in his show of Triumph: the devil, I mean,
sin, death, hell. Briefly in all terrors and temptacions of Satan, in all
heaviness, in the most sorrowful cogitacions many times of death, of the last
judgment, of the judgment seat of the Lord, among the other comfortes of
the holy Ghost, the godly do chiefly stay themselves with the words of ye
Apostles Creed: I believe (say they) the Communion or fellowship of Saints,
the remission of sins, the resurrection of this flesh, and the life
everlasting. They leaning upon this faith, chasing all fear and heaviness
from them, if that the devil do minister any, do rejoice always in the
Lord. Howbeit, some man will here object, that considering they are men, it
can not be otherwise chosen but that they should be troubled with passions,
mourn and be sorrowful oftentimes. For they can not lay the nature of mankind
from them, and renounce as it were the feel of flesh and blood, which all men
have in them. I grant that the godly are distressed with heaviness many a
time and often, and that their minds, are sometimes troubled and mazed? and that
it can not be otherwise in these tumults of worldly affairs: Howbeit, the
same do forthwith come to themselves again, and disquietnesse of mind being
settled or appeased, they so facion themselves in Gods regard and provident care
toward them, that with joy they take all things very quietly and rejoice in
their afflictions, and reposing themselves in thapprooued love of God toward
them, do conceive such gladness and pleasure in their minds thereof, that the
same sorrow of theirs is soon overwhelmed withal, if happily these outward
things (as commonly it comes to pass) have caused any in them. For like as a
very little sparkle falling into a great river, is forthwith quenched and come
to nothing: even so, whatsoever evil there is, falling into the huge and
unmeasurable sea, as it were, of joys, with which the Godly do flow and are
always replenished, all that is by and by quenched, and vanishes to naught. For
there is never any place left open for heaviness there, where Christ the
fountain of true gladness is. To make short, howsoever the world goes with
them, the godly do always either simply and without stop rejoice in the Lord,
or else do take things to heart, but for a time, for other men's sakes, or in
fine: if they conceive any sorrow in their mind, for God and his glory, which
it greeueth them to see defaced, yet they forth with feel all that same to be
exchaunged for incredible gladness, and to be taken away clean with spiritual
comfort. And hereunto makes that saying of Paul to the Corinthians: I wrote
to you (quoth he) this same thing, least if I had come unto you, I should take
sorrow by those things, of which it behooved me to take pleasure, having this
trust toward you all, that my joy is all your joys. For I have written unto
you out of much affliction and anguish of heart, by many tears, not that you
should be cast into heaviness, but that ye might know the love which I have
somewhat abundantly toward you. And again: When we were come into Macedonia,
our flesh had no relief, but we were afflicted in all things. Outwardly we
had fights or contentions, inwardly terrors. Howbeit the God that comfort
the humble, has comforted us by the coming of Titus. etc. The same Paul
writes also to the Philippians, touching his sorrow: And surely he was weak
(says he) so that he was at deaths door: But God took pity upon him, and
not on him only, but also on me, least I should have one sorrow upon an
other. Therefore have I sent him the more deligently, that when ye saw him,
ye might again rejoice, and I might be the more void of sorrow. And to the
Thessalonians likewise: Therefore have we received comfort, brethren, by you,
in each of our afflictions and necessities, through your faith, by cause we do
now live, if you stand in the Lord. For what thanksgiving can we repair unto
God for you, in all our joy which we rejoice for you, in the sight of our God,
praying both day and night incessantly, that we may see your face, and may
supply those things which are lacking unto your faith. Here have thou now,
how the godly are wont both to be sorry oftentimes and yet for all that, to
rejoice in the Lord. Such is that saying of Paul also unto the Romans: I
say the truth in Christ, I lie not, mine own conscience bearing me witness
withal, by the holy ghost, that I have exceeding great sorrow, and continual
torment in mine heart. For I my self would wish to become an excommunicated
or cursed thing from Christ for my brethren, my kinsfolk, as pertaining to the
flesh. This in deed is the sorrow of love toward our neighbor or brother:
and may stand very well together with the rejoice of faith toward God, so that
he which thus mourns, does nevertheless always rejoice in the Lord, even
touching the civil or outward form and conversation of life also. For the
godly, by the Apostles saying, do live always without carke and care, and rest
still content with their state or calling: take in good worth things present,
do not greatly torment themselves with the lack of things to come, do
rejoice and cheer up their own soul in their own travail, as says the
Preacher: do take their meat with thanksgiving, do use or occupye such
commodities as they have at hand, for their necessity, and that reverently as
the gifts of God: being joyful, do lead an honest and quiet life, never
careful for the morrow with thought and pensiveness, because Christ teaches
that every days affliction is sufficient for it self: do not wilfully work
their own sorrow or harm, or procure themselves vexations and troubles: do
not reject and refuse such goods as God has given them: do not creep into
some solitary corner, to live the more at their ease and quiet. Nevertheless,
the same do take the troubles that God has sent them, patiently, and are
nothing agreeued with the loss of their goods, and do always give thanks
unto God for all weal and woe, whatsoever shall hap. To be short, they depend
wholly upon God, they have all their dainties, and all that they count good,
settled in God only, they every where look upon the mind or will of God
alone, they frame and apply themselves altogether to gods pleasure and
commandment, do joyfully rest in the love and good will of God toward them
with all their heart, enjoy things present, gape not greedily after things to
come. Thus do they always rejoice in the Lord. To this belong those sayings
out of Salomons book, entitled, the Preacher, I know (quoth he) that there
is nothing better for every man than to be glad and to delight his own life,
and to eat and to drink, and to be made merry or frolic with his own
labor. This is Gods gift. Solomon does not here, like some Epicure, exhort and
encourage to excess, gluttony, surfeite, nor to a voluptuous and Sybariticall
life, as they call it: but to use and enjoy Gods present benefits and good
Sybaritae, people of a city called Sybaris, in all kind of sensual
deliciousness passing all other: and thereof comes a pro uerbe, Sybaritica
mensa, applied to feasts and bankettes, exceeding in delicate fear.
gifts with cheerfulness and thanksgiving, who abundauntly gives all things
to enjoy, as the Apostle says, and fills every living thing with his
blessing, as the Psalmist David says. The same Salomo^ thus teaches: When God
has given wealth and riches unto a man, says he, this is the gift to God,
that he may eat and drink of them for his portion, and may have delight in
his own labor. For such a man is not carefullye mindful of the days of his
life, because God does fill his heart with gladness. Yea many times elsewhere
also the same Solomon bids us to let unprofitable cares and vain thought of
mind go, and to be of good cheer, to be quiet and pacient, in what case so
ever we stand. Her unto makes that saying of the same Solomon, wherein he
exhorts like as he did before, the faithful and the lovers of God: Go, says
he, and eat thy bread in gladness, and drink thy wine with a cheerful
heart, because thy works do now please God Let thy garments be white at all
times, and annoint thy head with oil. etc. In so many troubles and infinite
cares and miseries of this life, Solomon will yet have the godly to be of good
cheer and courage, and not to be careful and take thought: to rejoice always
in the Lord, not to fret and vex themselves. That thing can come to no man but
through the blessing of God, like as he also does many times testify, as when
he says: God gives wisdom and knowledge and gladness to the man that
pleases him. But to the sinner he gives carfulness, that he may increase
and gather together, and so it may be given to him that pleases God. But if
perhaps ought fall out, as the fashion of worldly affairs is, that galleth
him, and stayneth his gladness with some grief of mind, by and by the godly
and faithful Christians do resort or fly unto their heavenly father, and
having, as it were, familiar communication with him do lay open their cares
and troubles before him, and whatsoever it be that grieueth them, do earnestly
desire aid, help, comfort, with most earnest invocation and prayer, and with
humble meekness call for mercy: and in fine, whatsoever adversities they
suffer, do bewail the same, as it were, in the bosom of their most excellent
and most tender loving father* they crave for to have the same either lestened
and assuaged, or else clean taken away, and that with a most sure faith and
affiaunce, and yet in such sort, that they wholly do resign themselves unto
Gods will, and commit themselves unto his goodness: as men ready to bear
patiently whatsoever God will have them. And if in ye mean time they shall
feel their affiance or trust toward God to quayle or be overthrown of the
devil, if they shall perceive any scruple of conscience to arise within them,
if in any point they shall through mischaunce and unadvisedness, by the means
of man's infirmity, swerve and forget themselves, then do they repair to
their Curate or Minister: and whatsoever is a grief or trouble unto them, do
there open and disclose it without shamefastness or fear, and do hear with
gladness the sentence of the Gospel pronounced unto them by the Minister of
the Church, and do lay it up deeply in their hearts and minds, as if it were
pronounced by Christ himself, who is in deed our high Bishop and Priest, yea,
and do rest thereupon with full intent and meaning most heartily, and most
willingly. Besides they do many times also resort to the Lords Table, to ye
end that their faith may be the more kindled, and strengthened, touching the
merciful love and heavenly favor of God toward them, and that the same joy
in the Lord may be by this means repaired again, as it were, which our
ghostly enemy the devil did go about to quench or darcken. Hereunto may be
added a continual and diligent reading of holy Scripture: Wherein the Children
of God with unspeakable pleasure do hard by hear God talking with them
familiarly, comforting the heavy hearted, raising up the afflicted,
strengthening the weak and doubtful, calling men from despair. Join to
this, Sermons and godly Exhortacions, which the Preachers of the Word of
Salvation do make: wherewith also ye minds, of the godly are marueilously
refreshed, and that Rejoice of the Lord, here treated of, is so oftentimes
renewed. For God here does work joy and gladness to the hearers in deed, and
the bones that are brought low, do triumphantly rejoice, as the Prophet
says. Of like effect are the pryuate communications of the godly one with an
other also, touching God, and Christ the Savior: whiles that, according to
Paul's doctrine, they teach and admonish one another with Psalms, Hymmes, and
Spiritual songs, with joy singing in their hearts unto the Lord: whiles, I
say, the word of Christ is among them plentifully, with all wisdom, as Paul
says to the Collossians. Besides this, the very times and holy days do
often renew the Rejoice of the Godly, and that more is, do rather augment it,
and make it greater than it was. For they stir us up unto the remembrance of
Gods wonderful acts and miracles wrought for the salvation of mankind, and
by that occasion do fill the hearts of the godly with spiritual joys in the
Lord. Such are our Easter Holidays, which are kept to continue the remembrance
of Christ's Resurrection: of Pentecost or Whitsontyde, to call the sending down
of the holy ghost upon the Apostles: to mind the feastfull days of Christ's
birth, when the word being made flesh, is celebrated. Likewise the feast of
the Circumcision, of the Epiphanie, of the Purification, Palms, Annunciation,
Visitacion, Ascension, and such other like. At which times that spiritual joy
in the Lord, which the Godly have, is marvelously much increased with a
certain heap, as a man would say: I mean, in the remembering and recounting
of things done by almighty God, as I said before. Hereof comes that saying
in the Psalms, touching Christ's Resurrection: This is the day which the
Lord has made, Let us triumph and be glad therein. And in the Apostle also:
Christ our passover was offered up for us. Hereof is that saying in the Gospel
read in the Church for Christmasse day: Behold, I declare unto you exceeding
great joy which shall be unto all the people, that a Savior this day is borne
unto you, which is Christ the Lord. And also that in Esaias: A child is borne
unto us, and a son is given unto us. These and such other like sayings, which
are song in the congregation upon feastful and solemn days, how exceedingly
think you, do they rejoice and cheer up the hearts of the faithull
Christians? This, even this, I abide by, is to rejoice in the Lord, and not (as
others at such times are wont to do) to make feasts and bankettes, one with an
other, and seek after pleasures and belly cheer: but to spend the holy days
in godly and devout meditacions, and to give thanks to God for his benefits,
to sing Psalms and Hymmes unto almighty God. What? does not that frequent or
populous resort and assembly of the congregation and Christian men in the
Church, at all seasons, to hear the word of God, to make invocation and
prayer, to give thanks, cause a large increase of gladness in the godly? What
is he that can say nay to it? Therefore the faithful do most willingly come
forth to be present with other at that most holy and always to God most
pleasant and acceptable sacrifice of praise, invocation, worship, giving of
thanks, Hymmes, prayers: which at the coming together of the whole
congregation is used ordinarily to be made, with very great ceremony or
reverence. And it is not the least joy of al, that they here tell how any of
their brethren have happily and in assured and strong faith toward God
departed out of this transitory life. Whereupon they being also glad, do
yield thanks to the goodness of God, and pray that they may have the like
departure, and do follow the corse with a good will. And in thus doing, they
are not only brought in mind of their own mortality, but also their most
sweet and pleasant desire touching the heavenly dwelling, is renewed, and the
memory to live there in the fellowship of Angels, and to enjoy that most
blessed familiarity in time to come, with all the Saints, in the life
eternal, is with singular pleasure stirred up. Likewise at the baptism of an
Infant newly borne, the joy of the Godly is also amplified and made more than
it was, whiles they think and consider, not only of the number of Christians
herby increased, but also of the goodness, wisdom, and wonderful
determination and purpose of Almighty God, regenerating or renewing us by
water and the Holy Ghost. They are therefore with marvelous much gladness and
cheerfulness of mind present at this ceremony, ordained by Christ: yea,
even of their own forwardness and accord much more than when they being
desired, are used as witnesses at the childs Baptism. They are, I say
again, present at it, most heartily to commit the child unto Gods tuition, and
to join with others there present in prayer, and to hear the most holy words
of the Minister that baptiseth, and to take inwardely a close and hid pleasure
touching the Kite and fashion of the heavenly mystery, and of the water of
Regeneration, and to triumph over the devil, as ye would say, and to rejoice
on the childs behalf, being made partaker of all the sacraments, and to
render due thanks unto GOD, and to allure other men by their good example unto
like duty.

That which I now entende to speak, may perhaps, seem to most men absurd and
without reason: and yet will I speak it for all that, seeing it is as true as
the Gospel. The Godly are glad more than a man will believe, as often as they
have any occasion given to do alms, and the deeds of mercy and pity. For
they are fully resolved, and out of doubt, that whatsoever bounty and humanity
is bestowed upon their needy neighbor, the same is bestowed upon Christ
himself. Therefore when they see a poor man and beggar to resort unto them
for succor, they think that they see even Christ in his own person: and they
reckon themselves happy whom Christ vouchsafes to that honor, to crave alms
of them. That saying in the Gospel is always before their eyes: In as much as
ye have done it to one of these my poor wretched brethren, ye have done it
unto me. Yea and farther, they think that they are many times tempted or
proved, and they think that it may be Christ himself, coming unto them in
the likeness of a beggar. And they wonder at those men's lack of faith,
which, if Christ were here corporally among us, as once he was, say, they
would deny him nothing, though it were a great matter, and yet with a deaf
ear do pass by, refuse, and despise Christ walking here and there about like
a poor beggar, and crauyng his alms. They therefore, as I have said, are not
a little glad when they do an alms deed, and show liberality to their
neighbors. For believing the words of the Gospel, they behold and look upon
Christ in their neighbor, which will have all that laid out for him, that in
his name is bestowed upon wretched men, and such as be altogether succorlesse.
Therefore they feed Christ being a hungry, in their neighbor, they give him
drink being a thirst, they receive him into their house being a stranger they
cloth him being naked, they visit him being weak, they comfort him being
captive or prisoner: and if they be able, they ransom him also.

But among all these things, of what so^^, and how exceeding great do we
think that joy of the Godly to be, as often as (and in a manner they daily do
it, and without ceassing) they talk alone with their heavenly Father, and open
their desires unto him, with so great delight and pleasure many times, that
being as it were ravished beside themselves they pray the whole day together,
without having any mind of their meat, yea, and continue al night in prayer
also. And surely, if ye godly do ever of any thing receive a certain smak or
taste in this same life of the blessed life to come, they chieflye receive the
same by this their talking together and communing with almighty God, that I
speak of: whereby it comes that they are never without cause tired with
praying. And yet in such talk they are not only busied and occupied for
themselves, or for things properly pertaining to their own behoof, but even
for the whole catholic Church, for the christian common wealth, for the
spreading abroad of the Gospel, and for the sanctifiyng of the name of god
also. In this exercise they do both crave all good things, as well for the soul
as for the body, at Gods hands: as are peace, quietness, tranquillity,
concord of Princes, plentye of things necessary to life, and such other like:
and also make prayer to be free from calamities both public and private, from
war, famine, and pestilence: and besides, give thanks to the goodness of God
for the benefits received at his hand. Now such talking together with God is
so sweet and pleasant unto the^, that in manner having forgotten themselves,
and neglecting the care of their bodies, they do constantly persevere and
continue in prayer, as men raised upward with a certain godly zeal and
affection, and neither take their natural rest, nor long for meat: but after
a sort think themselves already among the blessed company of Angels, as if
they were become now immortal, and not here conversant in the world among
men. O happy creatures, who thus being delighted, do at large enjoy in their
minds continual gladness, unspeakable pleasure, and the endless rejoice of
Gods holy spirit. The world cannot so much as imagine what manner of things
these should be, nor behold them (as they say) but in a dream: the children
of God do only know them.

We have, I think sufficiently declared and opened, that which we took in
hand, that the faithful and true lovers of God do always rejoice in the
Lord, howseeuer the world go: to weete, as well in sadness as in gladness.
We will yet say thus much more. The right and true Christians do take
incredible delectacion especially among other men, at his wonderful ornature
and beauty of the world, at the variety, grace and order of heavenly bodies,
at the most pleasant sight of the Sun, at the stars shining by night, at
the amiablenesse of the earth, and the most fair, and as it were, sprinking
countenance of natural things: I mean so often as they do see, as the Poet
says:

The sky to shine, the trees to budde,
The chearing vines to spring
With branches, and the boughs to bend
With full Grapes that they bring.
The standing corns to yield their fruits
Each thing to flourish out.
The Wells to bubble, and with grass
The meadows clad throughout.
How rejoice they, even from the very bottom of their hearts as often as they do
remember Gods goodness, which would have all the other Creatures to serve for
man's necessities: Woods, Groves, Hills, large Meadows and Pastures, Fields,
Gardens of pleasure, fountains and springes of water, brooks or foords,
ryuers, and whatsoever things else are ministered out of these, for the use,
delyght and food of men, woods, trees, herbs, flowers or blossoms, beryes,
Pulse, all kind of corn or grain, all sorts of things that have life, wild
beasts for hunting, fowls for hauking or fouling, fishes for angling, weeles,
and for nets, to let pass the store, plenty and variety of other things
beside, almost without number. Join unto these also the hyd riches in the
bowels of the earth, the secret veins of gold and silver, the metals of
brass, iron and lead, precious stones and pearls of price, wonderful to
behold, fortheir greatness, for their beauty, and for a certain secret
virtue and operation hid in them. They know well that all these things are
given them of their most loving father, not only for necessity, but also for
honest delectacyon and pleasure. This now does delight woonderfully, and makes
the godly to rejoice more than a man can believe: As often as they see the
corn in the fields, the fruits upon the trees, the grapes on the vine, the
herbs and sweet smelling flowers, as the Violet, the Rose and the Lilly in
the gardens, so many times do they take the fruition and use of the same
things with a singular pleasure: and besides yield unto the goodness of their
most gracious and tender loving father exceeding great thanks, extol and praise
his goodness, have his wisdom in due admiration, and in fine, do testify
the joy of their mind, and their thankful will toward god, by singing of Himmes
or praises. And how do the same persons rejoice, as often as they by occasion
see their cattle come from ye pasturs, their Goats, Ewes, Kine, drawing home
apace with strouting vdders: as often as they see the labors and travails of the
little Bees, in which God has left so great miracles of his wisdom? in fine,
as often as they see their poultry bringing up their little Chickens with so
great chariness, defending them from the Kite and other Vermin, and huckling
them under their wings? why, will some man say, that thing does also delight
the wicked and Godless men. I grant in deed that ye wicked do take some
kind of pleasure by the same: but yet not in the Lord. For they do not
acknowledge Gods goodness toward us, that is the giver of al those things, nor
render thanks to Gods bountifulness, nor offer up the sacrifice of praise,
nor triumphing with spiritual joy, do sing and make melody in their hearts to
ye Lord, like as the Godly are used to do: who are persuaded that all these
aforesaid things do serve for man's uses, that these things are the gifts of
God, who evermore has a care over us and for us a providence after a fatherly
sort, according to that saying in the Book of the Psalms: Thou have put all
things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, and beside the beasts of the field,
the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea. For that power and right
which we lost in our first father Adam, the same have we recovered again by
Christ: so that we have rule and dominion over the creatures, and al things be
in subjection unto us, flocks or herds of small cattle, droaues of Neat and
other great beasts, wild beasts and all fowls that fly in the air, all fish
and living things swimming in the sea. The Godly do therefore know that all
these things do serve their turns and occupyings, as unto whom the father
has given all things together with his son Christ Jesus. Wherefore they are
not troubled in their minds, as me^ casting how to live, what to eat, and what
to drink, when they see so great care of their heavenly father for them.
Neither do they make scruple to use those meats freely which God has created,
for the faithful to take with thankesgyuing, and for them that know aright,
that whatsoever god has made, the same is good, and in no wise to be rejected,
if it be taken with giving of thanks, as Paul says to Tymothe. Besides this,
that gladness or Rejoice of the godly (to come again to our purpose) is wholly
clear and sincere and in every respect sound, true and unfeigned. But the
pleasure of the Godless by such things, if they do take any, is not pure and
perfect or substantial: but marvelously polluted or defiled: because infinite
scruples do remain in their consciences, that vex and trouble them, and
continually prick and sting them. Those rejoice even from the very bottom of
their hearts, and take incredible fruit of most true delight. But these do cast
of a vain trifling delight, I know not what my self, and dreamingly imagine a
gladness with the superficial part of their hearts only, after a slight
manner, and as it were with a dulled feeling. Howbeit I wade further in the
matter then I had thought to do at the first: and therefore now at the length
let us make an end. It is faith, therefore, Faith, I say, in Christ, whereby
we are fully and wholly persuaded, that God the father moved with love
incredible toward men, has preferred our salvation before the dear love of
his only son, and for all our sakes has delivered him into the hands of
the enemy, that through him we might recover that which we had lost in the
first parent of mankind, Adam, I mean, innocence, righteousness, holiness:
and might be delivered from sin, death, the devil, and everlasting
damnation, and being adopted to the sons of God, might be made heirs of the
immortal good things and of the kingdom of heaven. This same faith in Christ,
does both lift up and comfort the afflicted and terrified minds, and also
makes a man always to rejoice incredibly. This faith enforces a man to cry out
with the Apostle: If God be with us who can be against us? He that has not
spared his own son but has delivered him for us all, how can it be, that
with the same son he should not give us all things? who shall lay crimes
against the elect of God? it is God that justifies: who is it that can
condemn? It is Christ that dyed, nay that was also raised again, which is
also at the right hand of God, which also makes intercession for us: who shall
separate us from the love of God toward us. etc. This Faith being instructed by
the word of God, confirmed by his sacraments, settled in us with the holy
Ghost, resting and reposing it self in the only good will and love of God
toward us for Christ's sake, putting the hope of attayning salvation in the
free goodness, clemency, benignity, mercy and grace of God for Christ,
depending wholly upon God alone, having his only respect unto god, and
casting all his care and thought upon God, both asking and looking for all good
things at Gods only hand, as of a most loving and tender father, flying to
the only aid and help of God in adversity, studying from the very heart to
please God only, fearyng to offend through a certain honest and free
bashfulnesse: finally, occupied in a continual and daily contemplation of
heavenly things with all his mind, thought, care, and desire, despising
worldly things, beholding the celestial things: this same Faith, I say, makes
us to rejoice always in the Lord, and with gladness and merry cheer to give
thanks to the Lord for all things. I beseech thee, the everlasting father of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for thy sons sake, our Mediator, high
priest and advocate, that pouring forth plentifully into us thy holy spirit,
thou would stir up, increase and keep this same faith in our hearts.
For it is not in man's power to believe and trust, but comes from above from
almighty god, neither have we the same of our selves, but we have it as a gift
from thee, O most merciful father: and we ought at all times to acknowledge
our faith to come from thee, to render hearty thanks unto thee for the same.

Thus much had I, in manner, to declare touching the continual Rejoice of the
Godly, being moved upon occasion thereunto through that place of the Apostle
to the Thessalonians, where he says: Be glad always, pray without cessing,
give thanks in all things. And with that likewise to the Philippians: Rejoice in
the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice. By which words the Apostle
bids the godly sort, and them that do clean fast to him with full trust
and affiance, to be of good cheer and spiritually iocund at all times in the
memory and recounting of Gods good will toward them, and in the sure hope of
atteyning salvation, through our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, howsoever that
the world go. Now happy is that man, and happy in deed whatsoever he be,
that reposing himself only at al times in God, who takes care for the Godly
being moved thereunto through a certain wonderful and true fatherly love
and tender affection toward us, as is the natural father to his children:
whosoever I say, believing the son of God to be our righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, and fully persuaded with him self, that there
in no condemnation at all to be feared, of the^ that are ingraffed in Christ
Jesus, does pass over ye whole time of his life in spiritual joy, taking things
present in good worth, and nothing careful with thought and pensiveness for
things to come, serving always in fear, and exceedingly rejoicing with
trembling, as that holy Prophet David the Psalmograph does admonish.

This therefore that we may do in deed, and without counterfeyting, from the
very bottom of our hearts, howsoever things go, both in prosperity and
adversity, I pray the same our Lord and God to grant, without whom there is
never any sincere joy, and in whom only the scripture bids us to rejoice
and be exceeding glad always: to whom be praise honor, and glory, for ever
and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

