A TREATISE OF THE FOUR DEGENERATE SONS, VIZ. the ATHEIST the MAGICIAN the
IDOLATER. and the JEW.


Wherein are handled many profitable questions concerning Atheism, Witchcraft,
Idolatry, and Iudaisme: and sundry places of Scripture, cleared out of the
Original Tongues.

(...), Math. 7.6.

Quaerite and invenietis.

(...)
(...)
(...)
Id est.

Non laboravi, and inveni: ne credito:
Laboravi and non inveni: ne credito:
Laboravi, and inveni, credito.
Seneca. Lectio varia delectat, certa prodest.

Being the fourth Volume, of the Works of Mr. IOH. WEEMSE of Lathocker in
Scotland, and Prebend of Dunelm.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Cotes and are to be sold by John Bellamie, dwelling
at the three golden Lions in Corne-hill, near the Royal Exchange. 1636.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, WILLIAM Lord Bishop
of London, and Lord High Treasurer of England, etc.
Right Honorable
THe Church of God in the Scriptures is not unfitly compared unto a Kingdom,
and unto a family; And first unto a Kingdom, wherein there are filij regis
Kings sons, who succeed to their Father as heirs of the Kingdom; secondly,
filij regni the children of the Kingdom, who sometimes mendaciter se
subijciunt regi, Psalm. 18. Thirdly, exteri who do not acknowledge the King,
nor he them for his subjects. So in the Church there are filij regis, who are
the true children of God, and heirs of eternal inheritance, and filij regni,
who make a show and profession of Religion, yet many of them may be cast out of
the Kingdom into utter darkness Mat. 8.12. Lastly, there are exteri, who
live altogether without the Church and hate her, those does God abhor
Secondly, she is compared to a family wherein there are some who are begotten
of the same father, borne of the same mother, and (...), sucking one milk, and
those are said to be borne at home, or home borne Levit. 18.9. Jer. 2.14. Those
were heirs succeeding to their fathers inheritance. Secondly there were those
who were borne of the same mother, but not begotten of the same father, and
those were called foris nati Levit. 18.9. because familia matris (as the
Hebrews say) non est familia; and thirdly, those who are cast out of the
family and belong not to it, as bastards; such a one was Jepthe Judge. 11.5. who
got no possession with his brethren in his fathers inheritance. So it is in the
spiritual family the Church, those who are begotten of the immortal seed of
the Word by God their Father, and borne in the Church their mother, and (...)
nursed upon the sincere milk, 1 Pet 2.2. those are borne at home, or
homeborne; There are others who are borne of the same mother (...) mothers
children, but not begotten by one father, and many of them are foris nati, when
they are members of the visible Church only, who if they be not begotten of
the immortal seed of the word, and are not members of the invisible Church
also, the Lord reckons them not as his children. The Church their mother
bestows some outward favors upon them, but yet they are not those true
children who shall be partakers of the inheritance, and those mothers children
only oftentimes persecute their brethren, Cant. 1.6. My mothers children were
angry with me; but the third sort are those who are altogether out of the
Church, and those the Church acknowledges not as her children. Such are those
four degenerate sons, the Atheist, the Magician, the Jdolater, and the Jew,
whom the Lord acknowledges not for his children, but will have them cast out
like Hagars brats. Those four do hate the true Church most, persecute her,
and detest her; and the Church to them is like a speckled bird or Owl Ier.
12.9. who all set themselves against the Church; these four are mightily
increased now in the world, they are the bane both of the Church and
Commonwealth, seeking like the Boar in the Forest to root out the Lords
Vineyard; but the Lord has put a hedge about his Vineyard to save it from
them, and he has set up a watchtower within her, to discover those enemies;
he has set the magistrate about her as a wall to defend her, and the Pastors
as watchmen to observe them, and it is a blessed thing when these two agree for
the safety of the Church, then Moses and Aaron meet together and kiss one
another, Exodus 4.16. there is a great relation betwixt these two, the Church
and Commonwealth, and they have not been unfitly compared to Hippocrates
twins, when the one laughed so did the other, and when the one wept so did
the other; so when the Church of God prospers so does the Commonwealth, and
when the Commonwealth decays so does the Church, but when the care of both
these is matched in one worthy person, that is an happy union, then they are
like the two eyes in the head, which although they be two, yet they look both
one way, and although they be two, yet the radij visuales draw both to one
object. Your Lordship has an interest in both, you are a chief (...) in the
Church, an under rower under our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. and in the
Commonwealth another Eliakim, in whose hands much of the government is
committed, Esaias 22.21. and the key of the house of the Kingdom is laid upon
your shoulder, verse 22. and upon whom all sorts of vessels great and small
do hang, ver. 24. I have endeavored my Lord to discribe those four sons
according to that gift which God has bestowed upon me, that men may abhor
those vile sons, and learn to become Christians; And I have done here as the
Painters do when they draw their draughts, they draw first (...), some dark
lineaments, and afterward they add (...), and last they superinduce the vive
colors, and that is (...): I have drawn the first draughts and lineaments of
those four lewd sons, but if any would be pleased to add to those first
draughts the vively colors, he shall do a good work, and profitable to the
Church of God. I have taken the boldness to Dedicate these my travels to your
Lordship desiring that you would be pleased to accept of them, remembering that
Apologue of the Jews; Cholin folio 92. 1.
the Vine grapes of Babylon upon a time sent to the Vine trees of Judea and
begged some of their leaves to cover their grapes (for if there were not leaves
to cover them, the grapes would quickly perish; If such as your Lordship do
not favor our poor grapes, they will suddenly go to decay; accept therefore
(my Lord) of these my travels, and look upon them with a favorable eye, and
when I shall see that they shall profit any thing the Church of God, and be
approved by your Lordship then I have obtained my end.

Your Lordships in all Duty. JOHN WEEMSE.

An Alphabeticall Table, wherein are contained the chief matters and principle
heads of the whole Treatise, together with the Hebrew and Greek Words.
A
Aaron made the golden calfe, 189. he sinned not of ignorance, ib. the greatness
of his sin, ib. Aarons Idolatry teaches the infirmity of the Leveticall
Priesthood 190. how the Lord spared Aaron, though he was an Idolater Abel, what
it signifies. 203 Abraham an idolater. 179 he left his father and Country for
Gods cause 181 Abimelech, what judgment befell him for robbing of his idol.
228 Achab how wicked a King he was. 256 Acharon by the Hebrew is called an
Atheist. 3 Accursed, what it is to be accursed. 322 Achaz plays the
Politician. 283. A comparison betwixt Achazaz and Amaziah and what proverb the
Hebrews apply to them. 284 Adder, how the deaf Adder is said to stop her
ears. 42 Adjectivum perpetuum and adjectivum distinctionis what. 176 Adoption,
a difference betwixt Gods adoption and man's 298 Adorare what 265 Age to dye in
a good old age what it signifies 225 Alexander why he is called hircus
caprarum 114 (...), what. 7 Angels never call themselves men in the Scripture,
37. the Angels in working of miracles are not coworking causes, 96 how good
Angels differ from bad angels in hurting. 107 how they take up things 117. they
have a threefold motion 136. Angels refuse divine worship, 168. the difference
betwixt angelus mali and angelus malus, 107. what Angel buffeted Saint Paul
ibid Apollo, why he was called (...) 22 Apostles, how they are said (...) with
Christ 97 Apparitions, how true apparitions are distinguished from false 39
Aramite, why he is put for an idolater by the Syriacke 177 Archimedes his
quickenesse of wit 106 Arc, how long it was in Gilgal, Shilo, Nob, and Gibeon,
249. Arc called ariel lion of God. 257 Articles, some articles of faith proved
and believed, some believed only 10 Asa, a comparison betwixt David, Josias
and Asa 277. betwixt Amazziah, Vzziah and Asa 278 (...) what 3 (...) what 7
Astrology, of judicial astrology and the diverse names of it 43. Astrology
proceeded first from idolatry, 54. it takes away Gods providence 55. it takes
away liberty of will in civil things from man and that which he has by grace
58. it is subordinate to no other science 61 how judicial astrology borrows
from other sciences and has nothing of its own 61. whether it be a science or
not 62 Asuphim or collecti who. 298 (...) what 59 Atheism, the causes which
lead men to Atheism 3. Atheism the ^enter of all sin. 16 Atheist, the word
Atheist diversely taken 5. how many sorts of Atheists there are, ibid. they deny
in their jollity that there is a God 8. when we dispute against Atheists,
although we use natural middles, yet we conclude not as Physicians but as
Divines 10. a comparison betwixt a Christian, a Devil, and an Atheist, 14. So
betwixt Baalam and the Atheist ibid. So betwixt the Atheist and the Saduce 15.
So betwixt the Epicure and the Atheist ibid. So betwixt the Devil and the
Atheist ibid. The Atheist should be put to death 16.
B.
Baal whether he was a Prophet or not 128. why his house was turned to a Privy
195 the Lord would not be called Baal 215 three sorts of people diversely
affected toward Baal 220 Baalberith what 227 Baalim a common name to all idols
214 what it signifies ibid. Baragar what 133 Barbarism whence it is derived.
Before, to be before the Lord what it signifies in the scripture 114
Beresheth, what the Hebrews call opus beresheth 92 Beth signifies sometimes
contra and not in ib. Borne, what were the privileges of the first borne 295
Bowing, Cajetan makes two sorts of bowing 270 (...) what 7 Bukera sacla what it
signifies. 297 Burial, Moses burial most honorable 209
C
(...) what it is 59 Caph giminatum quid valet apud Hebraeos 279 caph by the
Hebrews is taken three ways 279 Captivity the difference betwixt the Jews
former captivity and the captivity now 332 Cemarim what they were 289 (...)
what 79 Chiun what it signifies 200 Christ as he was man wrought no miracles
97. the difference betwixt Christ and his Apostles in working of miracles ibid.
how often the Devil tempted Christ 150. a threefold error concerning Christ
304. Christ is (...) and (...) for us, reasons proving that Christ is come 306
Church was first in a family then in a nation, then scattered abroad 178. three
sorts of gifts bestowed upon the Church 156. two sorts of effects in a Church
180. how the Jewish Church was divided 190 (...) 133 Circumcision a defense
against witchcraft 153 circumcision a seal of the covenant of the Jews 302
Cohen and Cumar how they differ 235 Conscience what it is called in the Syriack
9. how an erroneous conscience binds 229. four privileges of a good
conscience when it stipulates with God, 227. four sorts of consciences 272
Consecrate, who did consecrate when the Priesthood was in the wrong line 234.
Idolatrous Priests could not consecrate ibid. Contingency, three sorts of
contingencie 119 Covenant, we must not covenant with hell, the devil the world
and death, 26. the indirect covenant with the devil 42. what they do who
enter into the direct covenant with him 30 Conception twofold in the scripture
106 Corpus purum, impurum and non purum how they differ 73 Craft of the Devil
131 (...) what 88 Cruelty, Of the cruelty of the Devil. 141
D
Dan committed idolatry 243. how long idolatry continued in the Tribe of Dan
ibid Darts, why they are called fiery darts (...) what 3 Devil, a great sin
to lie with the Devil 32. how many ways he appears to men 34. why the Devils
are called hoary ones 34. the word devil taken three ways in the scripture 88
of the power of the devil 90. of the knowledge of the devils 111 four things
makes him to have great knowledge 112. whence the devils had knowledge to
foretell things to come 122. there are not devils more milder than others 146
diverse names given to the devil 151. the devils when they assume bodies, they
are not affected as our bodies are, 154. he tempted the woman first in her
irascible faculty, 20. in her intelligible and concupiscible faculty, 21. how
he corrupts our understanding, 22. how he works in and upon a body, 101. how
he assumes bodies 102. The Devil cannot beget a child, and why, 106 he can
transport bodies and how, 104. what knowledge the devil has of the Scripture,
123. he flatters when he foretells things to come, 124. his responses were
doubtful 125. how he strikes the bodies with diseases, 107. he cannot move the
will, 110. he sees the effects in the cause, 116. his great employment breeds
him great knowledge, 117 he pursues the weakest first 138. he observes our
predominant sin 139. our age, 140. what are the means to resist the devil
152. why he is called diabolus 148 (...) what it is 109 Diseases, how to
discern diseases that come from God, those that come from the devil, or
natural causes, 108. the Jews ascribe d^seases to evil spirits 110 (...)
what 150 Divine, to divine by the intralls of beasts is unlawful. 87 Doctrine,
errors of the Church in doctrine threefold 180. Dreams are of four sorts,
63. divine dreams of two sorts, 66. what the breaking of a dream signified,
66. how Solomon could ask any thing in a dream, 67. why the Lord revealed
himself to heathen Kings in a dream, 67. how we shall know dreams to be from
God, 69. how we shall know dreams to be from the devil, 72. whether all
impure dreams are diabolical or not? 70
E
Ear, the Lord takes great pains about the ear, 149 Egypt, the increase of
idolatry when the Church was in Egypt, 185. the Lord reckons up ten times this
benefit of bringing his people out of Egypt, 186. In what sense it was
forbidden that the people should go back to Egypt, ibid. many plagues they
got out of Egypt, 188. what league it was when the Church gave her hand to
Egypt, 280. why the Egyptians put the Elephant in their colors 280 Elders, how
the 70 elders of Israel were chosen 79 Eliah, what care the Lord had to
preserve him from dearth and famine 263 Elisha, his answer to Hazael whether
it was doubtful or not 127 (...) how they differ 45 Ephod, three sorts of
Ephods 235 Erasistrates the Physician, his skill. 119 Error conditions what
320 Etzrephennum what 221 (...) what, 3 (...) what, 59 Exorcising, a temperate
gift bestowed upon the Church 156 Extasis what it is 72 Ezekias, what things he
did for the removing of Idolatry 284
F
Faith, The Devil tempts us in our faith 149 Faithful parents who have badde
children get comfort by looking upwards to their godly parents of whom they are
descended 240 Fast, why Christ took the defense of his Disciples when they
fasted not 158 Fire, the fire in the second temple was humano divinus 262. the
Jews are uncertain concerning the fire of the second Temple, 262. Foot, what
is meant by a firmented foot 145 Fowls, of divination of fowls 83. what
things fowls can foretell 89. they cannot compare things distinctly as men
do; ibid. what things we may learn from fowls 85. to take up contingent
events by fowls is devilish, ibid when this divination by fowls ceased, 87
G.
Gentilisme, when the Jews turned from Gentilisme to Christianity, how they
were called 301 Gentiles, three sorts of Gentiles were out of the covenant 337
Generation, three things concur in generation 102 Gergasites fell from the
Jewish Religion to the heathenish 302 Gibeah, a filthy fact committed in Gibeah
81 Gideon, whether he tempted God in asking a sign or not. 222. whether he set
up an Ephod to make an Idol thereof 225. what is meant when it is said that
the Jdoll became a snare to Gideon 226 (...), what 3 Gnalma what it signifies.
303 Gnal panai, what 171 Gnarum, taken in a good sense and in a bad 132 God,
reasons proving that there is a God, 10. 11. 12. 13. what are the privileges
of God in working 70. he uses artificial means in curing of diseases 48. how
God, Nature, and Art works 89. he only works miracles 91. a twofold work
of God 92 whether God concurres as a mediate or immediate cause the very effect
93. God works according to nature, besides nature, but not contrary to
nature, 95. God although he uses instruments in working of miracles yet it is
he who does the work, 96. God in working exceedes Art, Nature, and the Devil.
101. men fanized Gods according to their several inclinations 165. God can
make Satan an instrument for the good of his Saints, 113. God reserveth three
things to himself, which he will communicate to no creature, 166. A threefold
taking up of God, 173. God chooses some to himself out of all places except
hell, 182. New Gods what 221. a judgment upon those who rob the true God. 230.
how the word God is taken in the story of Micah's Idolatry, 232 he teaches his
people by silly creatures, 204. Groves, why they are called Ashera.
H.
Heart, what is a sincere heart, 276. how one is said to have a heart and a
heart, ibid. In what respects a man is said to have a sincere heart, 277.
Humor, Satan observes the humor of the body in tempting him 132
I
Iamlicus Proclus his divination by souls 86 Jacob, how Idolatry took
increase in the family of Jacob, 183. how it is said that the Lord brought
Jacob out of Egypt, seeing he dyed there, 208 Idolatry, whence it had the
beginning, 163. how great a sin it is, 167. the effects of Idolatry, 175. how
Epiphanius divides Idolatry, 177. how vile a sin it is, 245. Of Idolatry in
the time of the Kings, 247. the Lord punishes the Idolatry of the Father upon
the children, 255. the Jewish Idolatry was buried in the captivity 292
Idolaters, choose the most vilest things to worship, 167. how the Lord mocked
Idolaters, 169. a twofold Idolater 174. Idolaters pretend the example of Saints
for their Idolatry, 218. Idolaters should not rob their Idols, 228. Idolaters
carried their children about the fire, and then passing through it burnt them
in the fire 281 Idol, how they honored their Idols, 166. Idols are nothing.
176. Idols a dangerous treasure, 183 the Lord will not communicate with Idols
in any thing, 216. to whom it is sacrilege to rob an Idol, 229: Whether it be
lawful to be present at Idol service or not, 170. Popish Idols is a let of
the Jews conversion, 350 (...) what. 7 Jeroboam changed four things in the
worship of God, 213 Jerusalem anagogice what it signifies, and things without
Jerusalem catagogice what they signify, 290 Jews, of the threefold estate of
the Jews, 297. Jews ruled by judges, patriarchs and Kings, 178. Jews who
worshipped Idols were of three sorts 221. they prayed with their heads covered,
264. they turned their faces toward the temple, when they worshipped
publickely, 265. they lifted their eyes to idols, 266. they kissed their idols
ibidum. they praised God three manner of ways ibid. they held up their hands
to their idols, 267. they stood barefooted before their idols, 268. they leaned
down before their idols, 270. they bowed their knees to them, 167. what
dignities the Jews lost when they were not his people, 300. they hate the
Samaritans above all Apostates, 302. they know not the time of their visitation
305. three sorts of Jews differ concerning Christ's coming, 306. they deny
John the Baptist to be Christ's forerunner, 313. they despise Mary our Lords
mother, ibid. they acknowledge not two natures in Christ, 314. they mock his
officers, ibid. they detest his name and surname, 315. they mock Christ's
cross, 318. they despise his imputed righteousness, 318. his resurrection,
his sacraments, and us Christians, ib. what they hope their Messiah will do
for them when he comes, 321. Of the curses which befell them since the killing
of Christ, 328 the Lord gave the^ sundry warnings of their rejection, 335.
whether they are to be suffered in a Christian common wealth or not. 337. what
benefits they may enjoy amongst us Christians, 339. which are the lets of the
Jews conversion. 344 The Jews prefer Mishna and the Talmud to the
Scriptures, 349. Gods mercy to Paul a bloody persecutor shows that he may be
merciful to the Jews, 355. Reasons of their calling, ibid. objections which
seem to deny the conversion of the Jews, 362. of the manner of their calling,
363. their lamentation after their conversion will be great, 364. who were the
cause of Christ's death, 366. what hatred was betwixt them and the Gentiles of
old, 368. what joy there will be when they shall be gathered, 369. the Jews
and Gentiles make up one Church 370. they hope their Temple shall be built,
372. of the end of their calling, 377. reasons why Christians should be earnest
for their conversion 378. how thankful they ought to be for their
conversion. 381. Image, the devil persuaded people that Images were sent down
from heaven 164. and that they had divine power. ibid Josias, what care the
Lord had of him though he was killed in battle, 207. Ioaz in a better case than
Abimelech. 228 Jonathan the Grandchild of Moses, 238. Israel, in Israel there
were sundry dialects. 242 Israelites, how they were charged for worshipping the
Host of heaven in the wilderness, 196. their pilgrimage through the
wilderness resembles the estate of a Christian man's life, 203. they tempted
God ten times in the wilderness. 204 Ittariad what it signifies, 220 Judah
whether the Idolatry of Judah or Israel be greatest, 254 Julian fell from
Christianity to Paganism. 255
K
Kings, when the first increase of Idolatry under the Kings was 249, what
things are to be observed when the Kings of Israel are set down for examples
252. Kingly government the best government, 236 three Kings of Judah, most
excellent Kings 247 A collation betwixt the Kings of Egypt, Israel and Judah.
L
Lamentation of the Jews for the death of Christ, 335. Leagues, what leagues
with Idolaters are unlawful, 278 Levite, how there could be a Levite in the
Tribe of Judah. 236. the calling of Levits and Priests, two distinct callings
237. a Levite sought to be a Priest that he might eat bread, ibid Life, man
has a threefold life, 144. in what respect a man is bound to lay down his
life for another 358 Lots, the end why lots were institute, 74. how many sorts
of lots there were, 75. what caveates are to be kept in a divisory lot, 75.
what is a consultary lot, 76. whether the lot cast for Jonas was a divine lot
or not, 77. whether the lot which fell upon Jonathan was a Divine lot or not,
ibid. a lot for divination was diabolical, 80. why Matthias was chosen by lot,
78. why the Apostles afterward were not chosen by lot (...) what. 113
M.
Magic, how many sorts of magic there be, 59. In what respect men are
called magitians 40 Manasseh, how the Hebrews read this name Manasseh and
Moses, 238. Of the increase of idolatry under Manasseh 287. Mamluchim who are
called by the Turks, 303 Mamzer, what it is, 298 Marks imposed for four
ends. 31 Maymorides rule of religious outward worship, 264 Media are operantia
or deferentia 35 Merlin not begotten of a devil. 204 Michaes many
irregularities in consecrating a Priest, 233 Malefactor how he was a type of
Christ Ministry, how base a thing it is to enter into the ministy for gain,
238 Miracles, are of three sorts, 91. what is a miracle within a miracle 47.
the difference betwixt the miracles of the Apostles and the miracles of Satan,
99. Molech what, 199 Moses why he caused beat the calfe to powder, 195. his
body signifies not the ceremonial law, but his body indeed, 24. whence he is
called Moses, 207. Moses body buried by the Angels, 208. Musellanus mocked
divination by fowls, 87
N.
Naaman, how the Lord deals with him although there be many infirmities in
him, 274 (...), what. 88
O
Oath, a representative oath binds all people, not a personal. 77 (...),
what, 83 (...), what, ibid. Ostracismus, what, 79 Ox, whether it was an Ox or
calfe, which was worshipped, 197. how the Ox was marked, 198. whether it was
the whole Ox or his head which they worshipped. 197
P
Paul, how he wishes to be anathema for his brethren 361 Parang, what 302
Parents, can transmit nothing to their children but original sin. 241
Petalismus, what 79 Peace, go in peace, what it signifies, 271. Pesulim, who
were 298 Peffercorne, how many times he changed his religion, 303 (...), what
71 Pollute, what it is to pollute a place 289 Power, two sorts of Power, 89.
what does limitate Gods power, and what the devils power, 39 Prophets, how the
Prophets of God differed from the Prophets blasted by Satan 38. the Prophets
understood things past, present, and to come, 120. they are called Chozim,
ibid. Prophecy is not habitus sed actus transiens, 121. two sorts of
Prophecy, 122 Philacteries, institute as helps to prayer, 152. the Jews used
them as remedies against witchcraft. 153
R.
(...) what. 83 Rabsakeh, a comparison betwixt Rabsakeh and the Papist 185.
Rabsakeh turned from judaisme to Paganism, 301. Religion, the Devil hates
Christian religion 150. Rempham what it signifies 200 Rekim, what 228 Reuben,
why the tribe of Reuben changed their idolatrous names of Nebo and Baalmeon,
216
S
Samuel, whether he appeared to Saul, or Samuel in show only, 34. what the
Jews held concerning Samuels apparition, 35. wherefore the scripture calls him
Samuel. 36 (...), what 34 (...) who 134, the difference betwixt (...) and
(...), ibid. Shepherds, why they are called Punctatores 31 Shields, whereof
they were made of old 157 Sichor, what it signifies 188 Sight is deceived by
Satan three manner of ways 138 Signs, how many sorts of signs there be 48
Sin, four things in every sin to be considered, 210 two sorts of sins,
255. Salomons throne had six steps which were called admonitiones graduum,
219. what blessings the Lord bestowed on him before his fall, 249. he wrote
his book of Ecclesiastes after his fall, 250. he was not a reprobate, 251
Sorodaemones what they were, 133 Sorcerers are more dangerous instruments than
witches, 139. what sorcerers should be put to death 160 Soul whether it goes
out of the body and returns or not, 73. what the Hebrews do mean by
gathering of the soul, 243 Spirit, four illapses of the spirit, 219. to he
clothed with the spirit what, 220 Saints, what duties are to be performed to
the dead bodies of the Saints, 206. Of the care that God has of his Saints in
their birth, in their death and after they are dead. 207 Stars, whether they
produce alteration in religion or not, 56. why they are called Mozalim and
Meshartim, 58. what use we are to make of them ib. Superstition, is called
(...) and why 17 Superstition the mother of ignorance, 18. a comparison betwixt
the superstitious and religious. ibid. Symmachus from what religion he fell.
302. Synedrion when it was removed out of Jerusalem, 308
T
Tentation two fold 71 Teraphim, how they were made 88. it is taken three ways
in the Scripture, ibid. what sort of Teraphim was kept in David's house. ibid
(...) what, 118 Tephilim whence it comes, 152 Theodosius, it is fabulous that
he sent a letter to Chrysostom after his death 36 (...) what. 133 Thunder is
the voice of God the Lord used to speak in the thunder 247 Tophet, a
resemblance betwixt tophet and hell 290 Transportation twofold 105 Some deny
real transportation, 107 Tradition, of the tradition of the house of Elias.
310 Tunica molesta what 144 Tympanum what ibid. Types of the calling of the
Jews 353. types showing to the Jews their restitution from the captivity of
Babylon 351 Tzijanacke what it is, 124
V
Verbum sublatum and verbum Absolutum what, 215 Vitia creationis and vitia
accidentis 107 Vivicomburium, what, 124
FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE FOUR DEGENERATE SONS, The ATHEIST, the MAGITIAN, the
IDOLATER, and the JEW.
ISA. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me.


IT is very well known, and miserable experience teaches us, that many who
are anciently descended, and come of Noble parents fall into vile sins and
degenerate from their antecessors, not following their footsteps. Not unlike
unto those are the degenerate children of God, ( Ephesians. 1.15. Of whom the whole
family of heaven and earth is named) who are fallen from that first estate in
the which they were created, and are not to be reckoned as his genuine, and
natural children; but as unnatural, not worthy to be called his sons. These
degenerate children are four. There rests the fifth son, who is Gods natural
son, who worships God in purity and sincerity.

The Atheist denies his Father.
The first disobedient and degenerate son is the Atheist, who denies God his
father. The second is the Magitian or Sorcerer, The Magitian renounceth his
Father.
who after that he had solemnly vowed himself to God in baptism, yet after
he renounceth the true God, The Idolater misknows his Fa her.
and gives himself over to Satan, and enters into covenant with him. The
third ungracious and degenerate son is the Idolater, who gives the creature
that worship which is due only to God. The Jew killed his Father.
The fourth lewd son is the Jew, who cruelly murdered the Lord of life. The
fifth son is the Christian, The Christian acknowledges and worshippeth his
father sincerely.
who fears God and worships him sincerely. And from these comes Atheism,
Magic, Idolatry, Iudaisme, and Christianity, which are the subject of this
Treatise following.

Of the first degenerate son the ATHEIST.
Satan that crooked Serpent turning himself into diverse shapes, hating
always that which is good, he studies always to turn men out of the right
way. Now to draw them into (...), That is unto superstition. Sometimes again
he persuades them to (...), that is to Atheism; but he never draws them to
(...), which is the true worship and the golden mediocritie. The Hebrews call
the Atheist Acharon, because he is altogether alienate from God. And the Poets
in their Mytheologies call him the son of the earth. And this Atheism they
call (...), the fight of the Giants.

SECT. 1. Of the causes which leads men into Atheism.
When the shallow brain of man cannot comprehend the infinite God, The first
cause that moves men to be Atheists.
because he cannot comprehend him with his poor understanding, he begins by
and by to despise him: and so Satan leads the poor wretch to Atheism, Thou
can not comprehend him, therefore reject him. That which should most diswade
man from Atheism, and lead him most to worship the true God: Satan uses it as
a snare to draw him from God; for if we could comprehend God, he could not be
God: And if our mind could comprehend God, we should not be finite but
infinite; and so consequently we should be Gods. We do not comprehend God, but
apprehend him only, as the Schoolmen speaks.

The second cause.
Secondly, when men commit wickedness, they study by all means to escape the
punishment, He lies in wait to catch the poor, and says in his mind, God
has forgotten, he hides his face he will never see it. Psalm. 10.9. And even
as rebels after they have conspired against their sovereign being guilty of
Laesmajestie, they study to destroy all the rolls and registers, and that the
King himself be put from his throne, that they may escape all punishment
which they are liable unto. And as those who are addebted to others, wishes all
the bonds and obligations, (whereby they are bound to repay) were burnt. So
Atheists, and those who despise God, casting off the yoke of obedience, that
they may work sin with greediness, denies altogether God and his scriptures.

The third cause.
Thirdly, if it fall out that sometimes the Atheist be stirred up from this his
Lethargy, and begin to seek any thing at the hand of God, he does it but
coldly and faintly. And if the Lord grant not to him his desire according to
his mind; either he denies God altogether, or doubts at least whether there
be a God or not. Job 22.15. What is the Almighty that we should serve him, and
what profit shall we have if we pray unto him. So when the Israelites wanted
water in the wilderness, Exodus 17.7. they began to say, Is the Lord amongst
us or not.

The fourth cause.
Fourthly, the constant course of nature, and the wheels mooving one within
another, and turning about in the self same manner, mooves the Atheist to
Atheism, 2 Pet. 3.4. Where is the promise of his coming, for since the
Fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
creation. But to those who looks more nearly to the works of Gods providence,
and to the connection of causes; It is manifest, that the second causes are
always moved by the first cause. And those who acknowledged the world to be
created (as they did) must acknowledge also that he has power to dissolve it.

SECT. 2. Of the diverse ways how the word Atheist is taken; and of the
sundry sort of Atheists.
FIrst, this word Atheist is taken for him who worships not the true God,
Ephesians. 2.12. Having no hope, How many ways this word atheist is taken.
and without God in the world. Secondly, those who worships the true God, and
false gods; are Atheists, as the Samaritans. Thirdly, those who worships the
true God, by false means are Atheists, as the Jews, and Turks. But those
properly are Atheists, who has no God at all, and there are sundry sorts of
them.

First, some Atheists, who denies altogether that there is a God, as Diagoras.
Secondly, others doubted whether there was a God or not, as Protagoras. Who
said, Si Deus est unde prodeunt mala, si non est unde bona. That is, if there
be a God, whence comes evil, and if there be not a God, whence comes good
things. Thirdly, those who granted that there was a God, but denied that he had
any care of things below here. But enjoyed himself quietly in the Heavens,
Such was Epicurus. Fourthly, Democratus, and Leueippus, and those who held that
all things were ruled by a fatal necessity.

The contradicting Atheist.
Those Atheists again are divided into the contradicting Atheist, who denies
God and all religion. The second is the skeptic Atheist, The skeptic
atheist. The physical atheist. The stupide atheist.
disputing by way of Problem, whether there be a God or not. The third is the
Physical Atheist, who measures all things by the law of nature. The last is
the stupide or blockish Atheist.

The first sort of Atheist denying God altogether, are directly opposite to the
Christian, and in part only to the Physical Atheist. The Physical Atheist,
and contradicting Atheist, are semiantipodes, half opposite: but the Christian
is directly opposite to him, and they are very antipodes.

The second Atheist is the disputing Atheist, or skeptic, he propones whether
there be a God or not, and while he hanges in aequilibrio, between the two,
yet he inclines more to the negative than to the affirmative part; and him we
call dubitabundum Atheum, the doubting Atheist, and he is in the midst as it
were betwixt the contradicting Atheist, and the Physical Atheist.

The third is the Physical Atheist, who is so taken up with those things which
he perceives by sense, that he never lifts up his mind to those things which
savours of metaphysics, and far less to those things which savours of
divinity, and he is so drowned in natura naturata, that he never thinks of
natura naturans; that is, he is so drowned in nature below here, that he never
looks up to God, who is the God of nature. And the common saying may be
applied well to him, Where there is three Physicians there are two Atheists.
And as those who are borne in the bordering Country, ye can hardly discern by
their language what country men they are. So it is hard to tell whether this
Physical Atheist comes nearer to the skeptic or contradicting Atheist.

The fourth is the stupid Atheist, who by stupidity and blockishnesse quenches
that light of nature, which is inbred in all men. And if it fall out at any
time (which seldom happens) that he stir up this inbred light, then it
befalls him as it does those who has some Lucida intervalla, that is, some
clear intermissions, in the midst of their madness, but afterward they are
more mad then they were before. So those Atheists, after they have quenched
those sparks of light, they are more stupide then ever they were. This Atheist
is a midst as it were, betwixt the disputing Atheist, and the Physical Atheist.

Men are most discerned by their tongue, The atheists are descerned by their
language.
what country men they are, and whence they fetch their pedegrees. The
Christian man is (...), who speaks the language of Canaan, who praises God,
and worships him, and the Atheist is opposite to him, who is (...), and of a
strange language. Although the Atheists be (...) inter se, of one language
amongst themselves. The contradicting Atheist is (...). Who sets his mouth
against the Heavens, Psalm. 73.9. Such as was that beast Diagoras.

The second is the Physical Atheist, who is (...), sive impeditae linguae, who
lispes sometimes, and stammers, that there is not a God.

The third is the skeptic Atheist, and he is, (...) disputing, pro and
contra, on both sides.

The fourth is the Stupide Atheist, who is (...) scarce having a tongue, and
dumb when he should praise God. By what arguments atheists are to be reluted
only by reason.


All these Atheists which we have reckoned up, must be refuted by the
principles of nature only, for all other arguments they scorn. When we
dispute against a Turk, we may bring the Alkoron against him, when we dispute
against a Jew, we may bring the old Testament, and the Thalmud against him,
when we dispute against a Saducee, or a Samaritane, we may bring the five
books of Moses against them, When we dispute against a Pagan, we may bring the
wise sayings of the heathen against him. But nothing will serve against the
Atheist, but only to bring him to the bar of Reason, and God has left this
reason within him to convince him, and make him inexcusable.

How Atheists denies the first principle, that there is a God.
Object. But we cannot dispute against him who denies the first principles,
the Atheist denies the first principle, that there is a God: Therefore we
cannot dispute against him.

Answ. The Atheist denies this first principle, only in his Iollity, and
wantonness; But when he is put to it in distress, and God begins to frown
upon him, then he is forced to confess, that there is a God. The fool says
in his heart that there is not a God, Psalm. 14.1. The heart is taken three
ways in the Scriptures, first, for the reasonable faculty of the soul, The
Lord is said to give Salamon a heart like the sand of the sea, 1 King. 4.29.
that is, a heart that could understand and apprehend all things, the fool
labors to obscure this principle, in his understanding: Secondly, the heart is
taken for the will and affections, Psalm. 119.36. Incline mine heart to thy law,
and not to covetousness, that is my will and affections; So 2 Cor. 6.11. My
heart is enlarged to you Corinthians, that is my will and affections. And in
this sense the fool wishes in his heart that there were not a God to punish
him, and to take order with him for his offenses. Thirdly, the heart is taken
for the conscience, David's heart is said to smite him, 1 Samuel 24.5. that is,
his conscience smote him. The fool can never get this principle, blotted out
of his conscience. But still he must be enforced to grant that there is a God,
when his conscience is wakened.

The conscience in the Syriack is called Tira, Tara (...) conscientia from
(...) figuravit.
Romans 2. forma mentibus impressa, there are some lineaments drawn in the
conscience which cannot be blotted out, which Iamlicus de mysterijs, chap. 11.
calls a touch of the dietie.

Things are not hidden in the conscience, as in sinking paper, where the
letters can never be read, but they are written in the conscience, as letters
are written with the juice of an Onyon, where the letters at the first are not
legible, but hold them to the fire a little, and then they begin piece and
piece to be legible; So the things written in the conscience, although at the
first they seem not legible, yet hold them a little to the fire of Gods wrath,
they begin presently to be legible: as the letters which were written upon
the wall with a finger to Belthasar; there sin is written with the point of a
Diamont, and with a pen of iron, Ier. 17.1. Solomon says, Prove. 26.3. that the
whip is for the fools back: when God begins to whip these fools, the
Atheistes, then they confess that there is a God. In their jollity amongst
their companions they can propound this question, whether there be a God or
not? but when they are brought to the gallows, and the rope about their necks,
then they begin to cry peccavi, and confess that there is a God indeed.
There was controversy betwixt the Stoickes, and Peripatetickes; The Stoicke
held that man had no passions in him, and that he was (...); the Peripatetickes
held the contrary: Now, it fell out upon a time, that a Stoicke and an
peripateticke were sailing together in one ship; there arose upon a sudden a
great tempest upon the sea, the Stoicke began to look pale, the Peripateticke
marked this, and reasons this ways against the Stoicke, thou looks pale
Stoicke, therefore thou art not (...), without passions. He could not free
himself of fear when he was in danger to be cast away. So, although Atheistes
given to their lusts, belch forth sometimes that there is not a God, yet in
their distresses they are enforced to grant it. And as Tertullian writing
against the Gentile. (who worshipped many gods) observes well in sport, ye
worship many Gods, but when ye are in distress ye look not to the capital,
where your many gods are, but ye look up to the heavens, where the only true
God dwells. So Atheistes are enforced to grant, that in their perplexities,
which they denied in sport.

Object. But how can we prove by reason against Atheistes, that there is a God,
seeing to believe that God is, is an article of our faith; and that which we
believe, is not taken up by reason, but by faith?

Ans. Some articles of our faith are only believed; as the mystery of the
Trinity, and the Incarnation of Christ: reason has never place in these: There
are other articles of our faith again, that are both believed and taken up by
reason; as the creation of the world, and the immortality of the soul, these
may be proved by reason, and that there is a God.

Quest. When we dispute against an Atheist proving that there is a God; whether
dispute we against him as Divines; or as Physicians do, who brings their
proofs from nature only?

Answ. We dispute against them as Divines, although we use natural midses to
this purpose, Some articles of our faith are both believed and taken up by
reason.
we dispute not as Physicians: Round wounds or circular are hardlier cured then
long wounds, although the Chirurgian prove this by principles of Geometry, yet
he cures not the wound as a Geometritian, but as a Chyrurgian: So although the
Divine proves there is a God by midses taken from nature, yet he concludes not
as a Physician, but as a Divine.

There are devils, therefore there must be a God.
Argu. 1. Atheistes cannot deny, but that there are devils, and if they grant
that there are devils, they must grant also that there is a God. But perhaps
they will deny that there are devils, what will they say then to the
Demoniackes that are possessed, and in strength surpasses many men; and
sometimes they speak both Greek and Hebrew, being Idiots, and unlearned, and
if there were not such a spirit in them, how could they do these things, and
the devils being of such power, and so malicious and cruel, if there were not
a superior power to bridell them, and to restrain their wickedness, they
would presently turn all things upside down. Socrates being accused of
Atheism, answered, that he believed always that there were genij, both good
and evil.

Argu. 2. The conscience of man proves that there is a God.
The second reason to prove that there is a God, is taken from the conscience
of man; when a man commits a secret sin, which none is privy to, Justice
requires that this sin be punished, and punished it cannot be unless there
be both a witness, a Judge, and a sentence given out. This witness bears
record, but before whom? not before man, for no man knows the fact. This
witness then must testify before a higher Judge, before whom all things are
known. Darius made a decree, Ezr. 6.11. that whosoever should alter his word,
that the timber should be pulled down from his house, and being set up, that
he should be hanged thereon. So the great King of Kings, ordaines, that men
should be tried by their own conscience, and the timber of their own house to
torture them before him, who is the great Judge. Bernard de interiore domo,
cap. 14.
It was well said by Bernard, In domo propria, and propria familia, habeo
accusatores, testes, judices and tortores, accusat me conscientia, testes est
memoria; Iudex substitutus est ratio, voluptas est carcer: Timor tortor,
oblectamentum tormentum, quotquot enim fuerunt oblectamenta mala, tot erunt
tormenta dira in paena nam inde puniuntur, inde delectantur, In my own house,
and at home, I have the accusers, witnesses, Judges, and torturers, my
conscience accuses me, my memory is the witness, my reason is the
subordinate Judge, pleasure is the prison, fear is the torturer, delight is
the torment; for in whatsoever pleasure a man has taken delight in, with as
many torments shall he be punished. The Lord the great Judge has appoinied
this conscience as his deputy, to testify for him, and to convict the evil
doers.

Argu. 3. The diversity of the faces of men proves that there is a God against
the Atheist, The diversity of the faces of men proves that there is a God.
for look upon a company where there are ten thousand men, ye will see them
all distinguished by their faces, this distinction of the faces of men is most
necessary for the preservation of the society of men. The diversity of
tongues was a great judgment to the world, Genesis 11. that one of them could not
understand another. But this distinction of faces is a great blessing to the
world, for without it no society could stand; then the husband should not know
his wife from another woman, neither should the father know his children from
other men, and if the malefactor were not taken in the very fact he needed not
to be afraid. S. Austine cap. 8. adversus paganos.
Saint Augustine writing against the Panims, calls this diversity of faces a
great miracle: Men are distinguished from other, sometimes by some mark, as
the Jews who lives amongst Christians. But these marks may alter and be
changed: So men are distinguished by their languages, and by their dialects, as
amongst the Jews, some said Shibboleth, and others said Sibboleth, Judge. 12.6.
So these about Jerusalem had a proper dialect to themselves (...), Act. 2.8. So
Peter was known to be a Galilean, by his speech, Matthew. 26.73. and so the
Levite, Judge. 18.3. was known by his dialect, but these may soon vary, and
so does not the faces of men. Many things distinguishes man from man but the
face above all.
This diversity of the faces of men, proves that there is a God, for this
diversity of faces comes, either from nature, from chance, or from God; here
is not a fourth. This diversity of faces comes not from nature, for nature
endeavors always to bring forth things alike, as in a bushel of barley, This
diversity of faces comes neither from nature, nor from chance, but only from
God.
or wheat, we see all the grains alike: This diversity of faces, proceeds
not from chance; If a man throw a die, and desire always a diverse number to
fall out to him, yet not withstanding, the same number shall occur to him
often, which argues that this diversity of faces, comes not from chance. It
rests then that this diversity of faces comes only from God, who has only
distinguished the faces of men, for the preservation of society amongst men.

Object. But if they say that this diversity of faces comes from fancy; then
I would ask them, seeing fancy is seen more in beasts than in men? what is
the reason that there is no such diversity amongst beasts, as there is amongst
the faces of men; therefore it rests, that it is only God who makes this
diversity of faces.

Argu. 4. Non datur progressus in infinitum, We cannot be led from Iudicatorie
to Iudicatorie, therefore at last we must stay at the bar of the Judgment
of God.
we cannot make an infinite progress in things, but we must rest in one chief
and supreme cause. If a man be condemned by an inferior Judge, and the sentence
be just, then it is altogether unlawful for him to appeal; but if he be
wrongfully judged by an inferior Judge, he may appeal to his superior, as
Saint Paul did to Caesar, Act. 25. Nam appellatio est defensio justa and
innocentiae praesidium: An appeal is a just defense and a safety of ones
innocence; and the law of nature teaches us this, that a man is bound to
stand in defense of his own life, as far as he can by lawful means,
neither does he wrong to any, when he stands thus in his own defense; and as
in natural causes, the inferior causes, are subordinate to the influx of the
superior. So in cases moral, the inferior Judges, are subject to the
superior, and if they proceed not aright in judging, then they are not their
deputies, and the party wronged may seek for redress at the superiors
hands; and because men should not be led from judicatorie to judicatorie, there
are in all well constitute common wealths, some supreme judicatorie, from the
which men may not appeal, as in Judea the great Synedrion, in Athens,
Areopagus, and in Rome, the Senate; but because all men may do wrong and err
in judgment; the last and supreme Judge is God himself, to whom men appeals.
He is the judge of the whole earth, who cannot but judge rightly, Genesis 18.25.
He when he enquires for blood, forgets not the blood of the poor, Psalm. 9.
Who says, Been appellatum sed male Iudicatum: He approves the appeal, but
dislikes the wrong judgment. By this the Atheist may understand that there is
a God, who is the Judge of all.

A comparison betwixt the Christian, the Devil, and the Atheist.
Let us make a comparison betwixt the Christian, the Devil, and the Atheist:
The Christian by a justifying faith, believes that there is a God, and he
works out his salvation with fear and trembling: The devil by an historical
faith, believes, that there is a God, Iam. 2.19. and fears and trembles, but
hopes not for salvation; but the Atheist he trembles only, neither believes he
by a justifying faith as the Christian does, neither by an historical faith,
as the devils does, therefore he is worse than the devil in this point.

A comparison betwixt Balaam and the Atheist.
Secondly, let us compare the worst of men, and the Atheist together, let us
compare the Atheist and Balaam the Diviner; Balaam said, Number. 23.10. Let me die
the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. Balaam believed
the immortality of the soul, and the happiness of the life to come; but the
Atheist believes neither of these two; therefore the Atheist is worse than
Balaam the Diviner.

Thirdly, A comparison betwixt the Saducee and the Atheist.
let us compare the Atheist with the Saducee; the Saducees believed not the
immortality of the soul, neither the resurrection of the body, yet when they
were demanded, Why then study ye to keep the commandments of God, they
answered, That it might go well with them in this life; they admitted also the
five Books of Moses: but the Atheists, they acknowledge not the immortality
of the soul, nether study they to observe the commandments of God, that it
may go well with them in this life; neither admit they any Scripture,
therefore they are worse than the Saduces.

Fourthly, A comparison btwixt the Epicure and the Atheist.
let us compare the Epicure and the Atheist: the Epicure denies all Religion,
that he may prove the soul to be mortal; as Lucretius did, following
Epicurus: Therefore he falls upon this conclusion, 1 Cor. 15. Let us eat, let
us drink for to morrow we die; That is, we shall be quite extinguished in soul
and body, and there shall be no more of us than of beasts when they are knocked
in the head: But the Atheist gos further than the Epicure; for he denies all
Religion, and the immortality of the soul, that he may come to his conclusion
that there is not a God; these three go always inseparable together. If the
soul be immortal, then there must be a Religion, and if there be Religion,
there must be a God.

Lastly, A comparison betwixt the d^vill alone and the Atheist.
let us compare the Atheist and the devil alone, the devil acknowledged
Christ to be the Son of the most high God, Mark. 5.7. Secondly, he
worshipped, verse. 6. Thirdly, adjures Christ, v. 7. and acknowledged, that an
oath is the bond of the soul, Number. 30.2. Lastly, he knows that there is a day
appointed, when God shall come to judge the world, Matthew. 8.29. but the
Atheist, neither acknowledge Christ to be the Son of the most high God,
neither worships he Christ. He cares not for an oath, which is the bond of the
soul, neither expects he the last day of Judgment; therefore in these he is
worse then the devil.

The Atheist should die the death.
These Atheists should die the death; Whosoever worshipped strange Gods should
die the death, Deuteronomy. 13.9. And Asa, 2 Chro. 15.15. enlarges this threatening;
Whosoever would not seek to the Lord God of Israel, should die the death: Much
more then should these die the death, who denies the true God. And the Heathens
judged that Atheists should die the death, as Laertius witnesses of that
wicked Theodorus, who was condemned in Areopago propter (...). he was condemned
for Atheism: and Socrates (as this same Laertius witnesses) quod non eosdem,
atque civitas deos pictaret, and quod nova numina inveheret, he because he
believes not in these gods which the rest of the city believed in, and studied
to bring in new gods amongst them.

When there was no king in Israel, every man did that which seemed good in his
own eyes, Judge. 17.6. So when men believe that there is no good, what marvel
is it that they run not into all sins and abominations? Atheism is the
center of all sins.
This Atheism, is the center of all sins; and the Atheist is the vilest of
all creatures, wherefore let us abhor Atheism above all other sins, and
shun the company of these damnable Atheistes, who are appointed for hell and
damnation.

SECT. 3. Of Superstition.
THe ignorance of God has two rivers proceeding from it; the one is Atheism,
The ignorance of God breeds Atheism and superstition.
and the other is Superstition; and as seed sown in some hard ground, brings
forth no fruit at all, but in other ground it grows so rank and luxurian, that
the labourer reapes no profit of it. The Atheist is like unto hard ground where
no corn grows; the Superstitious again exceedes in his worship, and runs
as far unto the other extremity.

This superstition is called (...), from (...), timeo, metuo, and (...) numen.

It is a good observation of Tertullian, Verity in the midst suffers between
two extremes.
that as Christ suffered betwixt two thieves; so verity suffers betwixt the
two extremes. The Heathen held a multitude of gods to be worshipped, and they
denied unity. The Jews again holds unity worshipping one God, but denies the
Trinity of persons: Here trinity and unity suffers in the midst betwixt
the two extremes as Christ did in the midst betwixt two thieves. So Eutiches
confounded the persons; and Nestorius divided Christ into two persons, verity
suffered in the midst here: so in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.12. Some held
that they were only Christ's, others called themselves after Apollo, and others
Cephas; verity suffered in the midst here; for we must for ^^nour Christ, that
we despise not his Ministers; and we must so respect his Ministers, Atheism
and superstition are the two extremes, and true religion suffers in the
midst.
that we depend not upon them in matters of salvation, and so here (...), and
(...), Atheism and Superstition are the two extremes, and (...), the true
worship of God suffers in the midst.

This Superstition exceedes in worship, and offers more to God than he requires
at their hand, Esa. 1.12. and as the Lord forbids to be too just, Eccles. 7.16.
so he forbids men to exceed this way, and to run into superstition.

Quest. How can a man exceed in the worship of God?

Answ. in theogicall virtues, as they are theological, a man cannot exceed
but only in the circumstances, as when a man hopes he must take heed what
he hopes for, how he hopes, and when; so a man cannot exceed in justice, in
respect of justice it self, but in respect of the circumstances. This justice
may degenerate, and may exceed; as when the Judge considers not where or whom
he should judge, or how he should judge.

No theological nor moral virtue can exceed in it self but only in respect
of circumstances men does exceed.
This superstition the mother of it is ignorance, Ioh. 4. Ye worship ye know
not what; the companion of it is hypocrisies, the daughters of it are (...),
will worworship, and idolatrey; and it is found more in women then in men, Act.
13.50. and in the ignorant more than the learned; and it is like wine which
runs into a man's head, and makes him giddy, whereas true worship is like wine
which goes to the heart and cheares it.

What are the mother and daughters of superstition.
This superstition is hardly rooted out, jelousie, frenzy, and heresy, and
superstition are hardly rooted out; take but the example of the Jews, who will
not eat of the hollow of the thigh never since Jacob halted upon his thigh,
says Moses, until this day, Genesis 32.32. and it continues amongst the Jews
until this day now, for they will not eat of that at all, but sels it to the
Christians, Superstition is hardly rooted out of the heart The superstitious
are sinistrous in their conclusions.
and if the Christians will not buy it, they throw it to the dogs.

The superstitious are most sinistrous in their conclusions, because the nails
pierced the Lords hands, and feet, and the whip whipped him, therefore they
will worship them. The Philistims will not set their foot upon the thresholds
of the door, 1 Samuel 5.5. because Dagon fell and brake his neck upon the
threshold of the door; but they should rather have set their foot upon the
neck of Dagon, and tread upon him, because that Dagon could not preserve
himself, that he break not his neck.

Let us compare the religious, A comparison betwixt the religious and
superstitious. Plutarch de superstitione.
and the superstitious together; the superstitious finds no comfort in his
Religion, as the religious does. The Church to the religious is a place of
pleasure, but to the superstitious, it is a place of torment; and therefore
their Idols are called terriculamenta, Ier. 50.38. and tormina, in the temple
he is punished and vexed, there he holds up his trembling hands, and he goes
no otherwise to the temple, than if he were going to the den of Bears or
Lions.

The labourer after his labor finds his sleep comfortable unto him, Eccles.
5.12. but the superstitious is as much troubled, when he sleeps, The
superstitious is troubled as well in his sleep as when he awakes.
as when he waketh. Heraclitus was wont to say, that there was one common
world for all men, and that men when they sleep, they go every one into their
several world; but the superstitious, when he sleeps is still in the common
world, because he is not freed from that which troubled him when he was
awaked, dormit ratio sed vigilat semper metus, his reason is asleep, but his
fear always waketh. It is a terrible thing to live under the power of a
tyrant, but to live under a good king, or free common wealth, this is most
comfortable: but those who fear God as though he were a tyrant; whether shall
they fly from him? If they take the wings of the morning, and fly a far
off, yet he is before them, and where shall they hide them from him? The Law
grants this to servants, when they are desperate and out of hope of liberty,
they may beg that they may be sold and changed from a harder master to a more
gentle; but the superstitious can find no such change, neither shall he find
a God whom he shall not fear servilly, and from whose service he may exempt
himself: Let us not fly superstition so that we fall into Atheism.
Let us therefore fly superstition, but not as some men use to do, who when
they are flying from robbers and wild beasts, they fall inconsideratly into
some dangerous ways, where there are steep rocks, or dangerous pooles,
wherein they may be drowned; so some men flying superstition, they pass by
plenty, which is the midst, and fall into damnable Atheism and impiety.

Of the second degenerate Son the MAGITIAN.
THe prince of the world, says Christ, Ioh. 14.13. had nothing in me, he found
no sin in Christ; therefore when he tempted him he prevailed not, Aggressa
est hic tentatio, sed non ingressa est. The temptation assailed Christ, but
prevailed not, because there was no sin in him. When Satan tempts us, he
finds a way how to enter, he espies our nakedness, and looks where he may
most conveniently enter to tempt us. When Satan tempted Eva, first he began to
tempt her, When Satan tempted Eve what faculty of the mind began he at first.
(...), in her irascible faculty, which of all the faculties is most easily
stirred, and suddenly kindled, when he said unto her (has God said?) as if
Gods commandment had been an unlawful commandment, and he had been
injurious to man and woman to forbid them to eat of that fruit; but because
Satan perceived that he could not prevail that way with the woman, and that
she did adheare close to Gods interdiction; therefore Satan leaving the
irascible faculty, he turns himself to (...), to the intelligible faculty
which Moses shows in these words (And the woman saw the fruit was pleasant)
she saw it, to wit, in her mind; therefore the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.14. calls the
first transgression (...) that is a disception, then follows the corruption
of (...), that is, of the concupiscible faculty (she desired the fruit;) and
thirdly, he came back again to tempt her in (...), in her irascible
faculty: And lastly, he corrupted her in (...), in her sensitive faculty. So
Satan deludes the Magitians, and Witches; sometimes in their understanding
faculty, sometimes in their irascible faculty, sometimes in their
concupiscible, and sometimes in the sensitive faculty.

(...) Satan endeavors first to tempt us in our understanding faculty.
First, he endeavoures to corrupt them in their understanding faculty: Man
after his fall has a desire to know more than God has revealed unto him, and
more than is fit for him to know, and he seeks after Satan that he may inform
him, and teach him. And that saying of S. Augustine may be fitly applied to
these, Multi propter arborem scientiae amittunt arborem vitae. Many lose the
tree of life for the tree of knowledge; Example of this we have Act. 19.19. And
many of those who believed, came and confessed and showed their deeds; many
also of them who had used curious, Arts, brought their books together, and
burned them before all men. This curiosity and desire of knowledge drew them
to this Magic. Men are desirous likewise to know things to come, and
therefore they consulted with Satan. Apollo was called (...), because they used
to consult with him of things to come.

(...) So he tempts us in our irascible faculty.
Men are given much to revenge, and Satan is ready to blow the bestows, and
moves men to seek for revenge; therefore they consult with him, 1 King. 21.6.
Manasses used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizzardes, and
verse. 16. he shed much innocent blood; here Magic and murder are joined
together: Men consults with the devil, that he may show them the way how they
may the more fitly murder. (...). He tempts us in our concupiscible faculty.


Men are much given to their vile lusts, and fleshly pleasures; therefore they
run to Satan to further them in their beastly desires. An example of this we
have in S. Ciprian (who afterward by the mercy of God proved a Martyr) he
lusted after a virgin Iustina, Nazianzen oratione. 8.
and when by no means he could attain to his purpose, at length he incals for
the help of the devil that he might enjoy her. And Plutarch testifies in hi^
^ooke, De oraculorum defectu; Tripode^ deorum oppletum impiis and obscoenis
questionibus and responsis. That they would try Apollo sometimes with
Sophistry, and sometimes as bad, they would demand him of incestuous marriages
and adulteries, and such like; and he would be as ready to answer them, which
things civil and honest men (says he) would have been ashamed to have heard
of, so men for filthy lucre runs to the devil, Act. 16.16. A man kept a
Damsel possessed with a spirit of divination, because she brought her master
great gain by soothsaying.

Lastly, men seeks after Satan for their health, (...) He tempts us in our
sensitive faculty.
as Ahaziah when he was sick he sent to Baalzebub the god of Eckron to
enquire for his health.

SECT. 1. How Satan has abused the most part of the world by his Magic and
Sorcerie.
When the Lord had planted a Church in Judea, How Satan has abused the most
part of the world by his Magic.
and chosen Israel for his inheritance; Satan envying this; first he infected
Syria with Sorcerie and Witchcraft, and from thence the people of God learned
it. Esaias 2.6. because they be replenished from the East, that is, of the
sorcerie of the Syrians; such as Balaam was, who dwelt in Syria. Secondly, they
learned this Magic, from those who lay upon the West, as from the Philistims,
Esaias 2.6. So this Magic abounded amongst the Ammorites; therefore the
Hebrews says, In quocunque est aliquid de medicina and nihil est de via
ammoriorum hoc licitum est: that is, when men use natural means; there is no
sorcerie then as was amongst the Amorites. T^^^dly, this Magic abounded in
the South of Canaan in Egypt, as we see in Iannes and Iambres who resisted
Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8. they used a proverb or taunt unto Moses (as it is written
in the Talmud) Tu stramen portas in Afra. Afra was a place in Egypt where straw
abounded most; their meaning was, that there was magic enough in Egypt
already, and therefore it was needless for them to practice their magic in
Egypt. So they said, In urbem oleribus abundantem olera, venalia importas; Thou
carries herbs to sell to a town that abounds with herbs. So this magic
abounded in Samaria, where Simon abused the people by witchcraft, Act. 9. To
whom all gave heed from the least to the greatest, and they called him the
great power of God. So this sorcerie abounded in Ephesus, Act. 19.19. Therefore
they were called (...). This magic was professed there, and they had
Libraries of great price there, which afterward they burnt. So this sorcerie is
very far spread in these parts of the world where we live now, and where the
Gospel is preached. The Prophet Esaias speaking of the calling of the Gentiles,
says, Esaias 43.5. I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from
the West, I will say to the North give up, and to the South keep not back: so
we may say now, that neither the North, nor the South withholds, but they run
from all parts of the world to the devil, and he has his synagogue where the
Gospel is preached, and there he sets up his throne; Look to Lapland, Findland,
and to the mountains of Savoy, and here amongst our selves how they abound: Is
not this a just judgment for the contempt of the Gospel?

SECT. 2. How fearful a sin it is to enter in covenant with the devil.
When men bind themselves one unto another, What a sin it is to covenant
with the devil.
they bind themselves either by promise, or by an oath, or by a covenant.

They bind themselves by a promise: A promise is obligatio fidei, and here
they paune their fidelity and honesty, but in an oath, there is obligatio
animae and salutis, In it they paund their fidelity, honesty, and soul, and
then by covenant which is confirmed by write, by oath, and by some solemn
rites, as when they confirmed their covenants of old, they used to divide a
beast in two: and those who entered into the covenant used to pass betwixt the
parts of the beast divided, Genesis 15.10. Ier. 34.18. and they wished, that if
they brake that covenant; they might be parted and cut as that beast was into
pieces: And the Hebrews say, scindere faedus; David says, scissores faederis
mei, Psalm. 50.5. that is, who made a covenant with me because a beast was cut,
when the covenant was made; and this covenant they called Berith. To promise to
the devil is a great sin, but to bind our selves by an oath to him is a
greater sin; but to enter in covenant, with him is the greatest sin of all,
to deliver up to him soul and body to be tormented and cut by him at his
pleasure.

Secondly, in all covenants fidelity is most to be respected: There are four
great liars with whom a man must not covenant, hell, death, the world, and the
devil.

These who covenants with death, with hell, and the world, makes lies their
refuge.
These who covenants with death and hell: as the Prophet Esaiah speaks, Esaias
28.15. They make lies, their refuge, and under falsehood they shadow themselves.
There are two things that secure sinners are most afraid of, the Iayle, and the
Iayler, first of the Iayle hell, and next of the Iayler death.

The deceitful heart of man promises to the secure sinner immunitie from both
these, and makes an imaginary covenant with man, and promises to secure him
from them both; first, that he shall be free from hell, and promises to him
peace, when his destruction is at hand: when a man makes this kind of covenant
with his deceitful heart, he makes lies for his refuge, and his covenant is
nothing.

Secondly, he is afraid of death the Iayler, and in comes the deceitful heart
of man, and makes this imaginary covenant, and puts the evil day far from
him, and so he makes lies his refuge. Hagag said, 1 Samuel 15.32. when he
flattered himself that the bitterness of death was past, when as Samuels
sword was hanging over his head. Secure sinners when death is near to them,
they put it far from them, both in respect of preparation and expectation,
and upon a sudden it surprises them, and in a sudden they go down to hell,
wherefore we should never covenant with them.

The third lier that we should not covenant with is the world: The world is
like that Olive tree, which Habbacuck speaks of, Hab. 3.17. mentita est oliva;
the Olive tree made a lie. It promised fair in the spring when it blossomed,
but it brought nothing to perfection. So the world promises much, but
performs nothing really to men; and it is like Jonah his Gourd, when he
thought to have sheltred himself under it, a worm did consume it. So it
fares with the world, when men thinks to shelter themselves under it, then it
vanishes; therefore we must never covenant with this liar, the world.

But above all to covenant with the devil, To covenant with the devil the
father of lies, that is a fearful covenant.
who is the father of lies, Ioh. 8.44. This is the greatest madness of all,
who can trust him? or what fidelity is in his promises? he is (...) and (...),
who promises much in words, but performs nothing, Magis blandus quam
benignus: so he is (...), ready to praise and flatter us, when he minds no
such things, he holds out bread to us, but he gives us a stone, he presents a
fish to us, but he gives us a Scorpion, therefore we should never covenant
with him, he is ready to entice us to sin, and the first to accuse us: He
is like unto Ioab who would have persuaded the man to have killed Absalom the
Kings son, and if he had killed him, he would have set himself first
against him, 2 Samuel 13.18. therefore we should never covenant with him.

Thirdly, It is not lawful to make a covenant of peace with the devil, where
God has proclaimed war.
God has put an enmity betwixt the seed of the woman and the seed of the
Serpent; he has not put anger betwixt them, for those who are angry one with
another, they may be reconciled again, but he has put this enmity and deadly
hatred betwixt them therefore they should never be reconciled. It is an
unlawful thing to make a league of peace where God has proclaimed perpetual
war. This war is a most lawful war: Two sorts of war amongst the Jews.
The wars amongst the Jews were either bell^ spontanea, or bella praecepti:
Bella spontanea were these, which they undertook willingly at their own hand,
but bella praecepti were those which they undertook at the commandment of
God: This war is bellum praecepti, and not spontaneum; It is bellum
praecepti. Therefore the Lord says, Iam. 4.7. Resist the devil and he will
fly from you: A war may be unlawful three manner of ways; A War may be
undertaken three manner of ways unlawfully.
first, when it is rashly undertaken, without authority or command. Secondly,
when it is prosecuted cruelly, and cum medicina excedit modum, when the
physic exceedes measure. And thirdly, when the end is unlawful, when men
respects only vain glory, gain, or revenge. But this war is lawful, both
in respect of the commander, secondly in respect of the manner; we cannot be
too eager in prosecuting this war against this enemy, And cursed is who does
this work of the Lord negligently, Ier. 48.10. The Lord proclaimed a
perpetual war betwixt Israel and Amalecke, Exodus 17.16. and he caused him to
write a book of this for a memorial; and the reason was, because the
Amalekites cut off the tail of the host of the Israelites, that is, the faint
and the sick, and the straggling that came behind. The Chaldee paraphrast
paraphraseth this place after this manner: Targum Ionath. cap. 25. v. 18.
the Amalekites cut of from the Jews that part in which they were circumcised,
and wherein they bare the mark of the Covenant of God, and threw it up in
despite against the Lord. And does not this Amalekite Satan, hate the badge of
Gods Covenant in Gods children, and in contempt exposes the bodies of the
Saints baptized to all shame and ignominy. Therefore the Lord has registered
this in his Book, that there shall be perpetual war, with this Amalekite
the devil; and herein we should be (...), implacable, never to be reconciled,
or to make a covenant with him.

God has promised us the victory against Satan; therefore we should never
take peace with him.
Fourthly, God in this war has promised us the victory, Romans 16. The God of
peace shall tread Satan under your feet. And shall we be so base minded then,
as to yield to Satan, when God has promised us the victory. In other wars
the event is doubtful; and therefore the Scripture says, Ne glorietur induens
arma sed exuens, 1 King. 20.11. but in this fight we are sure of the victory
when we strive earnestly against the devil. And here we may rejoice when we
put on our armor, and when we lay them not aside, and prefer Iustissimum
bellum injustissimae paci.

Fifthly, We contend for an everlasting inheritance, therefore we should be
earnest in this fight against Satan.
the thing which we contend for should move us to be earnest in this fight. Non
controvertitur de limitibus sedde ipsa haereditate, we contend not here for
the landmarkes, but for the inheritance it self. When Themistocles was to
fight againg the Barbarians, he saw two Cocks fighting most keenely, and then
he took occasion to speak to his Soldiers after this manner; Hi neque pro
patria neque pro paenatibus nec pro sepulchris majorum, neque pro liberate aut
filiispugnant; sed tantum ne vincantur neuter cedit alteri. His ergo dictis
Atheniensibus ingentes animos fecit. These poor creatures neither strives for
their country nor for their gods, nor for heir fathers sepulchers, nor for
thet liberty of their children; but they strive only for the victory. In this
combat with the devil we strive not for an earthly kingdom, nor for our
parents, nor for the sepulchers of our antecessors, nor for our liberty, or
for our children, but for an immortal inheritance and incorruptible; and
should we not then be most eager in this fight.

Sixthly, when people who has been long at variance, If we take truce with
Satan, nothing will serve in hostage, but our souls, what can we offer to him
then in a final peace.
minds to make peace first, they make inducias seu treugas; and here they use
to give in hostage their children which are called filii oppignorationis, 1
King. 1.14. When we enter in parley of peace with the devil, what can we lay in
hostage to him, will we offer him rivers of oil? that will not content him,
Mic. 6.7. if we offer him our first borne, that will not content him, until we
offer to him unicam nostram, or our darling, Psalm. 22. and what can he seek
more of us. Therefore these who concludes a final peace with him, are most
desperate.

It is well said by Cajetan, the conversing with the Angels in this life, is
the beginning of eternal happiness; so the conversing with the devils in this
life is the beginning of eternal damnation.

SECT. 3. Of the sorts of Covenants made with the devil, first of the direct
covenant, and then of the indirect.
THese who enters into the direct covenant with the devil; first, they
expressly renounce God. Our baptism says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.21. Est stipulatio
bonae conscientiae; These who expressly covenant with the devil renounces God.
The answer of a good conscience toward God: where the Apostle aludes, to the
custom that was in the Primitive Church, for these who were catechized were
demanded of the catechist after this manner, Credisne, beleevest thou? And they
answered Credo, I believe. So abrenunciasne, do thou not renounce the devil?
And they answered, abrenuncio, I do renounce him. Therefore Tertullian in his
book de resurrectione, says, Anima non lavatione sed responsione sancitur;
the soul is not established by washing but by answering: And the devil being
Gods Ape, when he draws his slaves after him, he initiates them this ways.
Do thou renounce the true God: They answer, I renounce him. His second demand
to them is this, Believes thou in me? They answer, I believe: this is called
(...), when one promises, and the other restipulates.

These who enters into the direct covenant with him kisses him.
Secondly, these who enter into this direct covenant with Satan, they give him
the kiss of homage; as the children of God are bidden to kiss the son,
Psalm. 2.12.

Thirdly, they offer gifts to him.
Thirdly, they who enter into this direct covenant with Satan, offer gifts to
him; as the three wise men offered gold, incense and myrre to Christ, Number. 22.
The Jews used to offer to their new crowned kings gifts. 1 Samuel 10.27.
And his divination was in his hand, that is, the gift which he offered to the
devil when he was divining. So Ezech. 22.7. his divination was in his right
hand. And as we may offer nothing to the devil, so we may take nothing from
him. The Targum of Jerusalem Paraphrasing this place, Eccles. 2.5. [I planted
me Orchards, and trees in them of all kindes] is most injurious to Solomon;
paraphrasing the place this ways; I planted me trees which the Ptolomei, and
the devils brought me out of India: This pharaphrase is most false; for
although Solomon fell from the Lord, yet he fell never to covenant with the
devil, either to offer any thing to him, or to receive any thing from him: and
when he repents him of all the vanities, he never reckons up Magic amongst
them.

Fourthly, Fourthly, they take his mark upon them.
these who enters into a direct covenant with the devil takes his mark upon
them. And as God set his mark of circumcision in the flesh of his children; so
the devil sets his mark upon witches. When the false apostles persuaded the
Galatians to be circumcised, then S. Paul says, That they gloried in the flesh
of the Galatians, because they were circumcised, Gal. 6.13. So when Satan has
set his mark upon his slaves he glories in their flesh.

Marks are imposed for four ends, first, Marks are imposed for four ends.
they are notes of property to discern on man's goods from another to whom
they belong. Secondly, they are notes of distinction. Therefore neatheardes and
shepherds are called punctatores, Amos 1.1. (...) punctatores.
The words of Amos who was amongst the heardm^n of Tekoa, inter punctatores;
this was not a note of property, but a note of distinction which they set upon
their beasts. Thirdly, for homage, as the mark of the beast, Rev. 16.2.
Fourthly, for ignominy and shame. Such was the marks which S. Paul bare about
in his body, which he calls (...), Christi, Gal. 6.17. they inflicted them for
his shame, but he thought them to be his greatest honor and credit. These
marks of Satan are marks of shame, of property, and of homage, they are
commonly in some secret place of the body, and not sensible in that place,
although ye thrust a bodkin in the place which is marked; and when he marks
them, they have intolerable pain, as they confess, until Satan appear to
them the second time, and then the place marked is past feeling, and has no
pain at all. It is true that there may be some natural cause why the part
affected is not so sensible. But when this mark, and other presumptions
concurres together, it should not be lightly rejected; and it may be Semiplena
probatio.

Fifthly they eat and drink with him.
Fifthly, they enter into such familiarity with him, that they sit down to eat
and drink with him, and rise to play. The Apostle forbiddes the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 5.11. If a man be called a brother and be a fornicator, or an idolater, or
a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, not to eat with such a one; far
less to eat with him who is without, whom God himself Judges only, and whom
the Church medles not with. To eat with the devil who is judged already, who
lies under that fearful Anathema maranatha, 1 Cor. 13.22. and under that
eternal curse and malediction of God.

Lastly, they lie with him.
And lastly, these who lies with the devil. If a man commit incest it is a
greater sin then adultery, because he observes not the degrees of
consanguinitie, Levit: 18.6. If a male lie with a ma^e, this is a greater sin
than incest, Quia hic non observatur sexus; because the sex is not observed
here. If a man lie with a beast, this is a greater sin, this is confusion,
Lev. 18.23. quia hic non observatur species. It was a greater sin in Anah, Genesis
36.24. to set beasts of diverse kinds to engender together, as the horse and
the ass, who beget a mule, a monstrous generation. And the Prophet alludes to
this sort of generation, Hos. 4.4. [For they themselves are separate with
harlots, (...) mulus.
cum merciricibus separationem faciunt] liparedum]; they shall beget bastards
such as the mule is, Pered is a mule; or they shall be unfruitful as the mule;
much more monstrous is that generation when a man lies with a beast. When all
the beasts were brought before Adam, there was not one of them a match for
Adam; to teach man that he should never match with a beast. When the Prophet
Jeremy would express the filthiness of the Jews in their whooredomes, Ier.
5.8. he says, Every man neighed after his neighbors wife. This adultery made
them like stoned horses running after a mare. So he compares them to salt
bitches, or filthy dogs. The price of a dog shall not come unto the house
of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 23.17. That is, of a whore or whoremonger, who are
filthy as dogs; what is it then for a man to lie with a beast? But if only
with the devil, this is abomination of abominations: Quia hic non observatur
genus.

Quest. An chobher chobharim, (...)
Deuteronomy. 18.11. Psalm. 58.6. be meant here of the express covenant with the
devil, because it is said there ligant ligaturas?

Answ. They are not said there ligare ligaturas, because they enter in a direct
covenant with the devil, the 70. translates it (...), for the serpents when
they are enchanted runs together in a knot, and wimples themselves one within
another.

SECT. 4. In what manner Satan appears to those with whom he enters into the
direct covenant.
SAtan appears to his confederates, three manner of ways; Satan appears
three manner of ways to these with whom he enters in the direct covenant.
First by some visible body in show.
First, per apparentiam. Secondly, per assistentiam, and thirdly, per in
existentiam.

First, Satan appears to his confederates, per apparentiam, when he takes
some visible shape of a body upon him, which is not a body indeed, but a body
in show, and this is called (...), because a body it self is not presented to
the eyes, but only a body in show; this is called spectrum umbra (...), and by
the heathen idolum, Lev. 17.7. Neither sacrifice your children hereafter
Lashegnirim hirsutis. (...)
The devils are called hoarie ones, because they appeared in the likeness of
Satyrs; hence afterward came this word Satyr, and he appears commonly to
them in some terrible and fearful shape. In the Syriacke there is but one
word which signifies both the devil and Ink, because commonly he appears to
men in some black and terrible shape. The word in the Syriacke is daiiva,
which signifies both the devil and ink; (...) chal. debija atramentum. (...)
diabolus Syriace.
but yet this subtle Protheus can change himself into any form, he can
transform himself in an Angel of light, as he appeared to Saul in the
likeness of Samuel.

Whether it was the true Samuel or Samuel in show which appeared to Saul.
The question may be moved here, whether Samuel himself appeared to Saul? or
was it (...), only in show.

Answ. the most of the Church of Rome holds that it was Samuel himself who
appeared to Saul, as Bellarmine, Seir, Lessius, and not Samuel in show.
Bellarmine goes about to prove that it was Samuel himself, who appeared to
Saul by the testimony of a Jew, Rabbi, David, Kimchi. 1 Samuel 28.12.
for if it had been counterfeit Samuel which appeared to Saul, he would have
come up with his feet foremost. This proof is as uncertain as the thing
which is in question, and this is but a begging of the question, when a thing
uncertain is proved by that which is as uncertain. The Jews held many absurd
things concerning these apparitions; first, The foolish dreams of the Jews
how spirits does appear.
they say when wicked spirits are raised up, and called for by witches, their
manner is to ascend with their feet upward, and their head downward, and that
the spirit raised by the witch of Endor, came up with his head first contrary
to the custom, and that thereby the witch knew him to be the King. Secondly,
that the witch saw Samuel but heard him not, and that Saul heard, but saw not,
and these that stood by, as Amasa and Abner, neither saw, nor heard. Lastly,
they say that men shall rise in the resurrection in the same habit that they
were buried in, because Samuel came up with his mantle about him; but these
fables are to be rejected.

If it had been Samuel himself who appeared unto Saul, then they charge
Samuel with a lie; It was not Samuel himself who appeared to Saul but
counterfeit Samuel.
for this Samuel says that it was Saul who raised him, and that he was not
raised at the commandment of God, and it is clear, that it was this
counterfeit Samuel who speaks here; for this Samuel says, why have thou
troubled me? had it been any trouble for the true Samuel, to have been raised
up by the Lord to reprove Saul. Secondly, God never used the ministry of the
Prophets after that they were translated to another life to instruct or reprove
the people, but only when they were living. Elias when he was yet alive would
not reprove Ioram face to face, but left a letter to be given to him after his
death to reprove him, 2 Chronicles. 21.12. but he never appeared to him visibly
after his death; and as Christ when he left this world never intended to
return before the day of judgment: so neither will his servants, Ioh. 21.26.
Where I am, there my servants are? There is no intercourse betwixt the living
and the dead, neither sending letters from them to us or speaking to us,
Nicephorus, lib. 14. cap. 43.
or from us to them, Luk 16. Therefore that which Nicephorus writes, seems to
be fabulous; That the Emperor Thedosius after his death, sent a letter to
Chrysostom. So for men to have written to to devil, as Gregory Thaunaturgus
sent a letter to the devil, wherein he commanded him to remove out of such a
place, (as Gregory Nyssen writes) This seems very ridiculous. And is it
likely that the Lord (who would not answer to Saul, neither by the Prophets,
nor by Vrim and Thummim) would appear to him after his death; Lastly it
appears that it was not the true Samuel, but the counterfeit, because he
accepted of that religious worship which Saul gave to him in bowing himself to
the ground, which the Saints of God would not have accepted; as the Angel who
would not accept of that religious worship which John would have given to him,
Revel. 22.

The Scriptures speaks of things as they appear to us, or as we conceive of
them.
Object. But the Scripture calls him Samuel which appeared here?

Answ. The Scripture speaks of things as they appear to us, as we take up
things, either by sense or in our conception; the Scripture calls the Sun and
the Moon great lights, Genesis 1. The Sun is more than any of the Stars; but
the Moon is less than any of the Stars except Mercury; and yet the
Scripture calls them great lights, because they seem so to us: so the
Scripture says, the stars shall fall from heaven, Matthew. 24.29. Rev. 6.13.
because they seem so to us. So Christ speaks of the Publicans according to
the estimation of the Jews, Mat. 18.17. because the Jews thought them more
vile than other men; so Gal. 2.15. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners
of the Gentiles. The Gentiles were not greater sinners by nature then the
Jews, but the Apostle speaks here according to the opinion of the Jews, who
thought the Gentles greater sinners than themselves. These things are spoken,
as the Hebrews says gnal derech haganne, per vim turpitudinis, because they
speak this of them in contempt; so three men came to Abraham; (...)
the Scripture calls the Angels men here, because they appeared in the
likeness of men; and John interprets this form of speech, Rev. 21. saying
[the measure of a man which is an Angel] that is, he was truly an Angel, but
because he appeared in the likeness of a man, therefore it was said [the
measure of a man.]

Quest. But seems not this a lie to call an Angel a man.

Answ. If the Scripture should bring in the Angels calling themselves men, that
should not want some show of a lie. The Scripture never brings in Angels
calling themselves men.
When the Scriptures brings in some apologues, as Judge. 9. 2 King. 14.8. The
Scriptures brings not in the trees speaking there, but only Iothan said this,
or Ioaz said that: But Esops Fables, and the Proverbes of the Foxes, (which the
Hebrews uses) bring in the beast speaking, which although they be not lies,
if we look to the (...), or a thing signified by them, yet they have some show
of lies: wherefore the Scripture which is free from all show of lies, faith
only, that Iothan spoke this, and Ioaz spoke that. The Scriptures call the
Angels men, because they appeared in the shape of men: But we never read in
the Scriptures, that the Angels called themselves men: If the three men which
appeared to Abraham, whom he lodged all night, Genesis 18.2. should have said to
Abraham, we are three men, I pray thee lodge us all night, how could they have
been excused from a lie?

Satan appears to his confederates when he spoke beside the Idol, by the
Priest, but not out of the Idols.
Secondly, Satan appears to his confederates per assistentiam, Zach. 10.2. The
Idols speak lies: How did the Idol speak lies? Satan did not speak out of
the Idols here, but it was the devil that spoke besides the Idol; so the
Priests, when they lay upon the skins of the beasts (which they had sacrificed)
and sleeped there, Satan blasted them, to belch forth their oracles; Therefore
Virgil says; Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit.

God himself is said to speak by Vrim and Thummim; and yet it was the Priests
who gave the answers; so Genesis 41.16. God shall give Pharaoh an answer; how gave
he him an answer? by Joseph: so 1 Timothy 1.17. false doctrine is called the
doctrine of devils: when as the devil himself speak not, but only the false
apostles by the devil.

Thirdly, he appeared to his confederates when he spoke out of the bellies of
the Pithonies and Witches. (...)
Thirdly, he appears to his confederates, per inexistentiam; as when he spoke
to Eva out of the serpent: These in the Scripture are called obhoth, Levit. 20.
as you would say, bottles or bladders, because their bellies were extended like
bladders, and the seventy translate them (...), ventriloqui; because the devil
spak out of their bellies, and in the Syriack spiritus tumoris, Act. 16.16.
because he gave his answer out of the bellies of those Pythones, which were
swelled up.

Here let us mark a difference betwixt these who were blasted by the devil, A
difference betwixt the Prophets of God when they prophesied and those who were
blasted by the devil when they prophesied.
and the Prophets of God when they prophesied: the Prophets of God when they
prophesied, fuerunt in spiritu, Rev. they were altogether taken up by the
spirit, neither were they any ways distracted, or out of their wits: when they
prophesied, they were sometimes weakened in body at the sight of the vision, as
Daniel, and Ezechiel were, but still they were settled in mind, and free from
these passions which might perturbe the mind at that time; but when the devil
blasted his prophets, as Bar Jesus, (Syriace) Bar Shuma-filius inflamationis,
they were mad, and distracted; they foamed at the mouth, Hos invasit (...).
and their necks wried about, and oftentimes they gave their answers out of
those parts of the body which modesty wills us to conceal Therefore the
Hebrews says, that spiritus ascendebat per zacuro, and per necebhah; per
zacuro, (...) Oraculum delphicum edidit responsa per pudenda puellae. They
differed from the true Prophets in the manner of their speech.
by that part which shows us to be men; per nekebhah, by that part which
shows a woman to be a woman.

Secondly, they differed from the true Prophets, in forma vocis, in the form
of their voice; for the unclean spirit when he gave his answers, he peeped out
of the earth, Esaias 8.19. and whispered out of the earth, whereas the Prophets
of God lifted up their voice like a trumpet, Esaias 58.1. and spoke distinctly
when they prophesied.

Qu. How are true apparitions distinguished from false?

Answ. Gershon in his book entitled, De probatione spirituum, of the trial
of the spirits, says, How are true apparitions distinguished from false.
that no transfiguration is to be admitted, but where Moses and Elias are
present; where he alludes to the transfiguration of Christ upon the mount,
where Moses and Elias were present. When the disciples saw Christ walking upon
the sea, they took him to be a spirit, Matthew. 14.26. but when he spoke to
them and said, [I am he] then they were no more afraid: It is the word that
distinguishes the true apparitions from the false.

Man is very ready to be deceived by these revelations. When the Lord spoke to
Samuel, and called him once, twice, he took it to be the voice of Eli, and not
of God, 1 Samuel 3.5. So 1 King. 13. the young Prophet was deceived by the old
Prophet: What marvel is it then, if these impure spirits deceive? When Satan
by his suggestions would have persuaded Augustine to seek some sign from God,
Aug. lib. 2. confessionum de vera religione.
because he saw many deluded that way by false apparitions; therefore he often
warned us, that we should not trust such follies or delusions. And Gershon in
his Book De probatione spirituum, of the trial of spirits, tells how Satan
upon a time appeared to a holy man in a most glorious manner, professing
himself to be Christ, and because the man was a religious man, and worthy to
be respected above many others, therefore he appeared unto him; But what
answered the old man unto him, I desire not to see my Savior here in this
desert, it shall suffice me to see him in the heavens, and he said, Sit in alio
soeculo, non in hoc, visio tua merces mea: O Lord let thy fight be my reward in
another life, and not in this.

SECT. 5. What is Magic, and who are Magitians.
A Magitian is he who uses midses which are only proper to God, either in
curing of diseases or working other strange effects.

These are magicians who usurpes any of Gods privileges in curing or acting of
their fates.
Things appropriate to God, are first to work by his word only: Secondly, to
cure by number. Thirdly, by order. Fourthly, he works sometimes only by the
situation of the body. Fifthly, he works sometimes by figure and character;
Gods sixth privilege is to use one midse to cure all diseases. Gods seventh
privilege is to use natural means, which notwithstanding has no force in
working of the miracle. Gods eight privilege is when he uses one midse to
produce contrary effects; so he uses artificial midses, as the brazen
serpent, Paul's girdle.

Gods first privilege to cure by word.
First, God uses sometimes only words, when he restores the sick to their
health: as when he said to the man sick of the palsy, arise and take up thy
bed, John 5.8. When the Magitian uses words only to cure the sick, this is
Magic, usurping that prerogative which only belongs to the Lord.

Object. It may be said, that Satan uses the words of the Scripture in curing
of diseases, as when one is troubled with the toothache, they bring these words
of Scripture, a bone of him shall not be broken?

Answ. It is well said by one, in nomine domini fit omne malum; that is, they
abuse the name of God, when they are about their Magic tricks: the Scripture
uses these words to another sense, and therefore it is but a wreasting of the
Scripture; fraus dicitur fieri contra legem, vel ipsi legi, Against the Law,
when they do a thing which is forbidden in the Law, and studies not to hide
the fact with any color; but fraus dicitur fieri legi, when they do a thing
contrary to the meaning of the Law, and yet seems not directly to do against
the Law; when Magitians use words of the Law, they use them to another sense
than the Spirit of God means, then faciunt fraudem legi.

Quest. When the devil has the chief hand in working these strange things,
what is the Magitians part in working here?

Answ. The Magitian uses these signs which Satan and he had agreed upon, and
this makes him guilty of that same fact with the devil. Two robbers lies in
wait by the way for a man's life, the one gives the sign, and the other kills,
they are both guilty of murder here: So the Magitian uses the sign
appointed by the devil, either to kill or to heal, and here both are guilty
of the fact.

Quest. If there be no force in words, what means that, Psalm. 58.5. the deaf
Adder stoppes her ear, and hearkens not to the voice of the enchanter? Here
there may seem to be some force in words to enchant?

Answ. Some says that these words are spoken only by way of apologue, as
Judge. 9. The trees spoke and chose them a King, which cannot be understood
literally. So the serpent is said to stop her ear, but one thing is said
here, another meant, that the crafty courtiers of Saul would not hearken to
David's good admonitions but stopped their ears; But the rule of Quintilian is
true, All comparisons must be taken from things that are true, but not examples.
that examples may be true or false, but all comparisons are taken from things
which are true indeed, Genesis 49.27. Benjamin is like a Woolfe, who kills his
prey in the morning, and in the evening parts the spoil: If the woolfe used
not to do this, it were not a fit comparison: So if the Adder stopped not her
ear, it were not a fit comparison.

Quest. How does the words then enchant the Serpent?

Answ. The Serpent by nature, so soon as she hears the enchanter stoppes her
ear, as the chicken new hatched is afraid of the Kite. Satan in the mean time
joins himself with the second cause that he benummes the serpent that she
cannot sting: And this we may perceive also in the Lunatickes, whose brains
are swelled up in the full Moon. Satan marking the second cause here, takes
occasion to work upon the brains of poor Lunatickes and makes them mad: so
Satan concurres here with the second cause and benummes, the serpent so that
she cannot sting; therefore the Psalmist, Psalm. 58.6. uses the same words
which are set down in the Law, Deuteronomy. 18.11. chobher chobharim; but when the
serpent becomes old once and fit regulus, (...)
then he will not be enchanted.

Gods second privilege to work by number.
The second privilege properly only to God is to work his miracles by
observing number, 2 King. 5.10. Go and wash thy self seven times in Jordan,
and thy flesh shall be made whole, 2 Kin. 18.43. Eliah said to his servant, go
again seven times; so Josh. 6.7. but upon the seventh day thou shall compass
the walls of Jericho seven times. This number of seven could do nothing of it
self; but it was a means appointed by God to work those miracles, when
witches in their sorceries uses this number of seven, they usurp that which
is only proper to God, therefore it is Magic. Some calls this Magic Magiam
geometricam; such was the Magic of Balaam, Number, 23.5. when he caused seven
altars to be built: so when the witch bids the sick party to dippe his shirt
seven times in south running water, this is plain witchcraft using that midse
of number which is due only to God. Physicians in curing of diseases which
they call chronicke diseases, as in curing their tertian agues, or quartan
agues, they observe number, as the third day, fourth day, but here there is a
natural cause; but when the Lord commanded Gideon, Judge. 6.25. to take the
second young bullock of seven years old and offer it, there was another
reason that moved him, here he respected not the bare number; Here he commands
him to offer the bullock of seven years old, because it was borne that same
year that the Madianites began to oppress the people of God.

The third privilege of God in working his miracles is by order, Gods third
privilege to work by order.
Ioh. 5. whosoever went down first into the poole, after that the Angel had
troubled the water, was whole and none other: If he had not gone down first
and kept this order, he had not been healed; so witches in hurting or curing
they observe order. A man is lying sick in his bed, they use usually to take
the sickness and lay upon him who comes first in at the door, he dies, and
the sick man is cured: this is witchcraft observing order which is only
proper to God.

Gods fourth privilege to work by situation of the body.
The fourth privilege of God in working his miracles, is the situation of the
body, 2 King. 13.17. Elisha commanded Ioaz King of Israel, and said unto him,
open the window Eastward and shoot. This situation of the body was a means
appointed by God in working this miracle. Daniel when he was in Babylon, he
opened his window and looked toward Jerusalem when he prayed, but this was a
part of the ceremonial worship commanded under the Law; for the Jews when
they were in a strange country were bound always to turn their faces toward
the Temple when they prayed, 1 King. 8. And when they were in the temple they
turned their faces always to the West when they prayed, because the
propitiatory was placed in the West end of the Temple contrary to the worship
of the Heathen, who turned their faces always to the East when they
worshipped, Ezech. 8.16. Here they respected not the situation of the body, but
the manner of the worshipping, but God in working of this miracle would have
the situation of the body observed as the situation only. Balaam when he would
curse the people of God, Number. 24.19. turned his face toward the Israelites,
and his hinder parts to the Moabites, and to the Amonites; therefore they are
called Been Sheth, that is, filij natum, because they were behind Balaams back
or posteriour parts.

Gods fifth privilege is to work by figure or character.
The fifth privilege of God in working his miracles is by figure or character.
When the Lord God appointed to destroy Jerusalem, these whom he minded to save
in this destruction, he caused to mark them in their foreheads with this
sign. Ezech. 9.4. The sign of it self had no force, yet it pleased the Lord
to use this sign for the preservation of his own. The Magitians in their
conjurations and exorcismes uses oftentimes characters and figures. Therefore
the Scripture calls them chartumim a charat insculpere, because they engraved
their charecters. Elimas the sorcerer, Act. 16.8. In the Arabicke is called
Chartom, (...)
because he used figures and circles in his conjurations, See Dan. 2.2. So the
Teraphim were made to the likeness of a man, and engraven with diverse
characters and figures. Therefore Aquila translates them (...), when Magitians
uses circles and figures in their conjurations, they usurp one of Gods
privileges, and this is Magic.

This is also one of the singular privileges of God when he uses one means
to cure all diseases, Gods sixth privilege to use one means to cure all
diseases.
Ioh. 5. Whosoever entered into the poole after the water was troubled by the
Angel, he was cured of whatsoever disease he had: This was Gods panaceum or
(...), to cure all diseases. When sorcerers and witches uses one remedy for
all diseases, this is plain magic and an usurpation of the privilege which
is due only to God.

Gods seventh privilege in working of miracles, Gods seventh privilege when
he uses means to cure, which has no force in them.
is when he used salt, spittle, meal, oil, dust, these midses had no force
in working these miracles, and they were not as the Schoolmen speaks, media
operantia sed deferentia, and God did not here (...), that is, he wrought by
these means, but not in these means: When a Fisher is fishing he catches upon
the hook the crimpe fish; the crimpe fish-transmits a benumdnesse, first, to
the hook, then to the line, then to the goad, and last it benumes the fishers
arm, now because the line and the goad are not capable of benumdnesse;
therefore they are but media deferentia. And these mides were of three sorts
which the Lord used; first, he used some midses as seemed to have some natural
force in them, yet had none. Secondly, he used midses which had no power in
them, and seemed to have no power. And thirdly, he used midses which had a
contrary power in them. First, he used midses which seemed to have a natural
power in them, Why God uses means which has no power in them, nor seems to
have no power.
yet had none at all, 2 King. 4.34. And he went up into the bed and stretched
himself upon the child, and laid his mouth to his mouth, and his eyes to his
eyes, so that the flesh of the child began to grow warm; he did this, non
aliquo ritu sed affectus vehementia; and so Paul fell upon Eutichus. Again, he
went up and down the house, now this way, now that way, and went up the second
time, and stretched himself upon the child, and the child neesed seven times.
The heat of the Prophets body here might have seemed to have had some natural
cause to have made the child's flesh warm, and to have brought life to him
again; but there was no natural cause here to help the child to live, but
only the power of God. So when the Lord commanded to lay a lump of figs to
Ezekias his sore, Esaias 38. Figs of themselves would matured the boil: One
would have thought that there were some natural power in the midse here to
produce this effect to make the boil ripe, but there was no force at all in
the midse here when it was applied to the sore, but the hand of the Lord did it
only.

Quest. Ye will say then, why used God these means if they had no force at all
to produce the effect?

Answ. God used such means to obscure his power a little in working of the
miracle, he cast a veil over his miracle covering it as it were with nature,
and by his example taught us, that we should not neglect the second causes and
ordinary means. Why God uses means which has no power in them, nor seems
to have no power.
Therefore Christ having wrought the miracle of the loaves, he commanded to
gather up the broken meat, Mark. 8.8. Secondly, the Lord used means which had
no power at al to effectuate these miracles, neither seemed they to have any
power in them, as the staff of Elisha, 2 King. 4.29. the girdle of Paul, and
Peter's shadow, Act. 15.15. And the Lord used such means as these that his
glory might appear the more, and that we should no stick too much to the
second causes, as Asa did to the Physicians. Thirdly, Why God uses means which
have a contrary power in them.
God uses means sometimes which have a contrary effect, and these means he
uses that his glory might most appear. And in these miracles the Hebrews
says, that there was miraculum in medio miraculi, that is, there was a miracle
within a miracle, 2 King. 2. To make the bitter waters sweet, was a miracle,
but to make them sweet by salt, that was a miracle within a miracle; So Number.
17. Aarons rod brought forth first leaves, and then it blossomed, to bring
forth leaves was a miracle, but then to blossom was a miracle within a
miracle: for all stonefruites blossoms first, and then brings forth leaves. So
to restore the sight to the blind was a miracle, Ioh. 9. but to cure him by
putting clay to his eyes, this was a miracle within a miracle. So 1 King 18.35.
to send a fire from the heaven to burn the burnt offering was a miracle, but
that the burnt offering should burn when water was powered upon it, and the
ditch round about the altar powered full of water, then for the sacrifice to
burn, that was a miracle within a miracle; when the sorcerer or witch uses
such means in which there is no power to heal, this is Magic, and an
usurpation of Gods prerogative. Therefore the Hebrews says, In quocunque est
aliquid de medicina in eo nihil est de via Ammoreorum, Lev. 18.3. That there is
no witchcraft where we see natural reason or physic to appear; when witches
uses means to cure, which has no natural help in them; this is magic
usurping one of Gods privileges.

God uses sometime one means to produce contrary effects; Gods eight
privilege when he uses one means to procure contrary effects.
as the bitter waters made the guilty woman's belly to rot and consume, but it
made the honest woman to conceive, Number. 5.28. When witches uses one means to
produce contrary effects, it is the usurpation of Gods privilege, and then it
is witchcraft.

God uses artificial means in curing of diseases.
God uses also artificial means in curing of diseases, as the brazen Serpent,
Paul's girdle; and here the Hebrews says, Deus aufert noxam per eum qui noxam
infert; as the looking upon the brazen serpent cured these who were stung with
serpents, Number. 31.9. In natural things it is the form that works more than
the matter, in artificial things it is the matter that works more than the
form, but here neither the matter nor the form works. The Magitians uses
sometimes artificial means in working strange things; as Giges made himself
invisible by his ring.

Signs are of four sorts.
The Magitians also observe signs. Signs are of four sorts; first, there are
divine signs; secondly, there are natural signs; thirdly, superstitious
signs, and fourthly diabolical signs.

Divine signs.
First, divine signs Ezech. 37.16. Son of man take thee one stick and write
upon it for Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions; Then take
another stick and write upon it for Joseph the stick of Ephraim, and they
shall be one in thy hand. Here the joining of the two sticks in the Prophets
hand, was a sign of the joining of the tribes together. So when Agabus took
his girdle and bound himself with it, it was a sign to Paul that he should be
bound at Rome, Act. 21.11.

Natural signs.
Secondly, we may observe signs natural, and make use of them as the
Physicians does in a man's sickness; and the Jews says that there are six
signs which are good to know when they are found in a sick man; the first is
gnatush stermutatio, (...)
neesing; the second is Seignir, sudor, swetting; the third is Shilshul, seeds
sive egestio, when he has the benefit of the stool; the fourth is, Keri
pellatio nocturna gonorea, the sheding of his seed; the fifth is Shena somnus,
sleep; the sixth is chalom somnium, a dream. We may observe these natural
signs.

The third are superstitious signs, Superstitious signs.
as if one meet a hare first in the morning, they take that for an evil
sign, and people are much taken with these superstious signs.

The last are diabolical signs; when Zoroastes was borne he presently laughed;
they gathered by that, that he would prove afterward a great Magitian: this was
a sign from the divill and not from God.

The devil uses sundry diabolical signs with his witches: They take a belt
in their hand, Diabolical signs.
and measure how many inches long the belt is; If ye name to them the name of
the person who is sick, they will tell you presently whether the person will
live or die; if the person will die then the belt grows a great deal shorter
by so many inches then it was before; but if the person be to live then it is a
great deal longer then it was before; this is the common practice of witches.
To break off or to dissolve this covenant with the devil is a very hard
thing; Simon Magus desired S. Peter to pray for him, but he could not pray for
himself, and unless the stronger man come in, and bind Satan and dispossess
him, he can never be dispossessed, Luke 11.

He that has a desire to come out of these snares of the devil, How men must
break off this direct covenant with the devil.
first he must know in what a dangerous estate he stands in, without repentance
he cannot enter within the holy city. Secondly, he must know, that upon
repentance he may be received into the kingdom of God again, as Manasses, 2
King. 21.6. and those of Ephesus. Act. 19.19. And such was Cyprian, who
afterward proved a martyr; then they must confess their sins. Act. 19. and
show their deeds, and last burn their magic books, although they were of
never so great a price, it is not lawful to keep such books but to burn
them, Act. 19.20. We may read the books of Heretics and keep them, but these
books we may not keep.

Whether it is lawful to remove the sign put by the devil or not?
A question may be moved here in breaking this direct covenant with the devil,
whether it is lawful to remove that sign which the devil has put for the
hurting of man or beast. Example, the devil bids take a toad, and put it under
the threshold of such a man's door, and when the man or any that belongs to him
comes over that door, then they shall die; Whether is it lawful to remove the
sign, or not, when we know it is put there. This question is disputed by the
Casuists sundry ways. Some holds that they may use the help of a witch to
remove the sign. If it be lawful for one (say they) to borrow money of an
usurer if he be willing to lend it; and if it be lawful to take an oath of him
who swears by his Idols, why may we not, say they, use the help of a witch to
remove the sign?

Answ. There are great odds betwixt these, because witchcraft is intrinsece
mala, it is evil of it self; therefore we must never have any meddling with a
witch, Romans 1. They who do such things are worthy of death, and not only they
who do them, but also they who consent unto them; but when one takes an oath
of him whom he knows will swear by his Idol only, or to borrow money from
him whom he knows is an usurer: these are not evil of themselves to take an
oath and borrow money: and if they were well affected they would swear
religiously by the true God, and lend their money freely; so that these two are
but evil as they abuse them, but are not evil in themselves as Magic is.

Any Christian man may safely remove the sign which is put by the devil.

Object. To remove the sign which Satan has placed, seems to be an implicit
calling upon the devil and a minding of him to perform his promise?

Answ. He that removes the sign calls not upon the devil here for his help,
neither does he covenant with the devil that he should cease to hurt, when
he removes the sign. If a traitor should make a covenant with the enemy, and
confederate after this manner with him; when I hold up this sign, or put up
these colors, then ye shall come and scale the walls; now if any good
citizen should know this, and should remove the sign, he would no ways be
thought to consent to their treacherous covenant, but rather to hate and
dissolve it.

Object. He who removes the sign that the devil may hurt no more, medles he
not here with the covenant which the devil made with the witch, which was
this: So long as the sign lies here it shall have power to hurt, but when it
is removed, it shall have no power at all to hurt?

Answ. Although he that removes the sign should know that the covenant was
thus made betwixt the devil and the witch, yet it would not follow that he
consented to this covenant, for he desires not the devil here to keep his
promise, when he removes the sign, neither enters he in a new covenant with
the devil here, but by that means he breaks the covenant which the devil and
the witch made, and takes away occasion to call upon the devil hereafter.

Object. But when he removes the sign, and hopes that Satan shall not hurt
hereafter, either he expects this event from a natural cause, or from the will
of man, or from God by a miracle; but he expects none of these ways; therefore
he looks to have the event from the devil; and it is all one as if he should
say to the devil; thou promisedst so soon as this sign was removed to cease
to hurt any more, I remove the sign, therefore perform thou that which thou
have promised?

Answ. He who removes the sign expects not here from the devil an positive
effect, but only an privitive when we call upon God by faith to save us from
the devil, then we know the devil has no power to hurt us, we expect no
positive effect here from him but only that he hurt us not, and the man when he
removes the sign he expects nothing by reason of the covenant made betwixt the
witch and the devil, but by breaking this sign he breaks the covenant betwixt
Satan and the witch. Therefore when he expects that the devil should hurt no
more, he does not: as if he should say, perform thou that which thou promised,
seeing I have played my part, but rather thus, I break off the covenant which
thou made with the witch, and has removed this sign which thou appointedst
for hurt, therefore thou must hurt no more.

SECT. 6. Of the indirect covenant with the devil.
What is the indirect covenant with the devil.
He makes the indirect covenant with the devil who uses foolish signs, or
write, or words, trusting in them, although he has not made a covenant
directly with the devil: When the Idolaters offered cakes to the queen of
heaven, they who offered the cakes made a direct covenant with the Idol, but
the little children who gathered the sticks, Ier. 7.18. made but an indirect
covenant with the Idol. So the witnesses that stoned Stephen, Act. 7. directly
killed him, but Saul who kept the clothes of those who stoned him was
indirectly guilty of his death; but as Saul became a most cruel wolf and
persecuted the Church, Act. 26.10. So these who enters into the implicit or
indirect covenant with the devil, may afterward easily enter into the direct
covenant with him; he who enters into direct covenant with the devil takes his
mark in his forehead; and he who enters into the indirect covenant with him,
takes but his mark in his hand. The Casuists of the Roman Church does not
condemn this indirect covenant altogether, for if any use these signs which
they use of probable ignorance, they take this to be but a venial sin.

SECT. 7. Of the diverse sorts of divination.
When God forbiddes his Church to commit any sort of Idolatry, or to worship
any creature, he forbids all creatures to be worshipped either which are in
heaven or in earth, or under the earth: In heaven, as the Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars; in earth, as men, beasts, fowls; neither under the earth, in the
waters. So the Lord forbids all sort of divination in the heaven, and this is
(...), Judicial astrology is forbidden.
or Judicial Astrology: So in the earth when men observe dreams, and this is
called (...); So when they observed the intrales of beasts, and this was called
extispitium; so when they marked the flying of the fowls, and this was called
Augurium: So when he gave his answers by lot, and this was called Sortilegium:
And lastly when he gave his answers by those who are under the earth by the
dead, and this was called (...); and sometimes he gave his answers by the skull
of a dead man, and this was called (...).

The Scripture gives diverse names to these Astrologers and condemns them:
What names are given to these Judicial astrologues in the Scripture.
F rst they are called Meggnonenin, Mic. 5.1. (...)
agnanan, which signifies a cloud, because they give their answers under
pretext of the clouds. Secondly, this Judicial astrology is called
haiidgnoni, (...)
Lev. 20.27. and the 70. translate him (...), and he is joined with obh, which
signifies ventriloquious, him or her who gave their answer out of the belly,
and he is joined often with the Pithonise, and with the Magitian, therefore
they called this judicial Astrology clavim magiae, the key that opens the
way to all Magic. (...)
Thirdly, they are called hachozim bakokebhim, intuentes stellas, beholders of
the stars, Esaias 47.13. chaza signifies not only to see, but also to
foretell things contingent; and therefore the Prophets were called chozim
videntes, 1 Samuel 9.9. Fourthly they were called modignim lachodashim monthly
prognosticators, (...)
Esaias 47.13. they made their predictions by the months. They reduced all
things which they had to do to several months, observing their Epimerides,
and so Haman cast his lot to fall in the twelfe month in the thirteenth day of
the month for the destruction of the Jews, Esth. 9.1. And they took nothing
in hand before they observed those monthly prognostications. These the
Chaldees called Astagnine, (...).
and these were they who said this day is an unluckie day to undergo any
business, and this day is a good day; so they said, we will not take a
business in hand, but in the first day of the month, or the Kalends. Fifthly,
they are called Asaphim, Dan. 2.2. and they were so called because in the
twilight they marked the heavens most, Nasaph signifies the twilight.

Judicial astrology came first from Idolatry.
This Judicial Astrology came first from Idolatry, for Idolaters worshipping
the Sun, the Moon and the Stars, as gods, they ascribed more to them then
natural influx, that by them things contingent might be foretold. The religion
of the Babylonians was no other thing then the science of the Chaldeans; and
they gave the selfsame names to the stars which they gave to their gods. The
Babylonian priests in their sacrifices, Vide valesium, page 211
said these same things of their Gods, which the astrologer said of the stars:
When the Priests were asked who had stolen the ox, they said it was Mercury
that had stolen him; and the Astrologue said that he was born under Mercury
who had stolen the ox. Therefore Ier. 10.2. the Idolater and the Astrologue
are joined together; Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not afraid of
the signs of heaven; here he puts the way of the heathen, their Idolatry with
the fear of the stars.

As this Judicial astrology came from Idolatry; Who enlarged this Judicial
astrology.
so it was enlarged much afterward by the Chaldeans, therefore a Chaldean is
put for a Genethliacke, Dan. 2.10. He sent for the Chaldeans, that is, the
Genethliackes, as an Arabian is put for a thief, Ier. 3.2. Thou lay like a
Arabian by the way, that is, like a thief; as a Cananite is put for a
merchant, or one that tradeth, Hos. 12.7. and the Jews learned much of their
Judicial Astrology from the Chaldeans, Judge. 5. the Stars fight against
Sisera. Vide Michol in radice Maschah.
They say that these Stars were unluckie Stars to him. And that the
Astrologues foresaw his ruin in the Stars and forbade him to go out to
battle that day; but the Lord they say hardened his heart and drew him to the
river Kison, where he was killed. And lastly, the wicked Mahumitans have much
more enlarged this Judicial astrology.

This devilish art is first injurious to God, This Judicial astrology is
first injurious to God.
for it takes away Gods providence and ties all things to a fatal necessity.
Secondly, it ascribes to the stars the foretelling of things contingent by
them which is only proper to God, Esaias 41.23. for when there concurres a
number of causes about one effect, which are not subordinate to ascribe the
effect to any one of these causes more than to any of the other, it is to
ascribe a contingent effect to a cause which it cannot be ascribed to, for when
there is no dependence betwixt the effect and the cause, then it is mere
contingencie; and God only knows such things which are contingent: a child is
born at such an hour under such a constelation, therefore such and such things
will befall him, to ascribe these effects to his birth because he was borne
under such a planet, that is folly, for there is no dependence here betwixt
the effect and the cause: And here they had need to look to a nearer cause
than to his birth, as to the constitution of the parents who begat the child,
and to the nurse who nourished him, and to his food, and they had need more
to look to the time of his conception than to the time of his birth; for the
stars works more in the time of the conception of the child, and when he is
in his mothers belly, than in his birth.

Obj. But they will say when they find the hour of the birth, they can easily
know the time of the conception.

Answ. Are all that are conceived at the same moment borne at the same time? I
hope they will not say so, for some are borne in the seventh month, and some
in the tenth month; therefore this their observation will not hold: And let them
look rather to his education, both by nature and by grace, than to the
stars; for these will change him more than Mercury or Venus.

They make the stars in their conjunctions to be the causes of men's actions,
both natural and moral. And they go further, that they are these which
produces alterations in religion. This Judicial astrology ascribes the
alterations and changes of religion to the stars.
They say when Jupiter is joined with diverse planets he produces diverse
religions; when he was joined with Saturn, that conjunction bred the Jewish
religion, and when he was joined with Mars, then he bred the Chaldeans
religion, and when he was joined with the Sun that bred the Egyptian religion,
and when he was joined with Venus that brought on the Mahumets religion, and
when he was joined with Mercury that bred the Christian Religion; and when he
was joined with the Moon, that bred the Antichrists religion. But it is
strange to see how these men ascribes more to the climates in the heavens and
to the stars then they do to the ground wherein they live, or to the air
wherein they breath, or to the food whereby they were nourished: And if we
should demand of these men what is the reason that it has fallen out that in
these countries where Venus, Mercury, and Saturn were of old worshipped the
signs remaining the same still, yet it has fallen out that their gods has
been expelled, and cast out of these nations again, although the signs
remain: So we may demand of them what is the reason although the Jews be
banished, wandering through the world, and changing so many climates, yet never
altered their religion; and what is the reason that the Mahumets religion is
professed now, where the Christian was professed of old; and we see sundry
religions professed in one place under the same conjunction; therefore this
conjunction of Jupiter with the Sun, or any other star cannot produce this
effect of religion. Thirdly, if religion depend upon the virtue of the stars,
when the virtue in that conjunction cease, whether will the religion cease or
not, or cease soon after, as the light cease when the Sun is gone from
us; w^^^ce comes it then that the Heathenish religion, and the Jewish
religion has endured so long, Vide Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 18. praeparatione
evangelica.
when as none of the astrologues can say, that the conjunction of the stars,
or the virtue of that conjunction has endured so long, and what conjunction
can they show when the Christian Religion arose to produce such an effect, or
what conjunction made this, when the Mahumetan religion arose. And we see
contrary religions professed where there is but little difference of place.

This judicial astrology is injurious to man.
As this Judicial astrology dishonours God, so it is injurious to man, for it
takes away from him, liberty of will in civil things, which he has by nature,
and in religious matters, which he has by grace, and brings him within the
compass of such a necessity. Quando astra non necessitant, sed inclinant; They
bring no fatal necessity with them, (...)
but inclines only a little. The stars they have their influxes, into the
bodies of men: therefore they are called Mozalim by the Hebrews, a Nazal.
influere. 2 King. 23. And the Rabbines call them Meshartim, a Sharat
ministrare, and therefore they serve somewhat to foretell man's inclination, and
manners, for they commonly follow the temperature of the body. But simply to
foretell by the stars, what manner of men they will be, that cannot be
foretold by the stars Sapiens dominabitur astris: As to say, such a woman
will be an whore because she was borne under such a constellation. But only
thus much they might say, her inclination would have led her to have been such
a woman, but good education, good company, and most of all grace, may restrain
her from that sin. So this Judicial astrology, brings men under a
continual fear. As the Lord threatened, Isa. 66.4. because when the Lord
called upon them they would not answer him. Therefore he would choose their
delusions, and bring their fears upon th^^.

What use we may make of the stars.
The Lord when he made the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars he made them for
signs, and for seasons, we may observe times by them. It is the commendation
of Issachar, 1 Chro. 12.32. that he could mark the times So we may observe the
stars to be signs of spiritual events. As sometimes of Gods anger in the
comets, for although they have a natural cause in them, yet sometimes they
signify great changes to happen in the Commonwealth, as war, famine, and
other Judgments. Christ foretold that before his last coming there should be
signs, in the sun, the moon, and the stars, which should be most
fearful signs to the wicked, as they should be comfortable to the children
of God, but we can never tell things contingent by them.

This Judicial astrology is injurious to other sciences. This iudicall
astrology wrongs other sciences.
Let us consider what is (...) and (...) is such a sort of art, or science,
which is foolish and altogether vain to lean to, as physiognomy and
palmistry, (...) is a liberal science or art, which is profitable to man. And
(...) is that which is hurtful to a man. As Judicial Astrology, and Magic.

We are to put a difference betwixt, Magiam divinam, A difference betwixt
divine Magic, the Magic of the Mathematician, the physical Magic, and
the diabolical Magic.
Magiam mathematicam, Magiam Physicam, and Magiam doemoniacam, divine Magic,
was that which the Magitians of the East learned from the Scriptures. As from
Balaam his prophecy of the star, Number. 24.17. and was confirmed to them by
the Mathematickes, observing the course of that star, and here the Lord takes
them in their own trade because they studied the Mathematickes. And this
star, they called his star, Mat. 2.2. This was Salutare sidus, for other
comets pretended some unlucky thing, but this star led them to Christ. This
knowledge of the stars was lawful, the Arabickes, call such an astrologue
Cachin, which comes from Cohen, Sacerdos, and the Egyptian Priests, who might
study n^ other arts, yet were permitted to study this sort of Astrology.

The second sort of Magic was Magia Mathematica, Mathematecal Magic.
which considers the diverse aspects and properties of the stars and this is a
lawful knowledge.

Physical Magic.
The third sort is Magia Physica, or ars medendi, and this is lawful.

Diabolical Magic.
The last is, Magia doemoniaca, sive diabolica, to foretell the events of things
contingent by the stars, and this is altogether unlawful.

All profitable sciences furthers a man to the knowledge of God, but this
draws a man from God.
All profitable sciences furthers a man to the knowledge of God, but this draws
a man from God. The Mathematickes prepares the mind (by abstracting of
things,) and makes a way for the mind, to consider things, more separate from
the material, and gross bodies. And Moses was bred in this sort of science,
Act. 7. When he was learned in all the sciences of Egypt. Secondly, Physic
elevates the mind further. As when Solomon wrote of trees and plants, he was
led here to the consideration of Gods power, and wisdom by them. Thirdly,
Metaphysica magis clevat, Metaphisick lifts the mind higher to God; Sed non
nectit postremo fini, It ties not the mind to the last end, it considers God
as Ens and affectiones entis are vnum verum and bonum. This is all that
Metaphysicke considers, but this is nothing, until the soul ascend higher:
By divinity, it is led to the highest degree to know God. vnum per vnionem, and
vnum per vnitatem, one by unity to know the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one
in essence; and one by union, to know Christ, God, and Man, to be one person,
to know him Ithiel and Veall, This knowledge of God ties the soul to the last
end, to God himself* for all the knowledge which Agur had, before he came to
this knowledge, he confessed that he was more brutish then any man, and had not
the understanding of a man, he had neither learned wisdom, nor had the
knowledge of the Holy. That is, of salvation, and life eternal, which only
the holy attaines unto: This knowledge elevates the mind to the last end, then
how brutish is that knowledge, that draws away the mind from the last end.

This science is subordinate to no other science, for all subordination is
either directa subordinatio, or else subordinatio ratione finis: Directa
subordinatio, is this, when one borrowes all from the superior science, as the
Apothecary does from the Physician, for he must know of the Physician, what
hot things and what cold, what drammes, and what scruples, he must put in the
physic which he is to give unto the patient. The second subordination, or
indirect subordination, is this which is subordinate only in respect of the
end. Example, a Cook is not directly subordinate to the doctor of Physic,
therefore he asks not of the doctor, what herbs he should put into a
broth, because he is not directly subordinate to the doctor, but ask him
the end why he makes the broth, he will answer for the safety of man, here
he is subordinate to the doctor in regard of the end, for the doctor gives
Physic for the safety of the man, and so does the Cook, who makes the
broth. This devilish art is not subordinate, ratione finis, for the supreme
and last science, Divinity serves for the good of man, to lead him to his last
end, and to save him, but this science is not subordinate, to this supreme and
last end, but it leads a man to his destruction and damnation.

This Astrology borrowes from other sciences and has nothing of its own. Vt
format ostentiones suas: that is, as he makes his houses in the heavens, he is
directly subordinate to the Mathematitian here, and borrowes his principles
from him: as he foretells natural things, he is subordinate to physic. But
when he foretells contingent things (which he ascribes as proper to himself,)
then he is subordinate to the devil. The Persian Priests were called Chobharim
astrologi prognostici from Chabhar. Isa. 47.5.

There is no science into this devilish art; for all sciences are resolved
into principles known by themselves, or demonstrate into some other science or
known by experience, or revealed by the first Verity. But none of these are
found, in judicial astrology, therefore it cannot be a science, that these
principles are not known by themselves, or demonstrate in some superior
science these two they will grant, but some will perhaps say this skill was
revealed by an Angel to Adam, or to Enoch, but who told them this, or out of
what Scripture have they learned it. It rests then that they say they know this
only by experience, The Chaldees that they might persuade this their art to
the Greeks, and to the Romans, said that they had experience of these things;
for so many hundred thousand years (as Cicero testifies in his book, de
divinatione) And so they said truly, for there is need of many more years
then these for to observe the figures, situations and oppositions, of every one
of these in particular, before the heavens shall be turned about to the same
point again. And all the particular events, which they would demonstrate, by
them shall never fall out, although the heavens should be in a perpetual motion
for ever.

Quest. How could Daniel, be made Master of the Magicians, Astrologers,
Chaldeans, and Soothsayers, Dan. 5.11. seeing these were damnable arts?

Answ. Daniel, was set over these as they were gaz^rim, Astrologers,
foretelling natural things, and not as they were Soothsayers, foretelling
things contingent, but these curious and damnable arts, no doubt he condemned
altogether, as unlawful.

These judicial astrologers were excommunicate out of the Church and banished
out of the commonwealth.
For this damnable art Aquila (who translated the Bible,) was excommunicate, and
cast out of the Church. It has been condemned by the decrees of Emperors. As
Cornelius Tacitus witnesses, lib. 17. they banished them out of Italy.

SECT. 8. Of divination of things on Earth, and first of dreams.
THere are four sorts of dreams. The first is a natural or a Physical
dream. The second is a moral dream. The third is (...), a dream sent from
God. The fourth is (...), a devilish dream.

A natural dream is that which arises from a natural cause, What is a
natural dream.
as these who dream that they are eating sweet things, they may gather by
this that they are subject to Pituit or fleame. Those again who dream of
fire, chollor abounds most in them. And those who dream of darkness,
melancholy abounds most in them, and their dreams are sometimes praesagientia,
foretelling things to come, as Galen in his prognostickes, tells that a man
dreamed that his thigh was broken, and was turned into a stone, and shortly
afterward he was taken with a dead palsy. So he tells of another who dreamed
that he was wallowing in a cesterne of blood, He gathered that this man
abounded in blood. But if a Physician leaning to such prognostickes, should
open a vein, and let blood, he should be holden for an rash and unskilful
Physician, for he should use such cures, not by dreams, but by the symtome of
the disease.

The second sort of dreams are moral dreams which arises from the multitude
of cares and businesses, Eccles. 5.3. What is a moral dream Gregory Nissen de
opificio hominis.
and Gregory Nissen has a fit comparison to express the nature of these
dreams, like as he that plaieth upon an instrument after that he cease to
play, yet the strings trembles for a while: So our actions in the day time
leaves some motions behind them when we are a sleep.

These sort of dreams we are to make little use of them, for in the multitude
of dreams are diverse vanities, Eccles. 5.7. but if we often dream of one
thing, we may gather by this what is our predominant sin, When we dream
often of one and the selfsame thing, we may know by it what is our
predominate sin.
for that sin recurres oftenest unto us which we are most given to, and
shows it self more in our sleep than when we are awake, for when we are
awake our reason watches more over our corruption, and restrains it that it
burst not forth; and this Plutarch illustrates by a fit comparison: A
Schoolmaster as long as he is present with his scholars, then they seem to
keep good order, but if he withdraw himself a little, to try how they will
carry themselves, then they begin to play the wagges; So when reason watches
our passions they seem to be more settled and quiet, but if reason withdraw her
self a little as she does in our sleep, then our passions begins to be more
unruly.

What is a divine dream.
The third sort of dreams are divine dreams, and these comes only from the
Lord; Joseph by his brethren is called bagnal hachalmoth, (...)
Genesis 37.19. which some interprets, Dominus somniorum, the Lord of dreams; but
they interpret not rightly this Hebraisme, as though Joseph were Lord of
dreams, God is only Lord of dreams.
for God himself is only Lord of dreams, therefore dominus somniorum here,
is a man who dreams often, or (...) as the 70. interprets it.

A difference of Gods revelation by dreams and by vision.
There is a difference when God reveals himself to men in a dream, when he
spoke to them in a vision, and when he spoke to them in prophecy, when he
revealed himself to them in a dream, he revealed himself to their fantasy,
when he revealed himself to them in a vision, he revealed himself to their
sight, and then prophecy was more intellectual.

When he revealed himself to their fantasy and not to their understanding,
Sometimes God reveals himself to the fantasy, but not to the
understanding, to his children he reveals himself in both.
that was an imperfect sort of revelation; so he revealed himself to Pharaoh,
he saw the vision in his dream, but he understood it not; but when he revealed
himself to his children, he revealed himself both to their fantasy and to
their understanding, and he makes them to understand their dream, Job 33.15.
In a dream in a vision in the night when a deep sleep falls upon men, in a
slumbering upon the bed, then he opens the ears of men and seals their
instruction. So likewise he reveals himself in vision to their sight, but
this vision came sometime to the sight only, but not the understanding: So
Balthazar when he was awake saw a hand writing upon the wall before him, but he
understood not what it meant; but Jeremy when he saw the vision of the
seething pot, and the mouth of it toward the North, Ier. 1.13. he understood
the meaning of the vision, that the army of the King of Babel should come
against the city of Jerusalem and burn it: So when Peter saw a sheet let
down from heaven with clean and unclean beasts in it; the Lord revealed the
meaning of the dream to him.

Thirdly, The highest degree of revelation was to their understanding.
when God revealed himself to the understanding of the Prophets, it was more
intellectual, and the most perfect sort of prophecy; and as vision was a more
perfect sort of revelation than dreams [Ioel 2.28. Your young men shall see
visions, and your old men shall dream dreames] so this intellectual prophecy
is a higher degree than vision, when God speaks to our ear by his Word in
this life, and by his Sacraments to our senses; this is not the perfectest sort
of revelation, but that is reserved to us in the heavens which shall be more
intellectual and divine.

As these divine dreams was from the Lord, so the interpretation of these
dreams was from the Lord, Dan. 2.28. and some of them were harder to be
interpreted than others, and were like aenigmata or ridles which had need of
much unfolding.

Divine dreams were either allegorical or theorematicall.
The divine dreams sometimes they were allegorica, and sometimes they were
theorematica; these were called allegorical dreams, which were not to be
interpreted literally, but had some mystical signification in them, as Pharaoh
his dream, and Joseph his dream; and Philo holds that Abraham was the first
who expounded these allegorical dreams.

Theorematicall dreams were these when things fall out plainly without any
allegory, as they were foretold in the dream, as when Joseph was bidden in a
dream to fly to Egypt.

Sometime the dream was from the Lord, but not the exposition of the dream,
as when Joseph dreamed that his brethrens sheaves fell down and worshipped
his; so when he dreamed that the Sun, the Moon and the Stars bowed down
unto him, we must not think that Joseph had the interpretation of these
dreams (as he had of the Butlers and Bakers) but when he was exalted in Egypt
and saw the event, then he remembered the dream.

Secondly, sometimes the Lord revealed the dream to one, and the exposition of
the dream to another; as the dream was revealed to Pharaoh, and the
interpretation of it to Joseph; so he revealed the dream to the Midianite, and
the interpretation of it to his fellow, Judge. 7.13.14. And this interpretation
of the dream is called, (...)
verse. 15. fractura somnii, the breaking of the dream, a speech borrowed from
the breaking of a nut, for unless the shell be broken, we cannot come to the
kernel; so unless the dream be interpreted, Dreams without the
interpretation to no use.
we cannot understand it: But Daniel exceeded all in dreams, and in the
interpretation of dreams, therefore Ezechiel calls him wise Daniel, Ezec. 28.3.
who told Nebuchadnezar both his dream (when he forgot it) and the
interpretation of it. It was a great skill in Apelles when they were enquiring
for a malefactor who was fugitive and could not know him, Apelles having seen
him once before drew him so vively, although he had no examplar before him,
that so soon as they saw the picture they found out the malefactor; but for
Daniel to find out this dream which he never dreamed of before, nor thought
of, this was the Spirit of the most high God who taught him.

Quest. It is said, 1 King. 3.6. How the Lord bade Solomon ask any thing when
he was dreaming.
that the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream, and said unto him, Ask of me
and I shall give thee: How could Solomon ask any thing of God in his sleep,
or pray to him, seeing oration est actus humanus cuius principium est ratio
libera, prayer is an action of man which has the beginning from reason and not
from fancy, for it is the Spirit of God who moves our reasonable faculty to
call upon him, and not our fancy?

Answ. Some answer that it was before his sleep when he was offering
sacrifices that then he sought this, and that, after that he awoke again, he
begged for this wisdom. Others answer, that he verily prayed in his sleep,
because of the earnest desire that he had for wisdom, made him to think of
it in his sleep; and it was actus rationis ratione causae. Tom. 2.2. qu. 95.
art. 6.

Quest. What was the reason that the Lord revealed himself in dreams to
heathen Kings and Princes, as to Pharaoh, and to Nebuchadnezar?

Answ. There may be three reasons given of this; first, for his own glory, he
did this to show that his providence did reach as well to the highest as to the
lowest, not only in the Church but also without the Church. And this was the
reason why he sent his Prophets sometimes even to the heathen, as Ezechiel to
Babylon, and Jonah to Nineveh, and all to show them that all their good came
from him if they feared him, but if they did not, then they should feel his
punishing hand. Secondly, the Lord did this both for their temporal and
eternal good; for the Lord delights in the conversion of sinners; wherefore
he does not only make his Sun to shine upon the good and upon the bad, and
calls them that ways to repentance, but oftentimes by his word and by dreams,
and his other benefits he invited them to repentance. And thirdly, he revealed
himself thus to the heathen for the good of his Church, Psalm. 105.14. He
reproved kings for their sake. And thus he revealed himself in a dream to
Pharaoh and to Nebuchadnezer for the Churches good. So Dan. 2.30. But as for me
this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any
living, but for their sake that shall make the interpretation known to the
King; that is, both for the Jews and the whole Churches cause, who by their
prayers obtained from the Lord to me the interpretation of this dream; so that
the dream and the interpretation of the dream were both given for the
Churches cause. So he revealed himself to Pilats wife in a dream for Christ's
cause. So the Lord sent a Prophet to wicked Ahab, promising him victory against
the Aramites for the comfort of his Church: So Elisha prophesied to Iehoram for
Iosaphats sake, 2 King. 3.14.

Whether Pilates Wife her dream was a divine dream or not?
Quest. What are we to Judge of this dream of Pilates wife?

Answ. This dream came from the Lord to admonish her and her husband Pilate.
Some dreams are from the spirit of God, but not with the spirit of
sanctification, as Pharaoh his dream, and the dream of Pilates Wife.
Secondly, some dreams are both from the spirit, and with the spirit; as
Joseph's dream. Thirdly, some dreams are with the spirit, but not from the
spirit; As a common dream of the child of God, comes not from the spirit of
God, but from the complexion of his body or from the multitude of businesses,
and yet it may be with the spirit of sanctification. Fourthly, some dreams are
neither from the spirit of God, nor with the spirit of God, as diabolical
dreams. How shall we know whether our dreams be of God or not?


Quest. How shall we know whether our dreams be from the Lord or not?

Answ. We must not take them to be from God, because we have often dreamed
them. Secondly, we must not try them by the event, because they fall out as we
have dreamed. For God often tries us this ways Deuteronomy. 13. Neither must we take
them to be from God, because the mind is more settled after the dream, then
before. For Satan can transform himself into an angel of light. But the
dreams which are from God, have some marks to discern them, if so be that
they are from him, for there is some internal instinct, whereby men are
stirred up to enquire what these dreams mean; as Pharaoh did; and it is the
part of the children of God, to pray earnestly to the Lord, to reveal to them,
those things which has been shown to them in a dream, for God opens the
ears of men in a dream, and seals their instruction, that he might
withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man, Job 33.15. God gives
warning to his children, sometimes of those things which are to befall them. Such
was that dream, which Theodosius dreamed, that the Bishop set a Crown upon
his head; when as he never thought of that business before. Theodoret.
ecclesiastica historia. lib. 5. cap. 6.
So that dream of Policarp, who dreamed that the pillow under his head was
burning, which foretold him of his martyrdom.

Of devilish dreams.
The fourth sort of dreams are devilish dreams, when Satan moves men to
superstitious and false things, Ier. 23.25. I hear what those prophets says,
who prophecy in my name, false things; saying, they have dreamed a dream, Ier.
29.8. For thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Let not your
Prophets, nor your Diviners that be in the midst of you, deceive you; neither
hearken to your dreams, which ye cause to be dreamed. Such a deceiver was
Semaiah the Nehelamite, or dreamer, Ier. 29.32. The Poets fained that there
were two gates, by the which dreams went. The one was cornea, and the other
Eburneavia. Homer. odyss. 19.
The one of horn, and the other of Ivory gate. The true dreams went by the
gate of horn. And the false dreams by the Ivory gate. And they say more
dreams passes by the Ivory gate, then by the horn gate. And therefore they
should for the most part not be regarded.

Whether all impure dreams be from the devil or not.
Quest. Whether may all impure dreams, be called diabolical dreams, or not?

Answ. in this sense they may be called diabolical dreams, because they come
from the devil, but they come not all immediately from the devil, for out of
the heart of man, comes murders, and adulteries, Mat. 15.19. There are some
thoughts immissae, and there are thoughts emissae, these which are cast in,
into the heart, come immediately from the devil, but those that come out of the
heart, come but mediately from the devil. And Bernard says well, Est morsus
mentis, and morsus serpentis, and est malum innatum eque ac seminatum, and est
partus cordis preter seminarium hostis. That is, we are bitten with the
corruption of our own heart within, as well as we are bitten with the biting
of the serpent without. And we have inbred evil into us, as well as that
which is sown into us. When Satan put it in the heart of Judas, to betray
Christ, This was tentatio immissa, a tentation cast in by the devil. So when
the devil moved David to number the people, this is immissa tentatio, a
tentation cast into his mind. 2 Samuel 21.1. So when he filled the heart of
Ananias, Act. 3. But when Christ said to Peter, go behind me Satan. This
tentation of Peter, came out of his heart, and was not cast in into his heart.
So impure dreams for the most part come out of the corruption of the heart,
and are not put in into the heart.

Our dreams for the most part are unclean dreams, We had need to pray to
God, to pardon us the impurity of our dreams.
therefore we had need to pray to God to pardon them. And to pray as the Jew
did, Heal them O Lord, heal them, as thou did the waters of Marah, by the
hand of Moses; and the waters of Jericho, by the hand of Elisha. Arba turim.
lib. orach chanic cephillah. 130.
And as thou healedst Miriam from her Leprosy, and Naaman from his Leprosy.

Seeing the devil is so malicious and so crafty, When we are going to rest
then we should especially beg the Lord to save us and to guard us.
that he labors to tempt us in our dreams, when we are a sleep. Our greatest
care should be when we go to sleep, to beg of God, that he would keep us
under the protection of his wings. And to send his Angels to protect us against
all the assaults of the devil, Philip. 4.7. The peace of God which passes all
understanding, keep your hearts, (...) a speech borrowed from Kings, who being
guarded by their guard, are safe from the assaults of their enemies, So we
being guarded by the protection of the Angels, are safe from the tentations of
the devil. Alexander was asked upon a time how it came that he sleeped so
soundly, the enemy being hard by. He answered because Antipater waketh. He
who keeps Israel neither sleeps nor slumbers. Psalm. 141.4. Therefore we may
lie down safely, neither can Satan hurt us at all. We have also gnirim, the
watchful Angels. Dan- 4.10. Pitching their tents about us, and we may be more
secure then Solomon was, who when he went to bed, had 70. valient men to watch
him, Cant. 2.8.

Quest. How shall we know dreams to be from the devil? How we should know
those dreams which are from the devil.


Answ. If they be contrary to the word of God, then they are from the devil.
Such was Semajah his dream contrary to Ieremies prophecy, Ier. 29.32. So if
they move men to filthiness, or uncleanenesse, they are unclean dreams, so
if their dreams be one contrary to another, ye may know they are from the
devil. Catarina Senensis said, that in her sleep it was revealed unto her,
that the Virgin Mary, was conceived in original sin. But Brigitta said, that
it was revealed to her in her sleep, Petrus Laiserius. lib. 4. de spectris.
that she was not conceived in original sin. This contradiction shows that
these dreams was from the devil.

In libro de probatione spirituum.
It is a good observation of Gershon, that men the elder that they grow, they
are the more subject to dreams; so says he, when the world is now fallen into
the doting, and old age, they are the more given to follow dreams and false
illusions then they were before.

Two sorts of trances, divine and diabolical.
Extasis or a trance, was a higher degree of revelation then a dream, and
there were two sorts of them, first, a divine trance, or extasis, secondly, a
diabolical.

A divine trance was this, when as the Servants of God were taken up in spirit,
A divine trance.
separate as it were from the body, and out of the body, that they might see
some heavenly mysteries, revealed unto them, as St. Peter was in such a trance,
when a sheet was let down to him from the heaven, and all clean things, and
unclean things in it, and he was bidden eat of them. But S. John was taken up
in a higher measure, when he was taken up in the spirit upon the Lords day,
Revelat. 4.2. and saw so many heavenly visions, of those things which should
befall to the Church afterward. But S. Paul was in the highest degree of al when
he was taken up into the third heaven, and saw and heard, such things which he
could not utter, and whether he was in the body or out of the body then he
could not know.

Quest. Whether goes the souls out of the body at any time, The souls goes
not out of the body in a trance.
and returns to them again in this mortal Life?

Answ. If the soul be once a glorified soul, It comes never back again to a
sinful body, to dwell in it again, I say to a sinful body, To put a
difference betwixt the glorified souls, which has returned to their bodies
again, and those souls which has not been glorified, and has returned to
their sinful bodies again. The glorified souls, Glorified souls when they
come to the body again, they come to a body without sin.
when they returned to their bodies again, they returned not to those bodies
as sinful and impure bodies, as Moses when he was in the transfiguration, and
those who rose when Christ suffered; their souls came not into impure bodies
again, Those bodies were corpora non pura, Souls not glorified comes to a
sinful body again.
but they were not impura. They were like to our bodies when they lie in the
grave, Corpus purum impurum non purum.
They are not sinful bodies any more, but yet they lie under the consequents
of sin, corruption, and mortality, and they were not to abide in those
bodies, but shortly to return to glory again. But those souls that returned
to their bodies again, and were to abide there, were not glorified souls,
they entered again into sinful bodies, Such as was the soul of Lazarus,
Eutichus, Act. 20.9. and the soul of the widows son of Naum, These souls
came again into sinful bodies, for that hypostaticall union betwixt the soul
and the body, was not perfectly dissolved, as our souls and bodies are
separate by death, neither were the souls glorified then in heaven.

A diabolical trance is that which Witches and Sorcerers falls into when they
lie dead and senseless for a time, and their souls seems for a time to be
out of their bodies, yet this union betwixt the soul and the body is not
dissolved now as they believe, but the act of vivification is only suspended
for a time; Satan cannot bring a soul into a body again as the Lord does. So
Sorodemones or Larvae sepulchrales haunts about the graves, to make men believe
that their ghosts walks here after they be dead.

SECT. 9. Of Lots.
THe Lord who is the righteous judge of the world, Genesis 18.25. and would every
man to enjoy his own, amongst other means he has appointed lots to cause
strife to cease amongst men, Proverbes 16.33.

Quest. But lots are cast into the lap, and moderated by the Lord, Prove.
16.33. then what needs any other means to decide controversies but lots?

A twofold providence of God, a general and a particular.
Answ. There is a twofold providence of God; first, a general providence, and
then a more particular providence; Possessions and inheritance are from the
parents, but an understanding wife is from the Lord, Prove. 19.14. A good wife
is given by the special providence of God, where we may see the ruling hand of
God, more than when he bestows inheritance by his general providence; has
God regard of oxen, 1 Cor. 9.9. that is, he has not this special care of them
as he has of men. The lot was reckoned among the inferior sort of
manifestation of Gods will.
This distribution by lot was reckoned amongst the inferior sorts of
manifestation of Gods will. Therefore when Joshua divided the land by lot,
Josh. 19.51. he divided it in Shilo before the Lord, at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation where Eliazar the Priest was present: They
rested not here in a lot, but they consulted also with the Lord by Eleazar the
Priest concerning this division; Saul's election was by lot, but not David's:
Matthias his election was by lot, but not Saint Paul's; the lot was but an
inferior degree of the manifestation of the will of God, 1 Chro. 23.5. the
Lord speak by lots, Number. 26.56. secundum es sortis, according to the mouth of
the lot, but this was but an inferior determination by his mouth. These lots
were of three sorts, either they served for division, or consultation, Lots
were of three sorts.
or divination: A divisorie lot.
This divisorie lot served for to divide possessions inheritances and goods
amongst men by this divisorie lot, the tribes got their possessions in the land
of Canaan: And others got their possessions by this sort of lot, and therefore
a lot is put for an inheritance, Psalm. 16.5. Psalm. 125.3.

In these divisorie lots these caveats must be looked unto; first, What caveats
must be kept in a divisorie lot.
when lots are cast to divide controversies betwixt men, then they must have
equal right to the things that are to be divided; In Israel if the question
had been amongst brethren for the dividing of their fathers goods, this could
not have been divided by lot, for the eldest should have had a double portion;
and the lot keeps medium rei and non personae, a lot might have been cast for
deciding amongst the rest of the brethren, because they had all alike right to
their fathers goods. When the two Goats were presented before the Lord, Lev.
16.8. (they were just alike in all things) which of them should be killed, and
which of them should escape, here the Lord bids cast a lot for them: So who
should dwell in Jerusalem and who not, Ezr. 2.11. and so the priests service
was by a divisorie lot. Secondly, in these divisorie lots this caveat must be
observed, that the lots be not cast on things unlawfully gotten by robbery (See
Joel 3.3. Naum. 3.10. and Obadiah 11.) or theft; such was the lot that the
soldiers did cast upon the coat of Christ. Thirdly, in these divisorie lots,
men must take heed that this be not their chief end to know the will o God
(for then they are not divisorie lots, but consultory lots) but their chie e
end must be in casting the lots that stri e may cease amongst brethren.

Consultory lots.
The second sort of lots are consultorie lots, when men consults with the Lord
by lots, what should be done in such and such cases. This lot differs much
from a divisorie lot, for a divisorie lot was only about division of
inheritances, and deviding of goods, but a consultory lot was used in higher
matters, as who should live and who should die: Such was the lot which was cast
for the trial of him who had the excommunicate thing, and it fell upon Achan,
Josh 7.18. this was commanded by God himself. This lot observes medium
personae, as the divisorie lot observes medium rei.

Quest. Whether is it lawful now to enquire for a guilty man by lot or not?

Answ. It is not lawful, for Judges now are bound to judge per scrutinium, per
test, by confession and such, and not by lot. But if in a camp all the
soldiers should transgress the kings Edict, and should commit a thing worthy
of death, yet the King willing to show mercy, might he not cause a lot to be
cast to try who should live and who should die, this the king may safely do,
because all are guilty alike here; and so of old they used decimare exercitum
(when all were alike in the transgression) that some might live and some might
die.

When the mariners caused the lot to be cast to try who was guilty in the
ship, this was an extraordinary trial which is not lawful for Judges to
follow.

Quest. Whether may we call this a divine lot or a diabolical lot which they
did cast here for finding out the guilty man? Whether the lot which was cast
for Jonas was a divine lot or not.


Answ. Although the mariners when they did cast the lot, did it not by
inspiration from God, but expected the event from the devil and not from God,
yet the Lord moderate the lot that it fell upon Jonas.

Quest. What are we to think of the lot that fell upon Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.42.
was it a divine lot or not, Whether the lot which fell upon Jonathan was a
divine lot or not,
seeing it fell upon an innocent man?

Answ. It was a divine lot directed by the hand of God, to show how much he
respected an oath, and would not have it violated; and although Saul exacted
this oath rashly of the people; yet he would have it observed as he would have
the oath made to the Gibeonites kept, although it was procured by their deceit,
because his holy name was interposed there.

Object. But Jonathan knew nothing of the oath which the people had made to
Saul, 1 Samuel 14.28. The representative oath binds all, but not a personal
oath.


Answ. When an oath is exacted of a multitude, it binds every one in
particular if it be a representative oath, as we see in the Gibeonites,
therefore many years afterward Saul's sons were hanged for the breach of of
this representative oath. So the Jews took upon them, and bound not only
themselves, but their posterity to keep the feast of Purim, Est. 9 29. So the
Israelites were bound to carry away Joseph's bones out of Egypt, because their
father Jacob had sworn it, Genesis 49.29. So Jonathan was bound for to keep this
representative oath which the people had made, although he was not present when
the oath was made.

Here we may observe first how much the Lord regards an oath. Secondly, how
Princes edicts and commands should be observed, although they seem strict and
hard to us. And thirdly, it is a fearful thing to meddle with things devoted
or anathematized, whether wittingly as Achan did, or ignorantly as Jonathan
did. Secondly, consultorie lots served to decide who were fittest for callings
in the Church, as when Joseph called Barsabas and Mathias stood for the
Apostleship. It was decided by lot; the Apostles calling were immediately from
God, therefore this was decided by lot which was immediately from God.

Why the Apostles at the first were chosen by lot, and why not afterward.
Object. But the rest of the Apostles were not chosen by lot?

Answ. Beda upon the first of the acts gives the reason of that, why Mathias
was chosen by lot, and not the rest, because the holy Ghost was not come down
upon them before the Pentecost, but the seven deacons were chosen afterward,
not by lot, but by consent. The canons has condemned all Ecclesiastical
election by lot; Men are to be admitted neither to Ecclesiastical callings,
nor civil offices by lot. Capite fin. de sortelegis, tit. 21. lib. 5. and can.
non statim.
therefore Zeno the Emperor tempted the Lord in this case, for when the Bishop
of Constantinople died, the Emperor was careful that another should succeed
in his place: And what does he? He caused a write to be laid upon the altar,
having these words written in it, Si quem domine censes dignum hoc ministerio
inscribe nomen ejus in hac charta, Lord write the name of him whom thou
think fit for this Bishopric into this paper; and he caused to shut the
gates of the temple, Neciphorus lib. 16. c. 18.
leaving the paper upon the altar: On Flavitias corrupting the Sexton of the
Church with money, caused him to open the gates of the temple in the night and
went in and wrote his name upon the paper and shut the door again, and so was
chosen Bishop of Constantinople. But men are not to be admitted to any
ecclesiastical calling, but for the fitness of their gifts. This election was
as bad as if it had been by a consultory Lot and worse, and it was a tempting
of God.

So men are now not to be admitted to civil callings by a consultory Lot, but
only for the fitness of their gifts, and by the sole choice of the Prince, or
by the suffrages and voices of the people, as the Athenians gave their voices
of old per Petalismum, by holding up of an Olive branch. So per ostracismum, by
holding up an Oyster shell, when they would have any banished, and sometimes
per (...), by holding up of their hands, but they made not their choice by a
Lot, The reason why they should not be chosen by a Lot is, because Lots are
uncertain and casual.

Object. And if it be said, that Prove. 16.33. The Lot is cast into the lap, but
the disposing thereof is from the Lord.

Answ. When a man has other means to try by, then it is a tempting of God to
use Lots, Solomon wills not men here to use Lots, because they are directed by
the hand of God, but rather he wills this, if men be forced to use a Lot, then
God should be called upon, by earnest prayer, that he would direct the
casuality of the Lot, and moderate it.

Quest. How were the seventy Elders of Israel chosen, Number. 11.26.27? Of the
conceit of the Jews how the 70. elders of Israel were chosen by lot.


Answ. The Hebrews in Pesikta, says that they were chosen by a consultory
Lot, after this manner. That day that God said to Moses, gather me seventy men
of the tribes of Israel. that I may choose of them for to be Elders. Moses
said, how can I do this, If I shall choose six out of every tribe, then there
shall be two more then seventy, and if I shall choose five out of every tribe,
then there shall be ten wanting of the seventy. And if I shall choose six out
of this tribe, and five out of another tribe, that will make but strife amongst
the tribes, what does Moses in such a case, he chooses six out of every tribe,
and brings out seventy two papers, and upon seventy of the papers, he writes
Zaken (Elder) and upon two of the papers, he writes cheleck (part) and he
putting them all in a box, (...)
he says to them, come ye and draw forth your Lots. And he who drew forth
Zaken Elder, Moses said unto him, the Lord has sanctified thee for this
calling, to be an Elder. (...)
but he who drew out cheleck (part,) he said unto him, thou have no part in
this business, Therefore the Hebrews says that Eldad and Medad, were inter
conscriptos, but they were not those which were written, they got cheleck only
(part,) and not Zaken Elder, but this seems to be but a Rabbinicall dream.

A lot for divination, is a diabolical lot.
The last sort of Lots is a Lot for divination, to foretell things to come, and
this lot is diabolical and altogether unlawful. Such was the Lot that Haman
did cast for the subversion of the Jews First, he enquired by Lot what day of
the month was fit for this. And secondly, what month of the year, whether
the second, third, or fourth month. And the Lot showed that the twelfth
month, and the thirteenth day of the month, was the fittest time for this
execution. Here we may observe the great providence of God, who overruled this
Lot, and made it serve for the good of his Church, that he would have the Lot
to fall, neither in the ninth, tenth or eleventh month, but in the twelfth
month, that the Jews might get leisure to gather themselves together to stand
for their lives, and to send letters through all the provinces for the
retreating of those wicked letters, which were given out for murdering of all
the Jews, And most of all they had this leisure granted to them, as Rupertus
says, that they might send to a far country to the heavens, their legates,
their prayers, their fasting, their tears, to cry for help from heaven in
such a distress. Haman did cast purim, in the translation of the 70. the
supplement is, God made two lots, one for his own people, and another for the
wicked; and so the rod of the wicked rested not upon the lot of the righteous,
Psalm. 125.3.

Such a lot of divination was that which Nebuchadnezar used, Ezech. 21.21. when
he stood at the parting of the way at the head of two ways to use divination,
he made his arrows bright, and he consulted with Images, Saint Jerome shows
the way how he divined by his arrows, he wrote upon the arrows the names of
Jerusalem and Rabba; and when he pulled forth the arrow on the which the name
was written, that town he began first to besiege; and because Rabba came forth
first, therefore he began to besiege Rabba first, Cabbhal here signifies
expolire to polish. The Hebrews holds that he made the heads of the arrows
bright and the names Rabba and Jerusalem did appear in them, as in a looking
glass. The Prophet Hosea says consulunt lignum which they applied to this
sort of divination, this they called (...).

SECT. 9. De augurio, or of the divining by souls.
THis divining by fowls the Lord forbids in his Law, (...).
Number. 24.1. Such as Balaam practiced, he went not as at other times to seek
for enchantments; the 70. translate it, (...), id est, (...) augures.
in occursum avibus, that is, to take a divination by the fleeing of the fowls
by their chirping, by their feeding, by their number, and such like: Such was
the diviners amongst the Philistimes, 2 Samuel 6.2.

What things the fowls can foretell.
Although the fowls be not domini actionum suarum, cannot command their own
actions as man does, yet by a secret instinct they can foretell these things
which are agreeable most to their nature as sensitive things, for their bodies
being subject to the influx of the superior elements, and exercised only
about organicke things, therefore by the influx of the superior bodies they
can foretell rain, tempests, and such like, which man cannot do by the
constitution of his body so well, because man's fantasy is carried to more
sublime and high things, for man's sense is not governed by external things, as
the beasts and fowls are. Hence it is that we see that these who are fools
and stupid, who are not so much ruled by reason as by sense, are apter to
divine of natural things than the wise, and they who sleep, rather than they
who walk, because their bodies are not only more affected with these
external changes, but also in these the fantasy is stronger than in wiser
men.

The fowls by a natural instinct and temperature of their bodies foretell
storms to come, and Summer and Winter: We compare things three manner of
ways; first, we compare things singular to make up the universal; How many
ways we compare things.
the fowls cannot do this. Secondly, we compare on thing with another; the
fowls cannot do this. Thirdly, we compare things and time distinctly
together in our mind, I say distinctly, because the fowls confusedly can take
up the times and seasons of the year, but they cannot distinctly discern the
time from the thing it self, as we do: These natural inclinations we may
observe and make use of them.

God has appointed the fowls to teach us, as to learn the time of our
visitation, Ier. 8.7. What we should learn of the fowls.
The Storke in the heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow know the time of their coming, but my people know not
the judgment of the Lord: So the Lord sets down the example of the Storke,
which is called Ghasida, or pity, Levit. 11.19. and (...), because the young
ones feeds the old; so should children learn from these (...), to feed their
old parents, and sometimes by their example, he teaches us, what we should
decline, and shun, Ier. 17.11. as the Partrich sits on eggs, and hatcheth
them not; so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the
midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool, the Partrich many times
sits upon the eggs, which she gathered, but never hatcheth them: So
covetous men enjoyes not the fruit of that which they toil for. Thus far we
have a warrant to make use of the fowls.

Quest. What use are we to make of these fowls which are called inauspicatae
aves, as the Owl, and the Skrich-owle? Esaias 13.21.

An. We may only make this use of them when they dwell in such places which are
desolate, that th^se places carries the mark of Gods wrath upon them, when the
inhabitants of them are spued out for their sins.

But to take up the contingent event of things by them is altogether devilish,
as to mark their number, We must not take up contingent events by the fowls.
their fleeing, eating, or chirping: to foretell contingent things by these,
that the Lord forbiddes altogether, Deuteronomy. 18. and they are joined with Augures
coeli, Esaias 46. Because of the great affinity which was betwixt them; the one
observes the starrie heaven, the other observes the nether region of the
air, and the fowls that flies in it, augures, the 70. translates (...), the
heathen called the fowls nuncios deorum; and first, they observed their
number, as Calcas foretold Agamemnon by the number of the Sparrowes which did
fly before him; how many years the Trojan war should last: So they marked
the crying, and eating of the fowls; If they refused to eat, they took that
for an unluckie sign; so they marked their terrae pavium or trepudium, their
tripping upon the ground. There are signs given from God to man, as the Lord
bade Ioash smite the ground so often, and he should have victory against the
Syrians, so from man to man, as Jonathan his arrow shot to David, and Judas
kiss to the Jews, whomsoever I kiss, Matthew. 26.48. so from the devil to
man; as when they foretell by the flying of the fowls, the events of things,
and things contingent; and so when they called upon the Fly, dominus muscae,
the devil answered them, 2 King. 1.4. There was one sort of divination by the
fowls very strange amongst them; they caused to write twenty four letters in
the ground, and laid a grain of barley upon every letter, and the Magitian
set forth a cock, using certain conjurations in verses, and marking what
grain the cock did pick up, Pecerus page 322.
these letters they joined together; The master of Iamlicus Proclus by this
sort of divination would know who should be Emperor after Valence, and when as
the cock had picked up only the grains of the four letters, (...) it was
uncertain, whether this was Theodosius, Theodotus, Theodorus, or Theodectes;
Valence being uncertain who was meant, caused to put to death many who were
named by these names, fearing that some of them should surprise him in his
Empire, and Iamlicus fearing the Emperors wrath, drank poison and made
himself away.

There was something natural in this action, as for the cock to eat,
something casual, as to pick up such a grain, and something ex instituto
humano, by man's appointment, that the letters being joined together should
signify such a name; and something diabolical, as who should be Emperor.

This kind of divination has been derided by sundry; It is memorable which
is reported by Herateus of Mausellanus, how he mocked these diviners by the
fowls; for when he was traveling toward the red sea with Alexander the
great, Vide Petrum Cunaeum. page
a Diviner seeing a bird sitting by the way, desired the army to stay for a
while, and he should shortly tell them what success they should have in the
war; Mausellanus being skillful in archerie, bends his bow, and killed the
bird, and this way mocked the Diviner, saying, how could this poor bird
foretell what should become of the army, when it could not foretell its own
death: Cato was wont to say, that he marvelled when one of these diviners met
another, that they could abstain from laughing, who so deluded and mocked the
people.

This kind of divination by the fowls, When the divination ceased.
ceased most when the Roman Empire ceased, the Romans were much given to it.

So to divine by the intrales of beasts good or bad success is unlawful,
Ezech. 21.26. To divine by the intrals of beasts is unlawful.
he looked into the liver; this is extispitium: the Priests of the Lord when
they were to sacrifice a beast, they looked first whether it was whole and
sound or not: Secondly, whether it wanted horns and hoofes or not, Psalm.
69.21. if it wanted these, they would not sacrifice it. Thirdly, if it was not
found within, they would not offer it: And lastly, when it was burnt they
observed whether it was wholely burnt to ashes or not, then they took this for
a good sign, therefore David prays, Psalm. 20.3. Remember all the offerings,
and turn thy sacrifice to ashes: So the heathen counterfeiting them, looked to
the intrals of beasts, and to try the events of things contingent by them.

The last sort of divination forbidden is (...) when they asked counsel of the
dead, or did divine by the skull of a dead man's head, (...)
which was called (...), and this the Hebrews calls Begolgola, and by Teraphim;
Elias in Tishbi tells, the manner how these Teraphim were made, they took a
child uncircumcised, whose head they pinched off with their nails, and they
put a little plate of gold under his tongue, and wrote upon the plate the name
of the spirit which they called upon. How many ways this Teraphim is taken in
the Scripture.


This word Teraphim is taken three manner of ways in the Scripture; first,
univoce; for the Teraphimes, which the Magitians used, such was Labans
Teraphim, which he consulted with, Genesis 31.19. Secondly, this word Teraphim is
taken Analogice, for the Idols which the Idolaters worshipped, Judge. 18.14.
These were not like Labans Teraphim, (...)
but by way of analogy, they are called Teraphim, for the worshipping of
idols, is the worshipping of devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. Thirdly, the word Teraphim
is taken aequivoce; Such was the Teraphim which Michol kept in her house, 1 Samuel 19.13. made only to the form of a man; for it is not likely that David,
who had a care to purge his house of all abominations, Psa. 101. would have
suffered his house to have bin polluted with Teraphim, either in the first or
second sense: Theodoret turns it (...) which seems to contain the corpse of
the dead man, and yet the corpse is not there: So this Teraphim was like unto a
man, yet there was nothing within it to resemble a man: This word devil is
taken three ways in the Scripture.
So this word devil is taken three ways in Scripture; first, univoce, as the
devil put it in the heart of Judas, Ioh. 13.2. Secondly, Analogice, Ioh. 6.70.
Judas analogice is called a devil there, And thirdly, aequivoce, when Christ
calls Peter Satan, Math. 16.23.

SECT. 10. Of the power of the devil, what Satan can do by himself, and by
his instruments.
THere is a twofold power, an absolute power, There is an absolute and a
limitate power.
and a limitate power: Gods power is an absolute power, therefore power is put
for God, Matthew. 26.64. At the right hadn of the power, that is, at the right
hand of God; and Satan's power is a limitate power: How Gods power is limitate,
and the devils power is limitate.
God limitates his own power, sometimes ad intra, as Genesis 19.22. he says he
could do nothing while Lot came to Zoa^: God by his absolute power might have
destroyed Lot in Sodom, but by his limitate power he could not, because it
made more for the glory of God to save Lot, then to destroy him; but the devils
power is a limitate power from without, for God who is more strong and mighty
than he, linitates and binds him, and far exceedes the devil in power.

First, God can only create things of nothing, God can only create things of
nothing.
Satan cannot do this; God when by his mighty power he does create,
presupposes nothing to work upon, and his action in creation depends upon no
other thing, for if he presupposed any other thing, then he should not create
absolutely by himself; How God, Nature, and Art works.
This his action must be answerable to his infinite power: Art, when it
works, must have some subject actually to work upon; nature must have some
thing potentially to work upon, but God when he works, needs nothing;
either actually or potentially to work upon. The Serpents which were brought
before Pharaoh by the Magitians, either they were but serpents in show only,
as Tertullian holds when he says, Moses veritas devoravit Magorum mendacia,
or else they were serpents brought there by the slight of the devil, but they
were not serpents newly created. There is as great distance, inter ens, and non
ens, betwixt that which is, and that which is not, as there is inter non ens
and ens, betwixt that which is not, and that which is, but, the devil cannot
change a body which is, unto that which is not at all, he can dissolve a body
into the four elements, but he cannot turn it to nothing, because he cannot
abolish the four elements: and as the devil cannot reduce that which is, to
nothing: so he cannot create a thing and make it of nothing to be some thing.
God only then, who is the cause of causes can create: There is in all the
elements some seeds or seminary virtues, and when fit time and opportunity
serves, they show themselves in their own kinds: Now when the devil draws
forth these, he cannot be said to be the creator of them, no more than the
husband man, who although he observe the fit times and occasions of sowing the
corn that it may grow, yet he cannot be called the creator of the corn; so
neither can the devil be called the creator, when he draws out any thing out
of the elements which is virtually in them.

God only can change one substance into another.
So God likewise by his power can only change the substances of things, as he
changed Lots wife into a pillar of salt, Genesis 19. and water into wine, Ioh. 2.
God only can change one essence into another, but he cannot change one
substance into another, so long as the form and substance of the first
indureth: Therefore the devil when he would take a proof of Christ, whether
he were God or not; he bids him change stones into bread, Matthew. 4. Satan may
delude our senses, and show us counterfeit shows for true, but he cannot
change one substance into another; S. Augustine lib. 18. de civitate Dei.
therefore Saint Augustine proves well, that Iphyginia was not turned into a
hare, neither was the companions of Diomedes turned into fowls; As Satan would
have had the people believe.

God only can work miracles, Psalm. 135. God only can work miracles.
Thou Lord only works mavelous things: Satan cannot work a miracle, for a
part of nature cannot exceed nature; Satan is but a part of nature, and a
miracle is above nature: Therefore Satan cannot work a miracle, and quod est
totaliter sub-ordine constitutum, non potest ultra istius Ns. ^rae ordinem
agere, Mira operatur Satan, sed non miracula, and the Angel did wonderouslie,
Judge. 13.19. So satan can do wonders, but no miracles.

There are Three sorts of miracles, Miracles are of three sorts.
Miracles in the highest degree, and Miracles in the second degree, and
miracles in the lowest degree.

Miracles in the highest degree are these in which nature had never a hand, nor
never could have, Miracles in the highest degree.
as to make the Sun stand still in the firmament, or to go back so many
degrees.

Miracles in the second degree, are those, Miracles in the second degree.
when nature had once a hand in producing of such things, But when they fail,
nature cannot help them again: Example, nature brings forth a man seeing,
but when he becomes blind, nature cannot restore him to his sight again: And
therefore when Christ restored the blind to their sight, it was a miracle in
the second degree. Miracles in the lowest degree.
A Miracle in the third degree is this, when nature in time could do such a
thing, but when it is done in an instant, then it is a miracle in the third
degree. When Peter's Mother in Law was sick of a fever, Mat. 8.13. nature in
time could have evicted this malignant humor, and cured her, but because upon
a sudden Christ cured her of this fever, therefore it was a miracle in the
third degree* So when Ezekias lay sick, God bids lay a l^^pe of figs to the
sore: figs in time would have matured the boil, but Ezechias being cured in
a sudden by the Lord, this was a miracle in the third degree.

The Devil cannot work miracles in the highest degree: Therefore it is false
which they write of the witches of Thessalie, that they could stay the course
of the Sun by their enchantments, and bring the Moon out of the firmament.

Satan can work no miracles in the second degree* Christ proved himself to be
the Savior of the world by this, because he restored sight to the blin^* and
the lame to their limbs, and the deaf to their hearing, and cleansed the
Lepers, Mat. 11.5. But Satan cannot restore sight to the blind, John 10.21.
Can a devil open the eyes of the blind.

Satan can work no miracles in the third degree; Such as was the curing of
Peter's Mother in Law upon a sudden; Satan has more skill then a Physician has
to give sovereign physic to a Patient, and so to cure him the sooner; but
this he cannot do upon an instant as Christ did.

The Hebrews marks a twofold work of God, opus Beresheth, A twofold work of
God opus beresheth and opus Merkebha.

(...)


and opus Merkebha; They call gods ordinary working in nature, opus Beresheth,
from the first words of Genesis; They call Gods miraculous works, opus
Merkebha, from Ezekiels chariot, Eze. 1.^

God in ruling natural causes he rules from the highest to the Lowest, and
from the top of the Lather to the foot, When God works in natural causes he
rules from the highest to the lowest.
Hos. 2.21. I will hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth,
the earth shall hear the corn, and the corn and the wine, shall hear
Iezreell. Here God rules from the highest to the lowest.

Some of the Schoolmen maintained that God touched only the first cause, the
Heavens, and the Heavens sent down the influence to the earth, and so to the
rest: As when the crimp fish touches the fishers hook, It sends a benummednes
to the hook, and the hook transmitts it to the line, and the line to the
goad, and the goad sends it to the fishers arm: Here the crimpe fish works
not immediately upon all these, but only upon the hook: but God does not
work so upon these subordinate causes, but is immediately with every one of
them.

Quest. Whether then does God concur as a mediate or immediate cause with
every effect. Whether God concurres as a mediat or in immediate cause with
every effects.


Ans. That is called a remote cause which is farthest distant from the effect,
and which touches not immediately the effect by the virtue of it: God is
called a remote and mediate cause if ye will respect the order of causes; as
he is nearer to the Heavens then to the corn or Iezreell: But if ye will
consider distance from the effect* If we respect the causes God works
mediately, but if ye respect his blessing he works immediately.
by his virtue, God is immediately with every offect.

But here we must take heed that we say not as some say, The sun shines
not, but God in the sun, the fire burns not, but God in the fire, for then
we should ascribe many things to God which should be unworthy to be spoken of
him, and we should take away the subordination of causes.

But when Satan works, he never works immediately, but by some second
cause, but when God works, Satan never works immediately.
sometimes he works nullo mediante supposito, no means intervening, as when
Christ cured the woman of the bloody flux by virtue which went out of him, Mar.
5.30. Sometims again he works mediante supposito and immedietate virtutis,
that is by a mean which intervenes immediately by his power, as when he feeds
us with bread, when we look that all the virtue is in God, then we say that
man lives not by bread only, but by every word that comes out of the mouth
of God, Mat. 4.4. but when we look to the bread, as to a second cause,
feeding us, then we say, that bread strengthens man, Psalm. 104.15. and wine
cheares his heart.

God only works from the highest cause to the lowest, It is he only that
sends rain, Acts 14.17. He left not himself without witness, in that he did
good, and gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons* It is he who gives
the first and the latter rain, and it is he that can hasten the rain, 2
Kings 18.44. And it is he that can send a general rain to destroy the
world; but Satan can do none of these, for Satan's power goes no higher then
the air: He is called the Prince of the air, and can raise storms in the
air, hail, and fire, and so can the Witches at Gods permission. He can
applicare hic activa passivis, as we, (when we make powder) use to put
brimstone and saltpeter together: So can Satan raise storms by applying
contraries one to another, but he cannot bring down fire from Heaven as Elias
did, 2 King. 1.10.

Quest. Seeing Satan works only by natural causes, by touch and influx* how is
it said that the evil eye of the Witch does bewitch, How does the evil eye of
the witch bewitch?
Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galathians who has bewitched you: (...), here is properly
spoken of those who bewitcheth by the eye?

Ans. It is not the eye here which does the hurt, but Satan; As he hurts
sometime under the pretext of the enchanting word, so here he hurts under the
pretext of the eye, and makes the witch believe, that it is her eye which
hurts, when as it is satan in the mean time, who does the hurt.

What are we to judge when a murderer is brought before a dead corpse and
bleedes.
Quest. What are we to think of that sort of trial; when a man is killed and
the murderer is not known, if the murderer come before the dead man, the
corpse bleedes* Here there is neither a physical touch nor a natural cause*
and God works not miraculously now?

Answ. Some hold, as there is a secret antipathie betwixt some living
creatures, as the Elephant, when he is mad, beholding a lamb becomes tame;
and the Lion is afraid of the cock, so there may be an antipathie betwixt the
living and the dead, and the blood is moved when the murderer is presented
before it; but this seems to carry but little reason with it, when a man was
killed in Israel and no man knew who had murdered him, If this trial had
been a lawful trial, why would not the Lord have set it down for the
discovery of the murderer? Vide Lessium. page 384
Iun^^^ writing upon this place hold^ this trial altogether to be unlawful.

God when he works upon the subordinate causes, he works ordinarily (...),
according to nature, and sometimes (...), pra^^r n^tur^m, as when he directs
the creature another way, then their natural instinct would carry them, as
when the kin^ of the Phylistines were yoked in a cart, 1 Samuel 6.7. they carried
straight, (leaving their calves) the arc to Bethsh^^^sh: So when the Raven
brought daily flesh to Eliah, This was pr^ter naturam, besides nature; for the
Raven is cruel to her own young ones, and will scarcely feed them, see Job
48.41.

Satan cannot move the creatures against their proper instinct, to do any
thing, but he may hinder their natural instinct by some natural means, by an
antipathie. Plutarch in Sympor.
The wild bull if he be tied to the figg tree it calmes him: The devil by
such means can hinder the creatures.

God never works contrary to natural means, God never works contrary to
the superior course of nature.
for the God of nature is never contrary to nature; And although the Lord
sometimes seems to be contrary to the second institution of nature, yet he is
never contrary to the first institution of nature* This is the supreme course
of nature, that all things should obey the first cause, and God never works
contrary to this first institution of nature. I will clear this by this
similitude. The inferior course of nature appoints every heavy thing to go
to the center, yet lest there be any vacuum in rerum natura, an emptiness in
nature, the superior course of nature draws heavy things upward to supply
this emptienes: Others expresses the matter thus. There is a common nature,
and a particular nature, and the particular gives way to the common: the water
by its own proper course runs down, but by the common course; the water of
the sea flows and ebbes, and this it has from the common course; Satan cannot
stop the inferior course of nature, farlesse the superior course of nature.

Gods miraculous sorts of working.
Gods second manner of working is opus Merkebha, when he works miraculously;
God in working of his miracles uses instruments, but it is he alone who wroght
the miracles; When God works his miracles by instruments, it is he only who
does the work.
he co^municateth not this his power with any, when the dead man was cast into
the grave of Elisha, and touched his bones. 2 King. 13.21. there was no power
in the dead bones to quicken the man again; so there was no power in the
apostles girdle, or shadow, to cure diseases, neither into the Apostles
themselves was this power, they were moral means here, but they were not
Physical causes, they prayed to God, and told that all was done in his name;
but there natural skill helped nothing here in producing the effect. So John
5.4. when the Angel stirred the waters, and they that stepped in first were
healed, the power was neither in the Angel here to heal, nor in the water
when it was stirred: When the Physician stirs his potion, here he uses his
skill, and there is a natural power in the potion; but when the Angel stirred
the water, it was neither the skill of the Angel, nor the power of the water
that healed the sick person. The Lord communicates not his power, no not with
the humanity of Christ: Christ as man did not work these miracles: Christ as
man wrought not miracles.
The fathers disputing against the Arrians, and Nestorians shows us this:
Gregory Nyssen writing against Eunomius says, Non vivificat Lazarum
humanitas, nec deflet in latibulis jacentem potentia* The humanity raised not
Lazarus, neither did the divinity weep for him. God then did not communicate
this his power of working miracles to any creature.

Ob. If it be said Mark 16.20. that the Apostles did (...), with Christ in
working of the miracles, How the Apostles are said to (...) with Christ. A
difference between Christ's working of miracles and the Apostles.
then they might seem to be coworking causes with Christ in the miracles.

Answ. this is only spoken in respect of the end, when as God only did work
the miracle; so men are said to help God, Judge. 5.23.

Christ in working of his miracles, differed far from the Apostles and
Prophets, when they wrought the miracles.

When Christ wrought his miracles, he wrought far greater works then any other
could do, Ioh. 15.24. If I had not done amongst them the works which no other
man did, they had not had sin, which saying is to be understood; If he had
not wrought mo e miracles, greater miracles, and more frequent, Mark. 1.32.
they brought unto him all that were diseased, Mat. 15.30. they brought to him
those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and they cast
them at Jesus feet, and he healed them; but when the Apostles and Prophets
cured the diseases, the virtue went not from them, as it did from Christ, Mar.
5.30. they ascribed never this virtue to themselves, but reserved the honor to
Christ, Luke 10.17. as Ioab reserved the honor to David, when he was about to
take the cit^e of Rabbah, 2 Samuel 12.28. Secondly, they could not cure when and
where they pleased, as Christ could, as Saint Paul left Trophimus sick at
Miletum, 2 Timothy 4.20. Thirdly Christ's miracles were greater then theirs, yea
when they wrought one and the self same miracle: Peter cured Aneas who was
eight years sick of a Palsy* Acts. 9.33. but Christ healed a man who was
thirty eight years impotent. John 5.5. So Peter raised up Dorcas who was
newly dead, Act. 9.37. But Christ raised Lazarus when he had layne four days
dead in the grave, John 11. Fourthly, Christ cured (...). the imfirmities of
the stomach by miracle, Mat. 5.23. But Saint Paul used only the ordinary
remedy to cure this disease in Timothy, drink a little wine for the
weakness of thy stomach, 1 Timothy 5.23. Miraculous works far exceed the
works of Nature, as the sight restored to the blind by Christ, far exceeded
the ordinary sight, and the wine miraculous in the Marriage of Cana, far
exceeded the natural wine. So Christ cure here exceeded far Saint Paul's.
Lastly, none of the Apostles confirmed themselves to be the messiah by their
miracles, as Christ did Mat. 9. that ye may know that the son of man has
power to remit sins, I say unto thee, take up thy bed, Mat. 9.

The witch is concausa into the work, and not causa sine qua non.
But when the devil works by witches and sorcerers, he works by them as by
coworking causes, They are not causae sine quibus non, for Causa sine qua non,
is not reckoned amongst causes, neither by the divines nor by the Philosophers;
for that is properly called a cause which concurres to the producing of the
effect. When a man sets fire to a house, the setting of the fire to the house,
is not the cause why the house burns, but it is causa sine qua non: So when I
open the window that I may see the light; the opening of the window is but
causa sine qua non, that I see the light; when Satan uses the witch in his
malicious and devilish enchantments, the witch is not causa sine qua non here,
but she is concausa, and helps all that she can to the destruction of the
creature.

The miracles which the Apostles wrought differed far from the miracles which
Satan wrought, which was not miracles indeed, but had a show of miracles, and
therefore they are called lying wonders; And first, they are lying wonders,
ratione causae, The difference betwixt the miracles of the Apostles and the
miracles of Satan.
as proceeding from the devil who is the father of lies. Secondly, ratione
formae, in the manner of their working, they are but delusions. And thirdly, in
respect of the end, for they serve only to confirm lies, 2 These. 2.9. But the
Apostles miracles were true miracles wrought by the spirit of God, they were no
delusions, when Aeneas was healed, he arose presently, and made his bed; and
all that were at Lydea and Saron saw it, Act. 9.35. So when Peter's mother in
law was healed of a fever, she arose and ministered to Christ, Mark 1.31. and
as many as he touched were made perfectly whole, Matthew. 14.36. Lastly, in
respect of the end, the Lord cured their bodies, to make way for the curing of
their souls, as Mar. 2.5. when he had cured the man of the palsy, he said
unto him, Thy sins are forgiven thee. So Ioh. 5.14. when he cured the man of
the palsy, he said unto him, Sin no more least a worse thing come unto thee;
But Elimas the sorcerer sought to turn away Sergius Paulus the deputy from
the faith, Act. 13.8. The Apostles ascribed all the power to God; but sorcerers
and witches, ascribe the power to themselves, Simon Magus said, he was the
great power of God, Act. 8. So the witches will have the sick to believe in
them, and that they have power to heal or to hurt (as they say) otherwise,
they can do them no good?

Quest. Whether can the devil do more with the help of the witch, than he
can do himself alone. Wherefore the devil can do more by the help of the
Witches than he can do alone.
Answ. Some holds that he can do more by the service of the witch, than he
can do alone, Mirum est (inquit) and mysterium, Fransciscus de victoria rel.
1. de art magica sub finem.
quod cum daemones nocere per se non permittantur, tamen, non adeo impediuntur
nocere per homines, ut magos, lainas, and alias maleficas; It is a strange
thing (says he) and a great mystery, seeing the devils oftentimes are
hindered to work by themselves, yet notwithstanding they are not so hindered
to hurt by men, as by sorcerers and by witches; and oftentimes he says, the
devil cannot work, unless the malice of man concur to the helping forward
of his devilish practice. God himself says, I was angry with my people,
Zach. 1.15. but ye helped forward mine anger; much more may we say, that the
witches with their malice helps forward the malice of the devil, and makes
the fire to kindle the faster; for the devil is but a finite creature, and his
power is not infinite; therefore the more that concurres to help him forward
his work is the more.

Let us compare Art, the Devil, nature, and God together; A comparison betwixt
Art, Nature, the Devil, and God.
Art can do strange things, yet it does only imitate nature: Architas
Tarentinus made a Dove so cunningly, that he mnde it fly in the air, as if
it had been a living dove; and the Egyptians made their gods so cunningly, that
they seemed to laugh, to smile, and to frown: And Xeuxes painted grapes so
vively, that he made the birds come and fly upon them: Vide Cael^um page 54.
and Apelles painted a horse so vively, that he made the horses passing by, to
ney, and the dogs so vively, that he made the dogs passing by to bark,
when they saw the painted dog: but Archimedes surpassed all, he made a heaven
of brass so curiously, that one might have seen in it the seven planets, and
all the motions: but the devil can far exceed Art; and all the skill of
man, yet the secrets of nature can far exceed Art or the Devil: The stone
Carystius of old erat (...) sive netelis, Caelium page 305.
fit to be spun as wool or flax, and they made napkins of it; which when they
were unclcane, they cast into the fire, and then they became as white as they
were before, and yet the fire burnt them not: when the Romans burnt the bodies
of the dead to ashes; Regum funera in ejusmodi adurebantur tunicis ne corporis
favilla came reliquo miscer^tur cinere Plin. l. 19. cap. 1. and ha^mortu^les
vocabant quib^s cadavera induebantur.
how preserved they the ashes of the burnt bodies, from the ashes of the wood
which burnt the bodies? they had this sort of linnin which they called
Asbestinum, which they did wrap the bodies into, which cloth burnt not, but
transmitted the fire to the bodies, and preserved the ashes of the bodies by
themselves; this was a great force in nature; so the hair of the Salmander
cast into the fire will not burn, but when the hairs of Servius Lucullus were
cast into the fire, the devil could not preserve them from burning, without
some natural means: and here nature exceedes Satan far, but God the chief
and supreme cause far exceeds Art, Satan, and Nature: When the three
children were cast into the fire, by faith they quenched the flames of it, Heb.
11.34. and their bodies were not burnt which were combustable in themselves,
neither was there any means to hinder the fire not to burn them, but only
Gods power: So the bush burnt but consumed not, Exodus 3.3. by this power of God*

There is conjunctum instrumentum, and remotum instrumentum: When the Physician
cures by physic, The devil can exceed remotum instrumentum the physician,
but not conunctum instrumentum the Physic.
the physic is conjunctum instrumentum of the cure, and the Physician is
only remotum instrumeneum of the cure: Satan cannot cure as the physic does,
yet he can far exceed the Physician.

Now follows to show how Satan can work in a body and upon our bodies.

When Satan takes a body upon him, the spirit here is not united to this body;
to make up one person with it, How Satan works in a body, and upon a body.
and to dwell in it, as our souls does in our bodies. Secondly, this spirit is
not united to this body, ut forma informans, which is tota in toto, and tota in
qualibet part corporis, which is all in the whole body, and all in every part
of the body; but he is there only ut forma assistens, Cum angelus sit completa
substantia and integra non est alterius rei pars substantialis non, igitur est,
forma in formans quia effectus causae formalis sine causa formali fieri non
potest, corpus autem informanre est effectus causae informan^is, ergo non poest
fieri ab angelo qui naturae sua est substantia, completa non forma informans
and naturae unita non sunt hic analogae.
he moves and directs that body only, but he informs not that body, he is
but in that body, as a Pilate is in the ship, or the Coachman in the coach.
We have three sort of spirits, Animales, Vitales, and Naturales; Our animal
spirits come from the brain, as to move, to see, and to hear; our vital
spirits from the heart, as our breathing, beating of the pulse, and such like;
our natural spirits proceed from the liver, as our concoction, degestion,
generation, and such like: Satan has these, secundum substantiam actionis, but
not secundum modum actionis, because they proceed not, a principio vi^ente and
informante: so he can lie with a woman, as these Incubi does, but he cannot
beget a child, because he has not this principium vivens; and if artificial
things, can give a sound, and be made to move, to laugh and to smile, what
marvel is it, that the devil can do such things in a body, which comes a
principio communi; these are common to things without life, and when the devil
eats, assuming a body, his meat is not turned into blood, nor nourishes his
body, this meat is resolved but into the air again, as the Sun resolves the
vapoures of the earth into air again, and converts them not into it self:
Thomas 1. part. questione 51. art. 2. ad. 5.
So Christ after his resurrection did eat, yet that meat did not nourish his
body, but was resolved into the air; so their meat which they eat, Angelorum
species servatur in singulis individuis, ut species solis and lunae, sed
hominum species servatur in multis and ob corruptionem singulorum similium
compensant generatione.
was not turned into seed for generation and preservation of their kind, f^r
they are immortal spirits and beget not; daemones nullam habent individi, vel
speciei mulciplicationem.

The Philosopher marks that three things concur ingeneration. The common cause,
the proper cause, and the material cause; the common cause is the heaven; Sol
and homo generant hominem, the proper cause is the father who begets, begets,
and the material cause is the seed. Satan cannot be called the father of the
child as the proper cause; for every thing that is begotten, is either begotten
a simili genere, or a simili specie: a simile genere, Satan cannot be called
the proper cause of generation.
as the Mule which is begotten betwixt the horse and the ass; a simili specie,
as a child begotten by a man, but if Satan could beget a child, he should
neither be a simili genere, nec a simili specie; for Satan is a spirit, and
has but an assumed body; but the child has a body that is begotten of the
father; and therefore our fathers are called the fathers of our flesh, Heb.
12.9. This is proper to a natural father; and Satan cannot be called a father
in this sense; If Satan could beget a child, then this child were bound to
honor his father, but no creature is bound to honor the devil; Satan
cannont be called the material cause of generation.
neither is there any material cause of generation here; for all generation is
(...), Heb 11. ex commixtione seminum, Ier. 31.27. I will sow the house of
Israel, and the house of Judah, with the seed of men; but Satan has no seed.

The Scripture acknowledges only two sorts of conception, first, Two sorts of
conception only spoken of in the Scripture.
when a woman conceives by her husband, this is natural generation (...), that
is borne of a woman, and begotten of a man; and the second was that miraculous
conception of the manhood of Christ in the womb of the Virgin Mary, conceived
by the holy Ghost: Another kind of conception the Scripture acknowledges not.

Object. But they say that Satan may steal the seed of a man, and that will
be a fit matter for generation. The devils seed is not a fit matter of
generation.


Answ. How can Satan keep in the vital spirits in the seed, when it is not
in the proper place of generation? If a man's blood be let out of his veins,
can Satan keep in the vital spirits in the blood, when it is out of the
vessels of it, the devil when he lies with a witch his nature is cold, as they
confess, therefore his seed is not a fit matter for generation, and is the
mother able to nourish such a conception nine months in her belly?

Object. And if it be said that the devil has begotten a child upon a woman,
as Merling.

Answ. If there was such a one as Merling, the devil beget him not by
generation; but it is more probable, which Serarius holds, writing upon Tobias,
that Satan can first make a woman's belly to swell, as though she were with
child: Secondly, in the time of her delivery, when she appears to be
delivered, Satan can by slight present a child, and make the people believe
that the woman has brought forth this child, as he brought serpents, and
laid them before Pharaoh, making him believe that they were newly created
serpents, and the devil bringing the matter thus far to pass, then some
evil spirit takes a body upon him; and that body he directs and guides, non ut
forma informans, sedut forma assistens, and he does strange things in this body.

Many of old were deceived by this, thinking that Satan lay with women, and
begat children, and they misapplied that place of Genesis 6.2. The sons of God
saw the daughters of men fair, and they went in to them, and begat giants upon
them: and the Poets from thence fabuled also, that Hercules was the son of
Jupiter, and his mother was Thetis the goddess of the water; and Alexander the
son of Jupiter Hammon.

Now let us consider what Satan can do upon the body of man, What Satan can
do upon the bodies of men.
and upon the soul when it is in the boby, and upon the soul when it is out
of the body

First, upon the body, he can transport the bodies of men out of one place to
another, Satan transports bodies.
and he can strike the body with diverse diseases.

He can transport the bodies; Transportation is two-old imaginary and real.
transportation is twofold, first, imaginary transportation; and then real.
Imaginary transportation is, when one is only transported in mind. When
Jeremy was in Jerusalem, he was bidden go, and hide his girdle at Euphrates
in Babylon, Ier. 13.4. this was but an Imaginary transportation. So when the
Lord carried Ezekiel from Babylon to Jerusalem, that he might see there the vile
abominations, and Idolatry, which they were committing in the temple of
Jerusalem, Ezech. 8.1. this was an imaginary transportation, and not a real.

A real transportation is this, when a man is locally removed from one place
to another, by a good spirit or by a bad: by a good spirit, as when the Angel
transported Philip to Azotus, Act. 8.40. and 1 King. 18.12. When I am gone from
thee, the spirit shall carry thee to some place that I do not know: by a bad
spirit; as the devil transported Christ out of the wilderness, to the pinnacle
of the temple, Matthew. 4. And in this sort of transportation, this is to be
observed, that Satan in an instant cannot transport a body out of one place to
another, Psalm. 14.4. Non de ventis sed de Christo loquitur propter a^tic ulum
gracum qui affigi solet subjecto, non praedicato.
the spirits of themselves flies nimbly as the winds does, Psalm. 18. compared
with Heb. 1.7. shows this. And as the lightning goes from the East to the
West in a sudden, so does the spirits quickly: but when they carry bodies,
they must fit themselves to the condition of the bodies, for bodies cannot be
carried but more slowly, by reason of their weight and heaviness; How Satan
applies himself to the condition of the bodies when he transports them.
and so the spirits must f^t themselves to their condition, and carry them the
more slowly: so when the Angel wrestled with Jacob, he fitted his strength to
Jacobs strength. The fire upon a sudden flies, yet in green wood we see it
burns but slowly; so Satan must but slowly move the bodies when he transports
them.

There are many who denies such transportation of witches from place to place;
Those who denies real transportation are injurous both to Ecclesiastical
Iudicatories and civil.
and they hold that it is only an Imaginary transportation, and that Satan
only represents to their fantasies such imaginations: but this opinion is
most false, and hurtful to the common wealth, and it is contrary to
experience, and innumerable, examples of those who have been really
transported: and then it is contrary to reason, for what lets, but that one
evil angel may transport bodies from one place to another, as well as good
Angels may do; when as the evil angels have lost nothing by their fall,
either of their strength or nimblenesse. And this opinion of theirs, is
contrary both to the Judgment of the Church and the commonwealth, and it
favors to much this horrible and great sin, that it is not punished
condignely as it deserves; for the Judges who are of this mind, either they
punish not the witches at all, or else but lightly, sparing their lives, and so
they spare those, whom the Law of God commands to be taken away. And this
opinion brings a blot upon Christian Iudicatories, both Ecclesiastical, and
civil, accusing them both of ignorance and rashness, as though they could not
discern what were done indeed, and what by imagination, and to accuse them of
cruelty and injustice, as though they should condemn harmless and innocent
persons to death for such things, which they never committed, but only being
deluded by Satan, they seem only to have done such things, yet in judging of
other crimes, there we presume there is no delusion, when they have the guilty
persons confessing their faults, if they be in their right wits, and stand to
their confessions made before. Moreover, these also may be put to death, who
are deluded by Satan in their sleep, for when they were awake they made the
covenant with the devil, as also because they desire most earnestly these
things to be done, which they seem to do in their dreams: and they are most
glad when they see these things performed.

Secondly, Satan can strike the bodies of men with diverse diseases
the devil can strike the bodies of men with diverse diseases; he can strike
them both vitijs creationis, and vitijs accidentis. Vitia creationis are such,
which men have from their conception; as to be crook backed. So with such
diseases as befall men after they are borne, which are called vitia accidentis:
so he struck Job with botches and boyles: so he bowed down a daughter of
Abraham's eighteen years, and we read in the Gospel of a dumb devil, Mat.
8.23. So of a deaf devil, Mar. 9.25. and of a blind devil Matt. 12.22. He
may hurt all the senses and the tongue.

Here we must put a difference between the hurting of the good Angels and the
bad. How the good Angels differ from the badde Angels in hurting.
The good Angels does hurt the wicked and preserves the godly: the good Angels
were sent to Egypt to kill the Egyptians, but to save the Israelites: but the
evil Angels do hurt the godly as the devil hurt the body of Job, and the
Angel of satan buffeted Saint Paul.

Ob. But it may be said that David called the Angels who hurt the Egyptians
evil Angels, Psalm. 78.49. and he sent evil Angels amongst them.

Ans. We must put a difference betwixt Angelus mali, (...) Angelus mali in
regimine, They were Angels of evil, but not evil Angels, who smote the
Egyptians, and saved the Israelites
and angelus malus; they were Angels of evil, but not evil Angels, they were
Angels of evil, because they inflicted punishments upon the Egyptians, but
they were good Angels protecting, and sparing the Israelites.

Quest. What Angel was that which buffeted Saint Paul?

Answ. Some hold that it was concupiscence and lust, against the which Saint
Paul strove. Others hold, that it was some great enemy of Saint Paul's; such as
was Alexander the Coper-smith: And some that it was a disease in his body which
vexed him; But it seems more probable, that Saint Paul was beaten and buffeted
by some Angel of the Devil: for Saint Paul describes here such a sort of
affliction, that might diminish something of that pride, and high conceit which
he had with the many revelations made unto him by God. This prick was given
him in the flesh, to diminish those high conceits. Now neither the calumnies of
the adversaries nor the diseases of the body were fit to do this; and least of
all concupiscence was fit to diminish those high conceits, for one vice cannot
be cured by another: S. Paul glories in this infirmity; therefore it was not a
vice, and if there was such a power granted to the devil over the body of
Christ, that he might transport it here and there; why might not the devil
have power over the body of Saint Paul to buffet it, seeing he had such power
over the body of Job, to strike it with botches and sores.

Quest. How are those diseases which are sent from God, discerned from those
which proceed from the Devil or from natural causes? How we are to discern
those diseases that come from God, from those that come from the Devil and
from natural causes.


Answ. It is more easy to discern those which are sent from God, then those
which are from the Devil at Gods permission. When diseases are sent upon men
in the very time of their sinning, then we may think that the disease
proceeds from no natural cause, 2 Cron. 26.19. When Vzziah had his censer in
his hand, to offer incense, and was stricken with a Leprosy in the mean time;
there was nothing natural in this Leprosy. So when the Kings hand dried up
upon a sudden; when he stretched it out to take the Prophet; this was a
punishment inflicted immediately from God. So we may know by the long
indurance of the plague, that it is from God; As when the Jews carried the
Leprosy out of Egypt with them to the Desert, and to Canan, it might be known
also by the color that it was not natural; sometimes it appeared red, Levit.
14.36. sometimes half red, sometimes green; and sometimes in the flesh of
man, and in their clothes, and in the walls of their houses. This variety of
colors shows that it has been from God immediately. Last it was remitted to
the Priest to try this disease, and not to the Physicians: which argues that it
was sent from God, and not from nature. So when he smote the Egyptians in their
hinder parts to their perpetual shame, Psalm. 78.66. this disease came not from
nature, but immediately from God. But sometimes the Lord inflicts a disease
which proceeds from a natural cause; As when he smote Iehoram with an
incurable disease in his bowels, 2 Cron. 21.18. This disease the Physicians
call Diarrhaea, when the Liver and the Lungues rottes, and are disolved piece
and piece, and so are evacuate: This disease had a natural cause, and a
moral; Valesius de sacrae. Phil. page 238.
The natural cause of it was evil diet, which corrupted both the Liver and
the Lungues: therefore the text says, his bowels fell out, by reason of the
sickness day by day, for this disease piece and piece consumes the Liver and
the Lungues, and ver. 19. it was two years before he died of this disease. The
Moral cause of his disease was this, because he made Judah to go a whoring
after Idols, ver. 13. if he had not committed those sins he had not so erred
in his diet, neither would it have hurt him so (for it is the Lord that wounds
and the Lord that heales.) Gods will is the first cause preceding all other
causes, yet it takes not away natural and subordinate causes.

But those diseases which are inflicted by satan, at the permission of God, it
is hard to know them. All the Physicians could not tell what it was that bowed
down the daughter of Abraham eighteen years, Luke 13.11. Therefore in such
cases, when the diseases are not known whence they proceed, we should ever
look up to the first cause: When Job was robbed of his goods by the
Chaldaeans, he looked up to the first cause, and he said, the Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken; So no doubt when satan struck him with such sores, he
said, The Lord wounds, and the Lord heals: people commonly when they are
stricken with some diseases they say, some witch has done this, but they never
look up to the first cause, the hand of God, but the greatest witch that
bewitches them is their own infidelity.

The Jews marks two sorts of spirits which hurts men. (...)
The Jews for the most part ascribes all sudden diseases to evil spirits, and
they make two sorts of spirits, one sort that killes in the night; And this
they call Debher; And another which killes in the day time, and this they call
Ketebh: and all the ground which they have for this is that which they take out
of Psalm. 91.6. he will deliver thee from the pestilence which walks in the
darkness, and from the destruction which wastes in the day time; And the
Targum following the Jews opinion Paraphraseth it thus. A caetu daemonum
perdentium in meridie, that is, from the company of the devils who destroys
in the noonetyme of the day; and the 70. translates i^, (...), and daemonio
meridiano; that is, from a devil that flies in the day time.

As Satan can hurt the bodies of men, so he can hurt the soul, Satan can hurt
the soul when it is in the body.

To strike the soul with madness.


when it is in the body; as the evil spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, and
struck him with madness and this is called (...) and opposite to this is, (...)
Mar. 5.15.

So he can strike the heart with blindness, and hardness; but for the will
of man it is moved by no external cause, but only by God himself: The Lord
persuaded Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27. It is the Lord only
who can peswade the will: Satan cannot persuade the will, God only does this.
satan propounds and suggests tentations to the will, but cannot enforce the
will. Hence it follows that the devil cannot be said to be the cause of
sin, directly moving the will, as God moves the will to good: the will is a
free working cause, and determinates it self to sin: therefore the Devil
cannot necessitate the will to sin, unless the will give its own consent,
non cogendo, sed suadendo nocet, non extorquet consensum, sed petit: Therefore
it is, that the scripture so often exhorts us to resist the devil, Ephesians. 6.
and James 4. Resist the devil, and he will fly from you: And if the devil
should draw men necessarily to sin, then it should be the devils sin
only; and not man's, when as all sin is willingly committed: Therefore he is
but indirectly the cause of sin, Satan is indirectly the cause of sin by the
will.
propounding and suggesting such objects which may affect the senses, and draw
the will at last to give consent willingly to the sin.

When the soul is out of the body, the devil can do nothing to the souls
of the children of God, What Satan can do to the soul when it is out of the
body.
for they are bound up in the bundell of life, 1. Sam. 25. but he can punish
the souls of the wicked, according to that power which is granted unto him;
and so much the more as the soul is the more immateriall then the body: So
the punishments of the soul are more fearful then the punishments of the
body* and although the bodies be more passible then the soul, yet the spirit
has more understanding; and when there is more understanding, there the pain
and the grief is the greater; And there is the greater harmony betwixt spirits
and their delights, then betwixt the senses and their pleasures, and
consequently there is more grief in the soul then in the body. Reasons moving
us to acknowledge the power of the Devil.


If we would consider either the number, strength, order, or agreement of the
devils amongst themselves, we must acknowledge their great power.

(...)
The order of the devils. First, there order: There is Beelzebub the prince of
the devils; and there are also inferior devils, as Rev. 12. the Dragon fought
and his Angels, and Ashmodeus Lucifer princeps daemonioru^: Augustinus Nyphus
in his book de daemonibus, cap. 17. says Omnis multitudo dictat ordinem, and
maxim in perpetuis substantijs; Every multitude requires order, but
especially those immortal substances; for as it is ordained (says he) that
men may live the more quietly and peaceably, that there be superiors to rule,
and inferiors to obey: So amongst the devils that they may hurt and annoy man
the more, there are some superiors, and others inferiors; which power and
superiority of theirs shall cease, when they can hinder no more the salvation
of man: And as all principalities shall be given up then, 1 Cor. 15. So shall
also (says he) this principality of the devil cease then. When we consider
their number.


If we consider then there number we may see what great power they have; A
Legion possessed one poor man.

(...) They are called Gibborim potestates.
Thirdly, consider that they are called Gibborim; potestates, strong ones, Psalm.
78.25. he fed them with the bread of the strong ones, that is with the bread
of Angels.

There agreement.
And lastly, consider their agreement: It is not Regnum divisum, a divided
kingdom, they all conspire together for the overthrow of man: by all this we
may understand what power the devil has to trouble and molest poor man.

Now to conclude this point concerning the power of the devils, this is our
comfort, that there power is a limitate power, and that they can go no further
then God permits them, 1 Samuel 18.10. It is said that the evil spirit from God
came upon Saul; why is he called the evil spirit that came from God, because
he was sent by him, and restrained by him at his pleasure. The Lord can rule
the devils at his pleasure, he cannot only restrain them that they hurt us
not; but can make them instruments to serve for the good of his Saints. 1 Cor.
5. the Lord biddes deliver the incestuous Corinthian over to Satan for the
destruction of his flesh, that his spirit might be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus; The Lord makes the devil here his instrument for the mortifying of
the corruption of the incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.5. So he used the
messenger of Satan to buffet Paul, that he might humble him, 2 Cor. 12.7. The
Lord can make Satan an instrument for the good of his Saints.
The planets the nearer that they are to the first mover, the more they are
carried about with the motion of the first mover; and the less they follow
their own motion, and those that are farther from the first mover, follows
more their own motion, and less the motion of the first mover: and they that
are farthest of all from the first mover, most swiftly perfects their own
motion; And yet for all that, they follow the motion of the first mover also:
Saturn that is nearest to the first mover, follows his own motion very
slowly, and finishes both his own course in thirty years. The sun that is
farthest from the first mover then Saturn, finisheth his own course more
swiftly (in a year) then Saturn does: But the Moon although she be the
lowest of all the planets, and finisheth her course in twenty eight days, yet
she follows the course of the first mover, and is carried from the East to
the West. The Angels and the glorified spirits, are most carried and directed
by God the first mover, and follows not their own motion: The regenerate in
this life they are too much busied about their own motion, and yet they are
ruled and guided by the spirit of God; But the devilles who are farthest of all
from him, and follows their own motion most, yet they are enforced to follow
the Lord and his will.

When Balaam would have cursed the people of God Number. 23.23. he was enforced to
say that there was no enchantment against Israel; When the Lion had killed the
Prophet, yet he tared not his flesh, nor broke his bones. Beth here is
(contra) and not (in)
1 King. 13.24. So the Lord restraines this raging Lion the devil, that he
make not altogether havocke of his Church, Pro. 30.31. there be four things
which are comely in going, A Lion which is the strongest amongst beasts, and
turns not away for any: a horse girt in the loins: a he goat also: and
fourthly a King, against whom there is no rising up: Satan is a strong Lion,
who turns not away for any, he is that strong horse girt in the Loyres,
which rusheth into the battle, and none is able to withstand him. Ier. 8.6.
he is also that he goat; Alexander was called Hircus caprarum Dominus duorum
cornuum, Dan. 8.6. The strength of a beast lies in his horns, Quando animaeli
cuipiam additur Genesis Plur. foemin, tunc significatur animal illud tenerum esse,
Genesis 38.17 Psalm. 113.4. Eze. 45.23.
and Dan. 8.21. He was called Hircus caprarum, to signify, that he was but a
young goat when he pushed the world, and none was able to withstand him: what
strength then has this old he goat, to push the children of men: And he is
that King against whom there is no rising: Therefore we should be afraid of
his strength always: But this is our comfort, that hell and destruction are
before the Lord, Prove. 15.11. to be before the Lord signifies not only that
things are known to him; but also that they are under his power and
subjection, Genesis 13.9. Is not the whole land before thee? Coram aliquo quid
significat.
so Cant. 8.12. my vineyard which is mine is before me; that is, it is in my
power, and belongs to me; So hell and perdition are before the Lord: That is
hell, and the devilles who are tortured there, howsoever they resist, yet they
are subject to the Lord.

These spirits must always be at the Lords command, and subject unto him. The
Apostle says, Heb. 2.8. That he has put all things under his feet; but we
see them not as yet put under him; sed tandem proferet victoriam injudicum, and
then his enemies shall be quite trod under his feet, Mat. 12.20.

SECT. 12. Of the knowledge of the devils, and of their predictions of things
to come.
THe devils has great knowledge, The devils have great knowlegde.
and therefore they are called (...).

Four things make them to have great knowledge. Four things makes them to
have great knowledge.

The devils know things uno intuitu.


First, they know things, uno intuitu, and they are intelligentes creaturae,
sed non ratiocinantes, they know not, as the Schoolmen says, Hoc ex hoc; they
reason not as we do, gathering this of this, but because they know not all
things together, therefore they learn, hoc post hoc, this after this. When we
behold the face of a man whom we know, here we rest without any reasoning to
enquire who he is; but if we have forgotten the man whom we have seen before,
then we begin to recollect, and bring our selves to a particular knowledge
of the man, as where we have seen him before, how they call him: The first
sort of knowledge which we have of the face, is, minus universalis, and magis
distincta, but the second is magis universalis, and magis confusa. When the
devil looks upon things he knows them, uno intuitu, as when we look upon a
known face. Our knowledge again is more confused, and therefore we come to it
by reasoning this and that way.

Satan when he looks upon the effects, and the cause, he does not abstract and
separate them as we do when we foretell by the causes, the effects following,
neither looks he by the effects unto the cause. Our sight is quicker than our
hearing, and therefore we see the lightning before we hear the clappe of the
thunder; but the devil takes them up both at one time. A comparison betwixt
man and man how far one exceeds another, and how far the devil exceedes man.
The devil being a spirit knows many things which man knows not, and he
apprehends them sooner than man, both for the impediment of his senses, and
dullness of his wit, when we consider how far one man differs from another
in quickness and understanding; and how dull another is in conception and
understanding; by this we may be led to take up what difference there is
betwixt the knowledge of the devil, and the knowledge of man; and that he far
surpasses man in understanding: Vitruvius lib. 9. de architec. cap. 3.
compare but Archimedes his quickness of wit, with Croesus his dullness, and
then ye may see what difference there is betwixt man's knowledge, and the
devils: Archimedes could find out to tell how much base mettell was in the
King of Siracuses crown, which was made to him, although he brake not the
crown. This was an admirable and great skill: Croesus again was as dull in
his conception, when he caused to take the flesh of Testudo the shell crabbe,
and the flesh of a lamb, and boil them in one vessel to try which of them
should be soonest boiled, and whether the shell crabbe would be as slow in
boiling as in going, and come as far behind the lamb now, as before;
therefore Tyrius said of him, Caelua page 51.
that he was Regum stultissimus, and coquorum infaelicissimus, of all kings the
most foolish, and of all cooks the most unskilful; Archimedes his skill far
surpasses Croesus his dullness, so the wit of the devil far surpasses man.

The Angles knows not this by this, as we do; when the doors was sprinkled
with the blood, they reason not after this manner as we do, this is the sign,
therefore such a man dwells here; but the blood was sprinkled upon the
doors, for to assure the Israelites, that none of their houses should be
killed.

Object. But ye will say, How the Angels take up things.
if the Angels compone not things, but apprehend only simple things, they have
the basest sort of knowledge, for children apprehend first simple things, then
they compone things; and thirdly, they reason; and thus they proceed from the
imperfect to the more perfect, and posteriora origin, sunt dignitate prima;
and these things which are last taken up, are most excellent; now the Angels
taking up things only simply, they seem to have the basest sort of knowledge.

Answ. The Angels by their simple essence know things, and not by passion, as
we apprehend in our mind.

Secondly, the Angels when they apprehend simple things, it is without any
kind of imperfection (as it is when we apprehend them) and eminenter includunt
perfectionem compositionis, and discursus. Secondly, The long life of the
devil makes him to have great skill.
their long life makes them to have great skill: Satan is an old Serpent,
therefore his skill must be very great. Let a man live but Nestors days, and
have good wit, together with long experience, he cannot choose but to be wise:
Satan saw from the creation of the world, and shall see to the last Judgment;
he saw the first world drowned with water, and shall see the second destroyed
with fire, therefore he must understand much. It is a long time ere a man come
to knowledge, and he spends a great time in folly, and if he live long he
forgets as fast and faster than ever he learned: But Satan Nescit quid sit
oblivisci, and therefore great must be his knowledge.

Thirdly, The great employment of Satan breeds him kill.
the great imploiment of Satan has bred him great knowledge: he saw the
rising, the height, and the fall of the four Monarchies, he had a hand in
them all, and quorum pars magna fuit. He was at the consultations of all the
tyrants against the Church, and no wicked deed was ever achieved, but Satan
was at the plotting-of it: and therefore great must be his skill.

Fourthly, his great intelligence that he has abroad; makes him to understand
much; His great employment abroad makes him to have skill.
for the evil spirits from all parts give intelligence one to another; and as
the Cherubims were painted in the temple with their faces one to another,
signifying that their is a correspondencie amongst the good Angels, for the
propagating of the Kingdom of God; so the devils agree one with another, to
give mutual intelligence for the upholding of their kingdom, and Regnum non
est divisum, Mat. 12.25. The Lord knows only the secrets of the heart; God
only knows the secrets of the heart.
as when Sarah laughed within her self, Genesis 18.12. and the Pharisees reasoned
within themselves, Luke 6.8. 2. King. 8.26. Ioh. 2.25. Heb. 4. all things are
naked before him, (...) a speech borrowed from the Priests under the Law, who
when they killed the beast, all things that were within the beast were laid
naked before the Priest, and he saw what was found, and wh^t was corrupted: so
all our thoughts are naked before the Lord, he knows which are good, and
which are bad; and therefore the Arabians say, Tu solus domine, nosti
substantiam pectoris; and thus they call upon him; O thou who know the
thoughts of men, when they hold their peace; that knowledge is the most
excellent knowledge, which we attain to by knowing the cause: but God knows
all things as they are in their causes, originally, but our thoughts are in the
heart, as causes: and therefore it is most fit that God should know them, who
is rather said to understand intelligible things then visible, because they
come nearer to his nature, and magis sunt in actu, and ille est purus actus.
This knowledge of the heart Satan has not, but only by effects, Satan knows
what is in the heart only by the effects
and here he knows this of this, and this after this, because he has no
knowledge of the cause but by the effect here; he conjectures what is in the
heart, as the Physicians by the pulse can tell the disease. Valerius lib. 7.
Erasistratus the Physician was much commended, who perceived by the
countenance of Antiochus King of Seleucia his son, that he was taken in love
with his mother in law; if a Physician by the beating of the pulse, and
countenance can take up this, much more can the devil do; and if the Fisher
by stirring of the cork, knows that there are fishes in the net, much more
may the devil know what is in the heart by signs.

The Lord knows the thoughts of our heart a far off, which the devil does
not, The Lord knows the thoughts of our heart a far off.
Psalm. 139.17. and as the Gardener in the Winter foretells, that this root will
bring forth such an herb, and this tree such a fruit long before the Spring.
So the Lord sees the thoughts of the wicked a far off. When the Prophet
foretold Hazael* that he should be King of Israel; and foretold also* what
cruelty he should exercise upon their women and children, that he should rippe
up the bellies of the women with child, what man or Angel could have foreseen
this? When it was told Hazael, he wept, and said, Am I a dog, 2 King. 8.13.
that I should prove such a cruel monster, but yet he proved such a monster, as
the Lord foretold; because from the wicked comes wickedness, 1 Samuel 24.13.

The Lord can foretell contingent things. The Lord only can foretell
contingent things.

There are three sort of contingent things. Contingens natum.


There are three sorts of contingent things, as the Schoolmen observes: the
first is contingens natum, the second is contingens rarum; the third is,
contingens indefinitum. Contingens natum, they make to be that which usually
falls out, as a man when he is old to have white hairs. Contingens rarum.
Secondly, there is contingens rarum which falls out very seldom; as when a
man is digging the ground, he finds a treasure: Satan can hardly foretell
this, because he knows not perhaps where the treasure is hidden, no more than
he knew where the body of Moses was buried, Deuteronomy. 34.6. Thirdly, there is
contingens indefinitum; Contingens indefinitum.
as whether Peter will run the morrow or not? This Satan cannot fortell.
These contingent things God only can foretell, Tell us what is to come, that
we may know that ye are gods; that is, if ye can foretell things contingent:
Therefore James Chap. 4. (because all contingent events depend upon the Lord)
wills us to say, we will do such and such things, if the Lord will.

A man and a maid are married together, to foretell that they will have
children, this is easy to do, because it is contingens natum; for usually
young folks beget children: but to foretell how many children they will have,
whether ten, or twelve: The devil more hardely can foretell this, because it
is contingens rarum. But lastly, whether they will prove wise men or fools,
that is, contingens indefinitum: Solomon himself could not foretell that,
Eccles. 2.19. and the devil himself cannot foretell this.

The Prophets understood things past, present, and to come. 1 Samuel 1.9.
The Prophets illuminate by the Spirit of God, understood things, past,
present, and to come, for he reveals his secrets to his servants, Amos 3.
therefore the Prophets were called Chozin videntes. The Prophets understood
things past. Satan may understand things well enough, ab exord^o temporis, from
the beginning of time, and remember them very well. But he cannot know exordium
rerum, the beginning of things; for God has them only written in his book,
Satan can understand things ab exordio temporis but not ab exordi^ rerum.
Psalm. 139.16. In thy book are all my members written, which in continuance
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them: So he has the book of
life, in the which men's names were written before the foundation of the world,
Rev. 3.5. and these whose names are written in this book, he reveals to his
servants the Prophets, Phil. 4.3. I entreat you to help these my fellow
laborers, whose names are in the book of life; but all this knowledge is
hid from Satan.

Secondly, the Prophets know things present, How the Prophets knew things
present when they were absent
although they were absent from those places where they were done, 2 King.
5.26. Was not my Spirit with thee, when the man in his charet turned to meet
thee. So Elisha knew well enough the secrets of the King of Syria, and what was
done in his secret chamber, 2 King. 6.12. although he was absent. So Paul,
although he was at Ephesus in Asia, yet his spirit informed him what was done a
far off in Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.3. yet the Prophets could not foretell such
things, Prophecy is not habitus sed actus transiens.
when the Lord revealed not himself unto them, as 2 King. 4.27. Her soul is
vexed within her, and the Lord has hid it from me; for prophecy was not
habitus sed actus transiens; and as the lute cease to give a sound when he
that plays cease to play; so they could not prophecy when the Lord
illuminate them not. But Satan and his sorcerers cannot foretell things when
they are absent, unless they be informed by other spirits, or see the effects
in the cause; as Satan can foretell that the river of Nilus will overflow, when
he sees the rain in Ethiopia like to fall.

Thirdly, The Prophets foretold things that were always hidden from man.
the Prophets being illuminate by the spirit of God, foretold things that were
always hidden, and which no ways depended upon any natural cause, such as
was the incarnation of Christ, and his resurrection, and such like: which
mysteries the Angels themselves desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. But they
understood them not, before they were revealed to them; far less could the
devils understand them: So the Prophet foretold three hundred years before
the birth of Josias, 1 King. 13.2. that he should offer upon the altar the
bones of the Priests that burnt incense at Bethel. And Elias foretold the death
of Ioram, and what disease he should die of, to wit, of a disease in his
bowels, 2 Chronicles. 21. These things Satan and his sorcerers could not foretell.

How did the prophets foretell things which never took effect.
Object. But the Prophets of God foretold many things which never took effect,
Esaias foretold Ezekias that he should shortly die, and yet he lived fifteen
years: So Jonah foretold the Ninevites, that within forty days Nineveh
should be destroyed, and yet Nineveh was not destroyed, as Jonah foretold?

Two sorts of prophecies.

Independens and absoluta prophetia.


Ans. There were two sorts of prophesies: the first was independens and
absoluta prophetia; which was called the prophecy of prescience; and this
always took effect. Comminationis prophetia.
The second sort of prophecy was the prophecy of commination or threatening,
which was conditional, and respected always the second causes, and this took
not always effect. If this sort of prophecy be considered in the second
causes, it may be said to take effect, as, Set thy house in order, for thou
shall die; if ye will respect the disease it self, or the constitution of
Ezekias body, Ezekias shall die, but look into the first cause, to Gods will,
who appointed to prolong Ezekias his life, he shall not die.

Quest. Whence has the devils this their knowledge to foretell things to come?

Ans. They have not this knowledge by experience and observation of natural
things only, but they learn also many things from the Scriptures; for although
the Scriptures be a sealed book to them, in respect of the spiritual
knowledge of it, The devils have the knowledge of the Scripture, but not the
spiritual.
yet they have a literal knowledge of the Scripture: The good Angels learn
from the Church daily, Ephesians. 3.6. and they desire to look to the mystery of
the incarnation with our stretched necks, 1 Pet. 1.12. they grow daily in the
spiritual knowledge: But the devils who are bound in chains of darkness,
Iud. 6. are more and more darkened in spiritual knowledge daily: when a man
comes out of a great light into a dark place, that weakens his sight much, but
take him out of a dark place, and put him in a clear place again, then it
will make him quite blind: Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily, above his prison
built a very lyghtsome and white chamber, which he whitened over with lyme, and
when he had a long time detained his prisoners in a dark dungeon, he suddenly
brought them into this bright place, wherein instantly they became blind,
because their eyes were not able to bear so sudden a change: The devils are
more and more blinded in spiritual knowledge.
So the Devils were in a place of great light in the Heavens, then they were
cast down into the low helles, and there they were fettered with the chains of
darkness; But when the light of the Gospel was revealed, It made them more
and more blind, that they have eyes now and sees none, and they have no
spiritual understanding of the mysteries of the Gospel; But when they see the
Scriptures, they may have the literal knowledge of them well enough, and
foretell things to come by them; and many things which should befall to the
Church; they might foreknow the rising and the falling of the mornarchies out
of Daniel, and they might foretell the nativitie of Christ by searching the
Scriptures, and many things which should befall the Church in their latter
times, by observing the book of the Revelation. The Oracle of Delphos gave
this answer to Alexander, Invictus eris Alexander; This was easy for the
devil to foretell, because Daniel foretold the fall of the Medes and Persians
by the Greeks: So the Oracle of Delphos foretold to Craesus, that his Kingdom
in the fifth generation should perish: This the Devil might easily learn out
of the Scriptures; for God visits the sins of the father upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation, and the children filling up the measure
of their fathers iniquity, then his Kingdom was shortly to come to an end. A
man murders another and escapes. It is easy for Satan to foretell what death
he should die out of the Scriptures; he who killes by the sword, shall be
killed by the sword: and sometimes the Lord uses the devil as his executioner
and hangman; It was easy for the devil to say to Saul, to morrow thou shall
be with me; because the Lord used him as his executioner in this Judgment.

Satan when he foretelles things to come, he speaks with a low voice, and out
of the ground; and he pipes as chickins do when they are new hatched, Isa.
8.19. sometimes he flatters the party who expects the revelation of him; and
therefore Demosthenes said that the Oracle of Apollo did but (...), that is
flatter Philip of Macedon: So when Alexander came into the temple of Jupiter
Hammon, the priest called him (...), Plutarch in vita Alexandri.
fair child, which Alexander took to be (...), Jupiter his son.

But when the Devil was doubtful of the events of his prophesies, then he
gave his answers doubtfullie, that they might admit a double sense; Such was
those answers which he gave by his false Prophets to Ahab King of Israel, when
he was going to besiege Ramoth Gilead, They demanded of him who should
prevail? He answered the King should prevail, but he tells not which King,
whether Syria or Israel. 2 Cro. 18.11.

Satan's responses were very doubtful.
His responses were so doubtful, that the wisest amongst the heathen could not
tell what to make of them.

All his responses were doubtful, therefore he was called (...) Apollo; Satan
is a great Sophister in his answers.
He being asked how the gods should be worshipped, gave this answer, (...)
Mittite capita Iovi, hominem vero Saturno.

The falacie lay here in the accent, for (...) being accented (accentu gravi)
signifies a man, but (...) being accented (accentu circumflexo) signifies a
torch or a light; but they mistaking the word (...) they sacrificed a number of
men to him in stead of setting of lights before him.

When the plague was very hot at Athens, Plutarch de Ei apud delphos.
they asked the Oracle of Apollo how it might be remedied: the Oracle answered
and bade them duplare aram, which neither Plato nor Aristotle understood; Plato
by Geometry, went about to find out how the Altar might be doubled; But the
Oracle meant, that they should double their sacrifices to the gods, and then
the plague should cease.

Example the third.

Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse, the words imply a double sense here,
either that the Romans might overcome, or that they might overcome the Romans.

Some hold, that by the placing of the negative particle, the devil deceived
Eve, as when he laid unto her, non moriendo morieris; for they say, when the
negative with the Hebrews is placed before the finite and the infinite verb,
then it neither certainly affirms, nor denies, but leaves the matter in
doubt.

This (say they) is the affirmative.

Moriendo morieris.
This is the Negative.
Moriendo non morieris.
This is the doubtful.
Non moriendo morieris; perhaps ye may die, and perhaps not: Vide grammaticum
^unij.
Thus Satan deceived Eve (say they) when he saw her begin to doubt, perhaps
we shall not die: But this rule holds not; for (non) being set before the
finite and the infinite, does flatly deny, Psalm. 49.7. Non redimendo, redimet
fratremsuum, that is, he can no ways redeem his brother from death. And so
when this particle (non) is set betwixt the finite and the infinite, it denies
only in part, Ier. 46.28. I will chastise thee in Judgment, Sed evacuando non
evacuabo te, that is, I will chastise thee in judgment, but not destroy thee,
here the particle (non) being set betwixt the finite and the infinite denies
not flatly, but only in part, yet being placed here before the finite and the
infinite, it is altogether negative; wherefore non moriendo morieris, flatly
denies here, and not doutfully.

He has likewise deceived some, by doubling the negative particle: when
Manfredus did contend with Charles, about the Kingdom of Naples, he got this
answer from the devil, Non non gallus superabit.

Fifthly, he manifested his deceit by the similitude of words: Such was the
Oracle which Thusidides makes mention of.

(...), Here they read (...), and some (...), and they could hardly discern,
whether to prepare themselves against the war, or to use remedies against the
sickness.

Sixtlie, the deceit lay in the words themselves, which suffer a double
interpretation, Genesis 3. That day that ye shall eat of this fruit, your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall know good and evil: We know good and evil two
manner of ways, first in theorie, and then by miserable experience; they knew
good and evil in the first sense before their fall, but by miserable
experience, when they did eat of the forbidden fruit.

Vide Morn perlcsse. page 389.
These Oracles has very often deceived men: Therefore Oenomaus the Philosopher
wrote a book against them, which had this inscription, De oraculorum
falsitate; As Plutarch wrote a book de oraculorum defectu; And Porphyre
testifies, when as the Oracle of Delphos could not divine by the stars, what
should befall them, the Oracle desired them, that they would ask him nothing
at all, and he told them that if they ceased not to ask him, he would tell
them lies.

Object. But the Lord seems by the Prophet Elisha, to give a doubtful answer
to Hazael, 2 King. 8.10. To whom Elisha said, go tell him that he shall not
recover at al, for the Lord has told me that he shall certainly die, The words
seem also to carry another sense; Go tell him that he shall recover, although
the Lord said that he shall die: He shall recover, because the sickness of it
self is not deadly, he shall not recover, because Hazael dipped a cloth in
water, and laid it on his face that he died. There is but one sense in the
prophets answer to Hazael.


Answ. There is but one meaning of the Prophet here answering to Hazael; but
the Critickes amongst the Jews found out another sense, (...) ei. (...) non.
reading in the margin, Lo ei, for Lo non; So they would show a diverse
reading of the prophets words.

Ob. Ezekiel 12.14. The Lord threatened Zedekiah with a Judgment, which might
seem to be given out very doubtully; I will bring him to Babylon, to the land
of the Chaldeans, and yet he shall never see it, although he die there.

Answ. Because this perfidious King, Why the Lord gave a doubtful answer to
Zedekias.
would not believe the Prophets of God, who told him so plain that he should
be carried to Babel; therefore the Lord tells him this closely, which soon
after he understood, when his eyes were picked out of his head at Riblah, and he
carried to Babell.

Quest. What are we to think of Balaam, Whether Balaam was a Prophet of God or
Diviner.
whether was he a Prophet of God or a Diviner only?

Answ. First he was a Diviner only, but afterward the Lord put a parable in
his mouth, Moses Gerundensis 162.2.

Balaam primum divinus postea prophets, deinde rediit ad primum.


ponere sermonem in illis, 2 Cor. 15.19. caryeth a notable Emphasis with it,
whereby is signified, that the Lord ruled their tongues, directed them what
they should speak, and sanctified them: So the Lord guided the tongue of
Balaam, and opened his eyes to Prophecy; Thus far the Lord put this parable
in his mouth; but he sanctified him not, for he following the wages of
iniquity, returned to be a diviner again: And the Jews applies this proverb
to him, Camelus cornua quaerens aures amisit; That is, Baalam hunting for
honor and seeking after riches, lost the gift of Prophecy; and amongst the
rest who were killed in the battle, it is said, that Baalam the Diviner was
killed. Ios. 13. This gift which Baalam had was only from the spirit of
illumination; And there was a great difference betwixt him and the holy
Prophets of God, A difference betwixt these, the Lord appeared to Balaam, and
the word of the Lord was to Jeremy.
Luke 1.70. and the Hebrews observe, when it is said the Lord appeared to
Laban, to Balaam, and to Abimelech, there is less meant here, then when it is
said, the word of the Lord was unto Isay, to Jeremy, to Ezekiel, for that
employed that the oracles of God were concredit to them, as to faithful
witnesses, but he did not concredit his word this way to Baalam, he was but
like a trunk, through the which the Lord spoke.

Quest. How differ the predictions of the Prophets, from the Predictions of
Satan and his instruments?

The differences between the predictions of the Prophets, and the predictions
of Satan and his instruments.
Answ. The predictions of the Prophets were for the most part of spiritual
things, and they prophesied but of temporary things in the second place; but
the predictions of the devils, were never of spiritual things. Secondly, when
the Prophets of God foretold good things, they added always conditionem
crucis, that is, some temporary crosses to be added to them; they shall
receive a hundred fold, but with persecutions, Mark 10. 30. but the false
Prophets prophesied always placentia, pleasant things. Thirdly, when the
Prophets foretold Judgments to come, this condition was always reserved; if
the people repented not, this Judgment shall come; but the false prophets
foretold all things to fall out by a fatal necessity. Fourthly, when the
Prophets foretold Judgments to come, although they took not effect, yet they
were not holden for false Prophets, such was the Prophecy of Jonah to the
Ninevites, and of Isaiah to Ezekias; for God is merciful when men repent; But
the false Prophets when they prophesied good things to come, and they came not
to pass, then they were holden for false prophets: So Jeremiah convinced
Hananiah that he was a false Prophet, Ier. 28. when he promised to Icconiah
his return out of Babell.

The Prophets had certain signs by which they demonstrated to the people what
should befall them, as when the Prophet Isay went naked and barefooted; This
was called Siman (...), this was a note to discern the Prophets by, but it was
not (...), (...)
for the false Prophets used also these signs, as Zedekiah made him horns of
iron, and said, thus says the Lord, with these shall thou push the Aramites, 1
King. 22.11.

The Prophets of God were distinguished from the false Prophets; for the false
Prophets wrought sometimes mavelous things before the people, but they could
not work miracles: These miracles in show were called ostenta, mopheth: (...)
they were miracles in show but they were not true miracles: If there arise a
Prophet amongst you, and give you a sign or a wonder, Deuteronomy. 13.1. These were
but lying wonders, but the Prophets of God they gave Oath, (...) from (...)
venit.
a true sign 2 King. 20.9. this sign shall thou have of the Lord: This Oath
comes from atha venit; As I am a true Prophet this shall verily come to pass:
So Moses confirmed himself to be a Prophet by his true miracles which he
wrought before Pharaoh. And last the true Prophets always prophesied according
to the law, and never against it Isa. 8.20. If they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

The knowledge of the devil serves only to the dishonor of God, and to hurt
poor man. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.1. shows if a man could speak with the
tongue of men and Angels, and have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and had all knowledge and faith; so that he could remove mountains,
and have not charity it profits nothing. Although Satan speak all languages,
foretell things to come, and have the knowledge of all mysteries, and could
remove mountains, yet this is all nothing, because he wants charity: All this
his skill he imployes only to the destruction of man, Therefore his knowledge
serves but as a barrel of pitch to cause him to burn the faster in hell fire:
his knowledge wants charity and nothing which he knows is profitable to man,
until he reveal it unto him: he is compared unto Stellio which every year
casts the skin of it (as Aristotle and Pliny testifies) and this skin being
drunk in a little wine is a sovereign remedy against the falling sickness;
but this envious creature presently eats it up again, least man should reap
any benifit by it, so the envious devil hides from man all that can profit him.

Satan's knowledge is most hurtful to us; When a Physician studieth physic,
only to know his science, that is Curiositas, when he studieth to know his
science, only that he may be known, this is ambitio. When he studies his
science that he may cure others, this is Charitas; but if he should study
his science to poison others, this were Crudelitas. All the study of Satan is
under fair pretenses to destroy man, Revel. 17.4. The whore is said to have in
her hand a cup of gold, full of abominations, (...) 1. Plenum philtris
impuris, for these philtra and pocula amatoria, were mixed commonly with most
impure and filthy things, tending to bewitch men. So when Satan presents a
gilded cup to us, wherein he promises most wholesome Physic to us, and most
skilfully tempered, yet mors est in olla.

SECT. 13. Of the craft of the Devil.
THe Scripture says, Let no man deceive you in sublime discourse, touching the
worshipping of Angels pressing to that he knows not, Col. 2.18. Here is
forbidden the adoration of Angels, and an opinion Fantastical of them, either
to extol them further then appertains to the degree of a creature, or to
extol a man's knowledge of them further than he has a ground, but to enquire so
far as the Scriptures teaches us, or nature it self, either of the good
angels, or of these revolted Devils, that is not forbidden: To converse with
them, to employ them, to covenant with them, or to worship them that is
forbidden, but the contemplation of their nature, their power, their illusions,
either by scripture or reason, is a part of spiritual wisdom; for the
Apostle says we are not ignorant of his stratagems, We may enquire of the
nature of the devils, although we may not covenant with them, or worship them.
and it is no more unlawful to enquire the nature of evil spirits, then it is
to enquire the force of poison in nature, or the nature of sin and vice in
morality.

First let us consider what instruments Satan made choice of, to deceive the
woman by; he made choice of the Serpent, the craftiest beast in the field: As
Ioab made choice of the wise woman of Tecga, and put a Parable in her mouth,
for to beg pardon for Absolon at the Kings hand, he is (...); this (...) is
sometimes taken in a good sense gnarum, Prove. 27.12. the crafty seeeth the
Plague, and hides him: and sometimes in a bad sense Ier. 4.22. they are crafty
to do evil. Satan is crafty in this sense.

Satan makes choice of the subtillest heads to be his instruments: Satan makes
choice of the subtilest heads to be his instruments.
And as the moath breeds in finest cloth, so Satan commonly imployes the
craftiest and best wits, to be his instruments to trouble and vex the Church
of God; As he choosed Vlpian that great Lawyer to write books against the
Christians; so he made choice of Porphir that great philosopher, to write
against the Christians; and Galen the Physician, and Lucian the scoffer, and
Julian the Apostate: But God makes choice of the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise; the Angel spoke out of the mouth of Baalam's Ass, these
crafty tentations of Satan are called his snares. 1 Timothy 3.7.

Satan observes the humors of the body.
Satan in his tentations he observes the humors of the body of man, and that
humor which predominates most in the body, that humor he observes and takes
occasion to tempt men by it. When God converts a man to grace, he does not take
away the natural humors of the body, but only rectifies them; But Satan
perverts the humors of the body, that by them he may work man's destruction,
and especially he works by melancholy upon the body; and therefore melancholy
is called esca diaboli by the Fathers; such was the melancholy of Saul, the
devil wrought upon his constitution, and troubled him sundry times, and Math.
17.15. this melancholicke in the Syriacke is called Bar Agara, and they
translate it commonly filium agri, (...) Extra tectum.
the son of the field, but not rightly, for filius agri signifies properly
an husband man, as filius civitatis signifies a Citizen, Luke 15.15. Therefore
they translate it better, who translate it Bar extra, and agar a domum; because
the unclean spirits made the melancholious man fly out of the houses; and to
live amongst the graves. These devils they call Sorodaemones, that is
sepulchrales larvae, who drove the melancholickes to live amongst the graves,
Math. 8.29. and tombs of the de^^. These sometimes are called (...): and
(...): and the Greek Physicians call this disease (...); Nebuchadnezer was
vexed with this.

When Satan possesses these melancholickes there is some natural thing in
this disease, and some spiritual, When Satan possesses the melancholicke the
natural cause would be helped by physic, and the devil cast out by prayer.
and both would be removed, both the next cause, and the remote cause: A man is
taken with a fever; the chief cause, is the abundance of choler, and the
second cause is, because he has walked too much in the heat of the sun;
first his choler must be purged, and then he must be removed to a place where
there is more shadow, and not so much heat: These melancholickes are not cured
but by prayer, and fasting, as by a spiritual Antidote; There must also
Physic be used for the purging of this melancholy, which is the Devils
bait; An evil spirit came upon Saul, and David played upon his Harp, and then
the evil spirit left him, Vtimur musica vel pro disciplina, vel pro
delectatione, vel pro aenimi purgatione, vel pro sedandis affectionibus and
morum composit one. 2 King. 3.15.
1 Samuel 16.24. David used a double remedy here to help this trouble of Saul;
first the sweet singer of Israel sang Psalms, 2 Samuel 23.1. by his calling
upon the name of the Lord, he cast out this devil. Secondly by his music he
settled his melancholy; Tarantula i^ti quam primum audiuntur instrumenta musica
levatur dolor; Mathiolus in Dioscoridem, lib. 1. 57.
when the Physician prescribed to the melancholean, to abstain from such and
such meats, because they either increase or at least does irritat this humor
of melancholy; They may do this, not only because it is wholesome to the
body; but also because it is the Devils bait; therefore they prescribe
abstinence from such; No sort of diet displeases or pleases Satan, but by
accident, because by them the humor is increased, which makes way for his
tentation.

Satan observes the full moon, and then vexes the Lunatickes: The second sort
were those whom Satan vexed not monthly as he did the Lunatickes, but
oftentimes whenever it takes him, it castes him into the fire, Mark. 9.18.22.

Those whom he vexed in the full moon, were called Lunatici or Siderati.

A difference betwixt (...) and (...).
We must put a difference betwixt these, (...), and (...) were those who any
ways were possessed by the devil, they were called also arrepticij, (...)
were those whom Satan possessed in the full moon (...) were those who were
Christians, but for their abuse of the holy mysteries of God, they were
possessed by Satan for a time, and (...) was a natural disease which we call
madness. Those Daemoniackes and Lunatickes were only cured by the Lord
himself, and his power. Those who were (...) were cured by the exorcistes in
the Primitive Church; and (...) madness was cured by Physic and natural
means.

Heat and moist makes the brain to swell Satan observing this vexes the
Lunatickes.
Satan knowing well the natural cause of things, and that the moon is hot and
moist: it is hot as the sun although not in so high a degree. Psalm. 121.6.
(...) sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the moon by night. He knew also
that she was humide and moist and fit to nourish things. Therefore the
Scriptures call herbs protrusiones lunares the precious things brought forth
by the moon, Deuteronomy. 33.14. Because the moon is humide and hot, she works upon
our brains and makes them to swell up: heat and moisture causes things to
swell up as we see in leaven. Therefore the scripture calls pedom fermentatum a
swelling foot Deuteronomy. 8.4. neither was thy foot fermented, that is, it was not
swelled, so heat and moisture causes the brain to swell in the full moon,
and Satan observing this, troubles the brain of the Lunaticke then.

Every one that is Lunaticke is not a doemoniacke, or possessed by a devil.
All Lunatickes are not doemoniackes neither are all Lunatickes upon whom the
moon shines in her brightness.
If this disease depended simply upon the moon, then all men should be
doemoniackes. Therefore to make them doemoniackes, it was necessary that the
body should be affected thus and thus, so that the moon might afterward
produce in the body this disease; The moon works nor so upon bodies, that she
produces this effect upon them, unless they be so affected before, that the
moon may produce this effect upon them; and when the devil affects the body,
so that he makes it subject to such an operation of the moon; then he that is
Lunaticke is arreptitius and possessed by the devil.

The secohd sort were those whom Satan vexed not monthly, but whenever the
fit took him, There were others that Satan vexed at sundry times but not
monthly.
he threw him in the fire, or in the water.

Observe here first the devil vexed him who was possessed from his infancy:
secondly, he vexed him both within and without; without he threw him into the
water, and into the fire; within wheresoever he takes him, he teareth him, and
he fometh, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away, Mark 9.18.

He vexes him from his infancy: as the devil vexed this miserable creature
from his infancy, so the Lord has his good Angels waiting upon infants to
preserve them in their infancy, Math. 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not
one of these little ones, for I say unto you that in heaven their Angels do
always behold the face of God. Angels have a care of all Gods little ones,
but especially of his little ones in age, whom he sets down as examples of
imitation to all his little ones, Math. 19.

Secondly, he threw him into the fire, and into the water, fire and water are
the two elemens which are most necessary for the use of man, therefore those
who were proscripti of old, interdicibantur* igne and aqua; Satan abuses these
two elements to the hurt of man, either when he throws him into the fire, or
into the water: and the good Angels have a special care over young ones that
they fall not into the fire or water, this is a special part of their charge
to preserve the sons of men. Angels have a threefold motion; first, motum
circularum, their circular motion: secondly, they have motum rectum, a straight
motion up and down: and thirdly, they have their reflexe motion. Their
circular motion they make to be this, Dionysius areopagita de divinis,
nominibus. cap. 4.
when they are always taken up in beholding the face of God who is Alpha and
Omega without beginning and ending: their direct motion they hold to be this,
when the Angels comes up and down upon the Lord Jesus Christ to be the
ministering spirits unto the Saint, John 1.51. And their reflex motion they make
to be this, when one of the Angels cries to another and says, Holy, holy,
holy is the Lord of Hosts, Esaias 6.3.

The devil threw him into the fire and water, Ithiel. Pro. 30.4. Who gathers
the wind into his fists, who binds the waters in a garment, and puts a bridle
in the mouth of the sea (...) Mark 4.39. It is he that can bridle and
restrain the Devils that they cannot hurt when and where it pleases them. The
Devil made him foame at the mouth, and gnash with his teeth, Mark 9. and
tear himself, if Satan can vex so poor creatures when they are but as
warders, what will he do to them when he has them close prisoners in hell.
And if he has so vexed the green tree (as Job, and the daughter of Abraham
and this young child) what will he do to the withered trees; and if his little
finger have been so heavy on poor creatures on earth here, how heavy will
his loins be on them in hell, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, Math. 13.42.

This (...) or veterator labors to deceive our sight, and that three manner of
ways; The Devil deceives our sight three manner of ways.
first by the object; secondly by the mids, and thirdly when he vitiates the
organ it self: first by the object, when he showed to Christ the glory of the
whole world, he thought to have deceived him by the object, Math. 4. When the
Moabites took the water to have been blood, when the sun shined upon it, 2
Kings 3.22. here the deceit was in the object, secondly the deceit is in the
mids, when we put an oar in the water, that part which is in the water seems
to be broken, and that out of the water seems to be whole, the deceit is in
the mids, when we see a fish in the water, the fish seems more to us and
nearer, by reason that the thinner and rarer midse is next to our eye, but the
remote midse from our eye, the water is more thick and gross, but if a man
were in the water, and beheld another standing upon the brinke of the River, he
should seem to the beholder much less than he is; The reason is, because the
next midse to the eye is thicker and grosser, and the remote midse is rarer and
thinner: When Simon Magus seemed to fly in the air, Here the deception was in
the midse; for the devil put some false midse betwixt their eye and the
object, that he seemed to fly. Thirdly the sight is vitiat when the orgaine
is vitiat; Satan can deceive when the organ is vitiat.
as when one has the yellow-jaundies, then all things seem yellow to him: So
when the humors are gross, and hinders the sight from being carried to the
Nerve opticke; then the impediment is in the Organe: When Satan possessed a man
with a dumb and a blind devil, then the organe it self was corrupted, Math.
12.22.

The Devil can deceive the sight, therefore these Iuglers who delude the
senses, should not be suffered in a Christian Commonwealth; for it is the
first degree to witchcraft.

Satan deludes the fantasy.
Fourthly, as this crafty Satan deludes our senses, so does he our fantasy:
The fantasy is a midse betwixt sense and understanding: Therefore the devil
troubles our fantasy more than our sense; and because fantasy is the next
gate to understanding, therefore he troubles it most.

Satan deceives the understanding.
Fifthly, this crafty devil deceives our understanding 2 Cor. 11.13. But I
fear least by any means, as the Serpent deceived Eve through his subtlety,
so your minds should be corrupted. Mentem hominis per substantiam nihil
implere potest praeter creatricem trinitatam, implet vero Satanas cor non
quidem illud ingressus, sed callida deceptione in malitiae affectum animam
trahens per cogitationes vitiorumque incentiva.
The evil angels can put into the heart evil thoughts, stir up evil
passions, to obscure the understanding, to deprave the will, and trouble the
fantasy: they can oppose themselves to the good Angels, when they are about
to illuminate the fantasy, and represent good thoughts to it: but they cannot
directly enter into the understanding. This Serpent has yet more dangerous
tentations, which are called Profunda Satanae, the depthes of Satan. Revel.
2.24. who can find them out, and what have we to oppose against them. Prove.
21. There is no counsel against the Lord; Achitophel his counsel was like the
Oracle of God. 2 Samuel 16.23. and yet the Lord turned it all to foolishness. 2 Samuel 15.31. So all these depths of Satan which he plots against the Church, the
Lord can turn them to folly.

Sixthly, Satan in his subtle tentations pursues the weaker first. He observes
the Sex.
The Apostle 1 Cor. 7. sets down a heavenly order; God is Christ's head, Christ
is the man's head, and man is the woman's head; Satan in his tentations began
with the woman first; Secondly, he tempted man the woman's head; Thirdly, he
tempted Christ the man's head; But he d^^stonever assay to tempt God Christ's
head; because no unclean thing enters into the heavens, Revel. 21.

He tempted the woman first, and then the man: Hence we may learn, that
sorcerers, and magitians are more dangerous instruments of the devil then
witches are.

Satan tempted the woman first, therefore he prevails most with that sex; yet
Exodus 22. ye shall not suffer a woman witch to live. Mekashpa in the feminine
gender.
so Lev. 20.27. and as Satan deceived the woman first; So his instruments are
readiest to deceive silly captive women laden with sins, 2 Timothy 3.6. when
they creep into their houses* in the Syriacke it is damchaldin. Chalda
signifies properly mustellam or viverram, a we fill or a ferret, for as a
ferret seeks out all the corners of the clapper, so the Heretics craftily
creep into silly women's houses, and deceive them. And as the devil tempted
the woman first and deceived her, and made her the instrument to deceive the
man: so he moved Jobs wife to tempt him, and Miriam to move Aaron to murmr
against Moses; Therefore the text says, obl^cutae sunt Miriam and Aaron, Number.
12.1. She was placed first, because she was chief in the transgression, and
drew Aaron to it; (...)
So the Jews stirred up devour women to persecute Paul. Act. 13.50.

Seventhly in his tentations he observes our predominant sins, and what we
are most inclined into, Satan observes our predominante sins.
there he lays the bait before us, o^ taken from us these things which he
knows the heart is most set upon. As he laid the Babylonish ga^^^e (...)
t^^^wedge of gold before Achan, Josh. 7.21. And ^^e presented Ta^ar in a
whoorish buske before (...), Genesis 38.15. and the Moabitish women before the
Israelites to ensnare them, and to draw them to whoredom, Numb. 25.1. So he
promises to the base witches some gain, but to high spirits; as to Iannes,
and Iambres, to Elimas the sorcerer, and to Faustus; to these he promises the
gift of miracles, as it were to make them men renowned: So he takes from them
the thing that they love best, as the Gergesites swine from them.

Eighthly, he observes our ages, our young years, middle years, and old
years, and has a several temptation for every time, in our younger years, he
tempts us to lust. 1. Tim. 2.22.

In our middle age, he tempts us ad (...) to the love of honor, and
preferment as sundry of the popes sought by Necromancy to come to the Popedom
as Silvester the second, and many others of them; And in our old age he tempts
us to (...) to the love of money, and this makes many in their old age to fall
to the Devil: And he tempts us in all our ages ad (...) to self love. Satan
observes our worldly estate, and fits his tentations to it.


Lastly, he observes our temporary estate, whether we be poor or rich; If
we be poor, then he persuades us to steal, and to take the name of God in
vain, Pro. 30.9. this is to turn stones into bread, Mat. 4. And if we be
rich, then he has another temptation for us, to deny God, and to say, who is
the Lord; The rich men then fall to oppression; and to the grinding of the
faces of the poor; And then they turn bread into stones, Prove. 20.17. This is
the devils Alchimy, and as the poor turns stones into bread; Satan hurts
more by his craft, then by his strength.
so the rich turns bread into stones.

Satan hurts more by his craft, then by his strength, when he comes hissing as
a Serpent, then when he comes roaring as a Lion: The Egyptians hurt the
Israelites more with their wiles, then with their strength, Exodus 1.10. and the
Midianites with their wiles vexed the people of God, Number. 25.18. more then all
the Moabites and Ammonites did with their strength; and Julian the Apostate
hurt more the Christian Church with his craft, then all the ten persecuters did
with their persecutions: Therefore we should be more afraid of his craft then
of his power or malice.

Seeing we have so crafty and so subtle an enemy, we should learn to be
wise, to defend our selves against this his craft. Our forefathers at the first
thought it enough to arm themselves against the wild beasts, that they might
not hurt them: but afterward they learned to eat their flesh, and to cloth
themselves with their skins; So should we not only seek to defend our
selves from the Devil, but also to learn by this his craft and subtilitie to
be wise as serpents and simple as Doves, Mat. 10.16. and this is a great point;
of wisdom de utilitate capienda ex inimicis, as Plutarch speaks.

SECT. 14. Of the cruelty and malice of the devil.
THere are three things which moves us to revenge, Anger, Envy, and Hatred.

Anger seeks to be revenged for the wrong done, but with a certain measure
that the punishment be answerable to the offense, and it resembles somewhat
Justice.

The envious is grieved at the good which they see in others, and they think
that it overshadowes and diminishes their good, therefore it does not so much
envy the good of others, as the obscuring and overshadowing of their own
gifts: But hatred looks only to the destruction of others, The Devil is not
said to be angry with man. The Devil envies the state of man.
The devil is not said to be angry with us, but either to envy, or to har^
us: He envies the estate of man, and his eye is evil, because he is good,
Mat. 20.15. and the reasons why he envies man is, because he has fallen as a
lightening from the Heaven, and has no hope to be restored thither again, but
he seeing God to have mercy upon man, although he fell from his first blessed
and happy estate, yet notwithstanding the Lord brings him back again by
degrees to a better estate: This grieves Satan to the heart, and he seeks by
all means to draw man into that same pit of destruction which he has fallen
into: but most of all he hates man deadly, wishing him all evil. He cannot be
revenged upon the Lord, therefore he seeks to be revenged upon man: but this
redounds back again to the Lord, Justin. institut. lib. 4. cap. de iniuriis.
nam Domino per servos laesos fit injuria.

There are found in man severity, cruelty and savagenes.

Asperitas crudelitas and feritas, these are found in man.
This severitie is when a man pardons nothing of the punishment which is to be
infficted by the law, and clemency is opposite to this, which is a sort of
pardoning, but not a free pardoning, What is severity.
it secludes not all sort of punishment, but only mitigates the severity: This
severity is found in the devil, for he is most severe in exacting punishment,
and mitigates nothing of the rigor. God who is clement is said, Citra
condignum punire, and ultra condignum praemiare; That is God punishes not to
the full, but he rewards above our deserts.

What is cruelty.
Again, there is in man cruelty, which punishes above measure, this cruelty
pretends some sort of Justice, and presupposes some power to punish, either by
a power indeed, or by an usurped power. This power of the devil is an usurped
power, and no marvel if he exercise it upon men out of measure.

The last is savagenes, Savagenesse is worst of all.
when men delights as beasts in cruelty, not for any justice; but only to
satisfy their cruelty; and these were called Savi, Such was that devil, Mar.
9.20. this savagenes makes men like unto beasts, and worse then beasts: The
Lion when he has killed a man, is not content to eat his flesh, and break
his bones, and suck his marrow; but he will tare his (...), or claustrum
cordis, that he may come to the heart; and that is the sweetest morsel of all
in the man to him; yet if the Bear fall down before the Lion and submit
himself to him, the Lion has that generositie in him, that he will spare the
Bear: But if man submit himself to Satan; he will tread upon him, insult
over him, and tear him most fearfully. Beasts may be somewhat excused, when
they kill men, for they are moved to it to satisfy their hunger; but these
cursed creatures, such as are serpents, and hornets, and waspes which stinges
men, and after they have killed them, they can make no use neither of their
flesh, nor of their blood to feed upon them; these are worst of all. Such is
the hatred of Satan against man, who reapes no benefit by the killing of man:
the Jews call the devils Pur-gnanijoth, that is furies, (...)
or revenging devils. These malicious spirits seek always the destruction of
man, and they think all to little which befalls man: when the Chaldeans had
robbed Job of his goods, and when fire came down and killed his sheep, and
servants, and when the house fell upon his children and smothered them, and
when he had stricken Job with botches and sores from the head to the foot;
when he had done all this (by Gods permission) to Job, he counts it all but a
touch of his finger, Job 1.11. But when he shall have full power upon the
wicked, how heavy shall his Loins be upon them; the eye has not seen, the
ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, what the
devils have prepared for the vessels of wrath.

(...) ex (...) nabis et (...) sugere in act ^xerxe. Plutarchus.
This savagenesse of the devil exceedes all the cruelty of the Tyrants of the
world: it exceedes Tzijanack navis sugentis, Ier. 29.26. which the greeks
called (...), when they enclosed a man betwixt two boards, his head being
free, and giving him by a cane a little honey and milk to suck, to keep in
his life, and annoynting his face with honey, and turning him always to the
sun, that the flies might molest and sting him the more; and within he was
eaten with worms which bred of his own corruption and filth. His cruelty
exceedes vivicomburium, Ier. 29.3. when men were put quick into the fire and
burnt: Vivicomburium.
it exceedes the cruelty of Manasseh who caused Esau to be sawed with a saw,
Heb. 11.37. It surpasses the cruelty of Antiochus when he put the Jews ad
tympanum, Tympanum.
2 Maccab. 19. It exceeds the cruelty of Nero, when he caused the Christians
to be put into a coat laid over with pitch and brimstone and burn all the
night that they might show light to those that passed by; Hence is that of
Iuvenal. Satyr. 8.

Tunica molesta.
Ausi quod liciat tunica punire molesta: It exceedes Vngulam, that sort of
torment which Cyprian, Eusebius, and Tertulia: often makes mention of. It
exceedes the cruelty of Cyclops, of Bufiris, of Phaleris, of Pyrillus, of
Schiron: No cruelty can come near to the cruelty of the Devil, Luke 22.31.
Satanas (...), is deposcere ad supplicium vel questionem, that is, he desired
that they might be put upon the rack.

There is no cre^ture that the Devil studieth to hurt but man or for man's
cause, which argues his inveterate hatred against man.

Man has a threefold life.
A man has a threefold life; first his natural life, secondly he has a
civil life, and thirdly a spiritual life. Satan hates all these three, and
studies to bereave us of them.

First, his natural life, He has a natural life.
Mar. 9.18. (...) which is to tare and rent as the dog does, Mat. 7.6. Mark
9.20. discerpit eum, and Luke 8.29. (...) he made him run violently, as the
horse when he is spurred, and made him tear and cut his own flesh with
stones Mar. 5.5.

The worship which the devils affected, The worship which the devils affected
to have man sacrificed to them, shows the great hatred which the devil has
against the natural life of man.
shows their great hatred against the natural life of man; of all the
sacrifices which was offered unto him, he delighted in none so much as in the
blood of men; as when the Jews offered their children to him, Psalm. 106.37.
and in Creete they sacrificed men to him: So did the Phoenitianes: and the
Lacedaemonians did offer 300. men to him at one time: This kind of sacrifice
was abhorred by the heathen. Eusebius de praeparatione evangelica, lib. 4. Vide
Morn Pless. pagina 385.
The King of Cyprus changed this sort of sacrifice, and in stead of men he
would have oxen offered to the gods; and Hercules traveling through Italy,
caused to make so many men of straw to be cast into Tiber, when as before they
used to cast men into it, and he is more commended for that, then for danting
all the monsters, which he overcame.

Satan hates this our natural life, therefore they are mightily deluded, who
run to a witch for their health. As Ahaziah sent to Baalzebub the god of
Ekren for his health, 2 King. 1.2. the tender mercy of the wicked are cruel
(says Solomon, Prove. 12.10.) when satan heales the body, and destroys the
soul; that is a cruel mercy, will thou prefer the vile body, Phil. 3.21.
to the precious soul. Pro. 6.26. The soul is called unica mea, Psalm. 22.20.
my darling, which is far to be preferred to the body, will thou lose thy
darling for to save thy poor body? propter vitam horae, will thou lose vitam
saeculi, thy eternal life.

Therefore those who hold that there is some devils milder, which they call
(...), a milder sort of devils (that hurts not, but takes away evil) are
deceived; and likewise that there are some witches which the common people
calls the Loosing witches, who does no hurt at all, but removes only that
hurt which the binding witch lays on the sick person: But they are most of
all deceived, who think that they can command this malicious and cruel
devil, for he will never be commanded with one of his slaves. One blamed
Aristippus, that he haunted too much the company of the harlot Thais, and more
then became a man of his profession; Aristippus answered to him, who reproved
him; This is the difference betwixt me and my corrivalls, that she commands
all the rest, but I command her; but what replied the man to him? Thou art
(says he) so much the more taken in the Net of Thais: So these who brag that
they can command the devil are so much the more his slaves, and they are
twofold more the children of hell.

The devil is a maliciovs and subtle spirit: Therefore if a man be possessed,
it were not lawful for us to ask any questions of the devil, as Christ posed
him, Mark. 5. what was his name? how many was there of them, and why he entered
into the man? Christ having absolute power over the devils, might ask him
these questions; But we have no such power over them: Therefore we may not
oppose them this way; for by this means we might be brought in familiarity
with the devils. 1 Cor. 10 20. I would not that ye should have fellowship with
the devils and by these means he more easily insnares us, we should not be
ignorant of his deceits, 2 Cor. 2.11. The Casuist Lessius holds, that it is
lawful to ask such questions of him, Lessius lib 2. cap. 42. note 70.
providing that they be asked Sine ullo sign^ benevolentiae, without any sign
of good will: Naevarrus cap. 11. not 28.
And Navarrus the casuist adds further, that if of curiosity men demand of the
devil such questions, it is no mortal sin.

So it is not lawful either to seek health of him, or of his instruments the
witches, and sorcerers; the casuist Lessius holds, If a witch by certain
magical signs given by the devil, has hurt a man, Lessius lib. 2. cap. 9.
not. 48.
In this case (if there be no other remedy) he may compel her by beating and
scratching of her, to remove this hurt or sickness, which she has laid upon
him; but withal he adds, that she must not remove this evil by another
charm, which is as evil; neither must he expect a positive effect from the
devil, but only that he cease from hurting of him any more. But we answer,
that to seek a cure by scratching of the witch, and shedding of her blood, is
a breach of the sixth commandment, and we are only to seek of the Lord that
he would remove these evils; for it is he that wounds, and he that heals:
The Lord Commanded when the Israelites were numbered that every one should pay a
ransom to the Lord, half a shekell, Exodus 30.12. that there be no plague
amongst them: by this the Lord taught them that it was he who was Lord of their
lives.

As Satan envies our natural life, so he envies our civil life: when he takes
away first our goods, Satan envies our civil life.
and then our good name; Man's goods are called his life, Luke 8.43. consumpsit
(...) she spent her whole life, that is, the goods which maintained her life.
Vivere est secundis rebus uti Job 21.7.
So Prove. 27.27. Thou shall have life for thy maids, that is, thou shall have
maintenance for thy maids; and because our goods are the means to entertain
our life, therefore, Deuteronomy. 20.19. Ye shall not cut down the tree of the field,
Quia homo est arbor agri, because man is the tree of the field, that is, the
tree entertaines the life of man; and therefore it is called a man. So Deuteronomy.
24.6. the over and the nether milstones are called a man's life; because they
are the means by the which the life of man is entertained. The Devil took
these helps from Jobs life; and the witches commonly kills men's cattle,
horses, and sheep, when they cannot hurt the men themselves.

So he envies our good name: The devil in the Syriacke, Vide Buxtor. in radice
gnug.
Math. 4. is called A kal Kartza, commedens accusationes; and the reason of the
name was this, because they gave these Sycophantes and accusers, pasties baked
with honey that they might accuse and caluminat the more freely. It was he who
objected to the Chrians, Thiestaeas caenas, incestus Oedipodeas, promiscuas
libidines, and conjurationes in principes. And therefore he is a most impudent
accuser. Satan stood at the right hand of Joshua to accuse him Zach. 3.1. ( for
the accusers stood at the right hand of him whom they accused Ps. 106) The
devil is Ptyas, Tertul and quiquid public utilitati infamis erat.
that spitting serpent Psa. 144 who spits his venom a far off; Tam absentes
laedit, quam praesentes pungit; And therefore he is called (...), He is called
(...) ^rim^nator, criminatio non sit sine ve^bis, sed Satan ad^ersotur and
verbis and factis
a (...), which properly signifies, traijcere; because with his venomous dart
he peirces the children of God: he is not (...), Susurro, who whispers
privately against the children of God; but he is an open calumniator; who
marks the wants and defects of the children of God; when Joshua stood with
soul clothes before the Lord, Satan was ready to accuse him. Zach. 3.3. when
he was new come out of the Captivity, like a firebrand new taken out of the
fire: Satan has no pity on him, but he is then ready to accuse him; if
Joshua's clothes be sulled, he is ready to mark that, so he watches for our
halting Ier. 20.10. and is glad when he sees us halt Psalm. 35.15. and if there
be a hole in our coat, he will say, we are ragged, and if we halt but a
little, he will say we are creeples. Therefore we had need to pray, Psalm
120.2. Deliver my soul O Lord from lying lips; and from a deceitful tongue.
So he envies our life in the policy, an evil spirit of discention came
betwixt Abimelech, and the men of Sechem, Judge 9.23.

But above all he envies our spiritual life: Satan above all envies our
Spiritual life.
Therefore it was that he let Saint Paul that he might not come to the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.18. for he knew well, that where there is no vision,
the people are naked, Pro. 29.18. and this was the reason why he was a lying
spirit, in the mouths of the false Prophets; And when the pastors are present
with their flocks, and sowing their good seed, Satan comes in, and pickes up
the good seed which is sown Math. 13.19. and when they have sown their good
seed, then the wicked one comes and sowes his kockell and his darnell; and
when the seed has taken root, Satan leaves not off here; he sought to winnow
Peter's faith Luke 22.31. so he labors to corrupt the pastors, to teach
heretical doctrine, and this is called a doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy

Satan envies our spiritual life, as our hearing of the Word; he possesses a
man with a deaf devil, Mark 9.25. The Lord takes the greatest pains about
our ears, more than any of the rest of all our senses to open our ear, Esaias.
50.5. to uncover our ear. Job 33.16. To circumcise our ear, Ierem. 6.10. To
unstop the ear. Esaias 35.5. To boar our ear Psalm. 40.6. So stillare in aurem,
to drope into our ear, Ezeck. 21.2. Deuteronomy. 32. Hence it is that so often it is
repeated in the Scripture, He that has ears to hear let him hear. But the
Devil shutes the ear, he possessed a man with a deaf devil, Mark 9.25. The
ear is Ianua vitae, the gate of life; Faith comes by hearing; he stops
this sense that he might not hear and so get faith.

He temptes us in our faith. 1 These. 3.5. I sent to know your faith, least by
some means the tempter should have tempted you. Sometimes he draws us to
(...) that we have no faith, when he pickes up the seed when it is new sown,
Math. 13. here there can be no faith: sometimes he draws us ad (...) to little
faith, O thou of little faith, Math. 14.31. and sometimes he draws us ad
(...) to wavering when the balance goes, (...) up and down, and keeps not an
equal measure: when Peter said to Christ Math. 26.35. If all should leave thee
yet would not I, here the balance goes up; and when he denied him at the voice
of a Damsel, Math. 26.69. here the balance goes down. So when he said to
Christ, John 13.6. Thou shall never wash my feet, here the balance goes
down, and when he said unto him, wash head feet and all, John 13.9. here the
balance goes up: So when he said Master bid me come to thee on the water,
Math. 14.28. here the balance goes up, but when he said I sink Master, Math.
14.30. here the balance goes down. But he suffers few to come to this (...)
great faith, Christ gives that commendation but to two, and they were both
strangers: to the Cananitish woman, Math. 15.28. and to the Centurion, Math.
8.10.

And how earnest he is against our spiritual life, we may see it by his often
tempting of Christ; He left him for a season, Luke 4.13. Yet he tempted him
again by the Pharisees and Saduces, and by Peter, Math. 16.23. And when Christ
was about to offer himself a sacrifice to God his Father, then came the Prince
of this world to discourage him, John 14.13.

actantius in Alen.
So Satan hates the Christians, and the Christian religion above all religion;
Lactantius. says, when the heathen were sacrificing to their gods, if a
Christian had been present they facrificed not: Hence was that saying brought
in into their mysteries (exeant Christiani) let the Christians go forth; he
hated so the Christians, that he could not abide them, nor their religion.

The Scripture gives Satan many strange and terrible names, first he is called
Satan; The Scripture gives Satan many terrible names.
because intestino odio homines prosequitur, he hates man with a deadly hatred:
he is (...) a hater of men; but we have to oppose to him Christ, who is (...),
a Lover of men. Secondly, he is called (...), the accuser of the brethten.
Revel. 12.10. This (...) signifies not any sort of accuser, but such an accuser
who accuses before a King. In the Revel. 12.10. he is called the accuser
before the Lord; So he accused Joshua before the Lord Zach. 3.3. and opposite
to him, we have (...) and (...), who interceeds with the King for us. Christ is
our (...); or advocate 1 Ioh. 2.1. Thirdly the devil is called Abaddon, and
Apollyon, Revel. 9.12. and the Devils are called Sheddim, Deuteronomy. 32.17. Psalm.
105.37. from Shadad, evertere, praedari, (...) demon.
vastare. Esaias 16.22.23. And in the History of Tobias, (...) vastabit.
the devil is called Ashmodeus, from Shamad, vastare; because he makes havocke,
and wastes all; and opposite to him is Christ, who is our Savior and saves us.
(...) dominus muscae.
Fourthly, the devil is called Beelzebub, dominus muscarum, lord of flies; the
Legions of the devils flies in the middle Region of the air: But the Lord of
Hosts is opposite to him, who has commandment over all the creatures. Fifthly,
he is that old Serpent, Revel. 12.19. And the Serpent opposite to him, is Christ
lift up in the wilderness. Ioh. 3.14. Last Satan is a roaring Lion; and Christ
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is opposite to him. Revel. 15.15. When Zachary
saw four horns lifted up to scatter Israel, he saw four Carpenters ready to
beat them down, Zach. 1.10. So whatsoever horns Satan lifts up against the
Church, The Lord is ready to beat them down, and if there be poison in the
Serpent, Christ is our Antidote.

In every fight it is most fit that we know our own weakness, and the
strength of our adversary: It was of old a most fearful thing (...), to
fight with beasts, 1 Cor. 15.32. we have to fight with a roaring Lion, and an
old serpent, qui (...) est, who uses both craft and malice in his fight
against us: Therefore seeing we are not able to withstand him in this fight, we
should pray to the Lord God who is Ish milthama, vir belli, that he would
stand for us least we fall in this combat.

SECT. 15. By what means Satan is to be resisted.
THe weapons wherewith Satan is to be resisted, are not carnal weapons, 2 Cor.
10.4. for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through God to
the pulling down of strong holds.

First we will handle here the counterfeit and false weapons, by which men
have gone about to resist Satan, and next the true weapons by which he is to
be resisted.

The counterfeit weapons which have been used to resist the devil.
The counterfeite weapons by which men have gone about to resist Satan, were
either in the Jewish synagogue or Christian Church.

The counterfeit weapons in the Jewish synagogue.
In the Jewish synagogue, God commanded the Jews to wear Phylacteries, to put
them in remembrance to observe the Law of God, out they abused these Tephilim,
or Phylacteries, they made them (...) or helps to prayer; as though they were
derived from Palal, precari to pray, and not from Taphal, apponere, which is
the right root; and the 70. translate them (...), if as ye would say immobilia,
things that could not be removed, but afterward they abused them to be (...),
remedies against enchantments, which varro called Praebia, quasi brevia; hence
comes our word brief which Satan gives to men for to save themselves from
hurts. Therefore it was altogether prohibited in the Council of Laodicea to
make Phylacteries. The Chaldee paraphrast paraphrasing upon Cant. 3.8. brings
in the synagogue of the Jews, speaking after this manner, I am beloved above
all people, because I bind my Tephilim upon my left hand, and the paper is
affixed to my right side, and the third part of it looks toward my bed, that
there may be no power in the Devils to hurt me. Here they abuse their
phylicteries as a remedy against Magic.

Secondly, they abused their circumcision, making it a remedy against Satan,
the Chaldee paraphrast paraphrasing upon the words of Soloman Cant. 3.8. (Every
one has his sword upon his thigh for the fear of the night) he notes this
word upon the thigh to be the seal of circumcision in the flesh, whereby they
prevail and do not fear the devils that walk abroad in the night.

Thirdly, they abused incense, making it a means to banish the devil, Cant.
4.6. (I will get me to the hill of incense) The Chaldee paraphrast
pharaphrasing upon this place, says, Omni tempore quo populus domus Israel
tenebat manibus suis artem patrum suoru^ justoru^, fugiebant daemones nocentes,
tenebriones, and matutini, and meridiani; eo quod majestas gloriae domini
residebat in domo sanctuarij, quae aedificata est in monte Moriah, and omnes
daemones and spiritus nocentes sugiebant ab odore incensi aromatum; that is,
all the time that the house of Israel kept the Art of their holy Fathers, the
devils fled away, both the morning devils, and those of the midde day; because
the majesty of God dwelt in the sanctuary, which was built upon mount Moriah,
and all the devils fled away when they smelled the smell of this incense.

Fourthly, they held that roots and herbs had power to expel the devil.
Josephus lib. 7. cap. 23. Radix quae bara dicitur, ^ statim expellit daemonia;
The root called Bara presently drives out the devil. And the same Josephus in
his book 8. of Antiquity cap. 7. shows, that Solomon had skill in exorcising,
and conjuring of spirits; which he got from the Lord, as the rest of his
knowledge; and that he used to hold these roots to the nostrells of the
possessed, that by the smell or smoke of these, the devils might be driven
out. Thus we see how the Jews in these times were too much given to magic.

Fifthly, they took the Liver of a fish whereby they might cast out Satan. Tob.
7. but these are carnal weapons, and the devil does no more care for such
weapons, than the Leviathan does, who esteems Iron as straw, and brass as
rotten wood, Job 41.27. The arrow cannot make him fly, slingstones are turned
with him into stubble, and he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.

Object. But they say, because the Angels assume bodies upon them; therefore
bodily things may affect them, and please them, or displease them.

Answ. The bodies which they took upon them were not the bodies of flesh and
blood, as ours are. Luk 24. a Spirit has not flesh and bones, Ephesians. 6.12. We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers:
when the spirits assumed bodies they were but Aeriall bodies, they could
neither be drowned, burned, nor hurt, they were only dissolved again into
the Element; No bodily thing could hurt them: when the Seraphin took a coal
from the Altar with a pair of tongs, the Seraphin did not this for fear of
burning Esaias 6. But only to show that he would use the ordinary means which
were appointed for the Altar, when he took the coal from it: So the Angel
when he appeared in a body to Manoah he went up in the fire, but was not
burnt by it, Judge 13.20.

No external thing can affect the devil, as we are affected with such: beauty
affects not his sight; music affects not his hearing; nor odours his smell,
for he being a spirit, nothing affects him but similitude of manners: Therefore
that is fabulous which is set down in Tobit 6.14. That the devil was in love
with S^^ah for her beauty; he loved her not for the gifts of her mind, for then
he should have loved them best who exceed most in graces; but he hated Christ
above all others: Therefore he does not love any for the graces of their mind,
but hates them more: when the devil beholds the goodness of the creatures, as
their beauty, comeliness, honesty, etc. although in the general he see them
to be good; yet he is so carried with his habitual malice, that he cannot like
the good that is in any creature; And even as these wretches, who make
themselves away, have a general liking of their life by the very instinct of
nature; yet through grief and despair they put often hands on themselves: so
the habitual malice of the devils suffers them not to like any good that is in
the creature. The counterfeit weapons in the Christian Church.


So the Christian Church uses false means to expel the devils, as the Church
of Rome uses salt, spittle, holy water, and consecrate oil; the primitive
Church first used this oil in working of miracles, then the fathers afterward
used it by imitation; and last the Papists use it as viaticum to further them
to heaven.

So they use exorcising of devils, Christ himself cast out devils by the power
of the spirit, and so he left this power of exorcising for a while in the
Church, for the establishing of the Gospel when it was new planted; he does
otherwise in constituenda ecclesia, than he does in constituta ecclesia: And
even as a Gardener when he removes a tree out of one ground to another, he sets
so many stays to it to hold it up, and he powers water against the root of it
daily, but when it has once taken root, he pulls away the stays from it,
and leaves it to the ordinary course of growing, as other trees; So the Lord
bestows at the first in the infancy of the Church these miracles, as stays
to confirm, and uphold l^er; but now when she is settled, he takes away these
helps, and makes her to grow by the ordinary course of grace; and if these
miracles should have endured still in the Church, of extraordinary things they
should have become ordinary and nothing regarded.

In the Primitive Church these gifts lasted for a while; but now to use this
exorcising in the Church, is to use that which is out of date, and it is now
but a carnal weapon which Satan cares not for; Vrim and Thummim were two
precious stones set in the breast plate of Aaron, by the which he answered the
people when he asked him of matters doubtful; these two stones were not in
the second temple; now if the priest should have put in two counterfeit stones
in the breast plate, and had given his answers to the people By them (when as
the Lord answered not by Vrim and Thummim) would he not have been holden for a
deceiver? So he who professes himself now to be an exorcist, when as the gift
cease in the Church now, he is to be accounted an imposter and deceiver.

There were three sorts of gifts bestowed upon the Church; some simply
necessary, as the Word and Sacraments: some were necessary for her in statu
legali, when she was under the rudiments of the Law, which are not necessary
now under the Gospel, as the ceremonies of the Law: Thirdly some gifts were
bestowed upon the Church in the infancy of the Gospel, such as were the gift
of tongues, of healing, and of exorcising, and these now are abolished. The
matter may be illustrate by this comparison: The Prince when he is a child, he
has a tutor to teach him, and a regent or administrator to rule and govern
him, and thirdly, he has his counselors, but when he comes to majority, he
has no master any more; he has not a regent or administrator any more,
Exoreismus fuit apud ^udae osante Christi ad ventum sed postea una cum
religione desiit apud ipsos and translata est, ad ecclesiam Christi, Act. 19.
but only his counselors who abides with him: So the Church in her infancy,
was under Moses law, as under (...) pedagogue: And when the Gospel was first
planted, the Church had these extraordinary gifts, as a time for a regent or
administrator; but she has the Word and Sacraments to remain with her as her
counselors perpetually. The true means to resist Satan.


The true means to resist Satan, are; first, the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6.16.
Above all taking the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked; where the Apostle alludes to the custom of
old, for when they dipped the heads of their arrows in poison, and shot them
at their enemies, they fired their flesh: So Satan's tentations are fiery darts,
and the shield of faith is said to quench them. The soldiers of old had their
shields made of raw neates leather, (as Polibius testifies, and Vigetius
writing de re militari) and when the fiery darts lighted upon them, they were
presently quenched; so these fiery tentations of the devil, when they hit the
shield of faith, they are presently quenched, and abiunt in spicas, Psa.

The next true means for the casting out of the devil, is prayer and fasting,
Mat. 7.21. This kind of devil is not cast out but by prayer and fasting.

Fasting and prayer are two excellent means to banish Satan; therefore it is
that the Lord allows the husband and the wife for a time to go asunder, that
they may give themselves to fasting and prayer, and then come together again,
that Satan tempt them not to incontinencie; and the Lord ( Joel 2.16. wills the
bridegroom and the bride to go forth of their bedchamber to sanctify a fast.

Quest. How did Christ, Math. Chap. 9. ver. 14. take the defense of his
disciples when they fasted not, as the Pharisees and John's disciples did,
seeing fasting is such an excellent mean for to banish Satan? How excuses he
them for intermitting this duty?

Answ. Christ takes the defense of his disciples here, because it was not time
for them to fast, so long as the bridegroom was with them; but elsewhere he
reproves them for not fasting. It is a good rule of the Schoolmen, that
affirmativa ligant semper, sed non ad semper, that is, affirmative precepts
bind us; but not always and at all times. The Lord commands them to fast; but
not when the bridegroom was with them, See Nehe. 8.10.

Paul prayed thrice against the temptations of Satan, and Christ blamed his
disciples because they had not joined fasting and prayer together to cast out
the devil; and where it is said, that the Pharisees and John's disciples
fasted, but not Christ's disciples; the meaning is, they fasted not usually as
John's disciples and the Pharisees did, but yet they fasted.

The third weapon to beat the devil, is the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.16.
take the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, Cant. 2.8. It is called
the sword of the spirit, because it is directed immediately by the spirit, and
because this sword pierces to the heart.

This sword differs from the magistrates sword; this sword proceeds out of
the mouth of the Lord, Rev. 1.10. and it is called the rod of his mouth, Esaias
11. but the magistrate carries his sword only in his hand.

Thirdly, this sword is called (...) and (...), a two edged sword, it can both
kill and save: The Magistrates sword can only kill, but never quicken to
restore a man to life; Saul's sword never returned empty from the blood of the
slain, 2 Samuel 1.20. It always killed, but it could never quicken, but this
sword can do both; therefore it has not been unfitly compared to the bitter
waters; when the woman that was guilty of adultery drank them, her thigh
rotted, and she died; but if she had been an honest woman, then having drank
of these bitter waters, she conceived, and brought forth a child; so this sword
both kills and quickneth.

This sword divides betwixt the soul and the spirit; but the Magistrates sword
divides only the head from the body.

This sword is of greatest force against the devils tentations; It was by this
sword that Christ beat Satan and all his tentations, Mat. 4. when the disciples
returned back from the preaching of the Gospel, then Christ says, Luke 10.18.
I saw Satan fall as lightning from heaven: the preaching of the Gospel is the
special mean to make Satan fall; when David gat the sword of Goliath in his
hand, having experience of it, before he said, there is no sword like that, 1 Samuel 21.10. so there is no sword like this sword in the spiritual combat
against the devil.

Quest. What if the Lord should suffer Satan to appear to us in a visible
shape? whether might we use the sword of the word against him or not?

Answ. We may not, Satan is a very subtle enemy, and can easily circumvent
us; therefore we should not reason with him, did he not deceive Eva in her
best estate, when she reasoned with him? how shall we be able then to resist
him: Our part only then in such a case is this, to turn about our faces to
the Lord, and weep upon him, and desire the Lord to rebuke him.

Object. If it be said, why may we not use this sword against Satan, if he
should visilby appear to us, as well as when we are commanded to use it
against his tentations?

Answ. His tentations are not so subtle when he tempts us, as when he
appears visibly to us face to face; for his tentations are mixed with our
corruptions, which are not as subtle as Satan himself is, and therefore it is
easier to resist these tentations by the word, than to resist Satan himself.

SECT. 16. That Sorcerers and Witches should be put to death.
THere are three sorts of people whom Satan tempts; first, those whom he tempts
contrary to their will; as those who were possessed in the primitive Church,
called (...); those should not be put to death; those they pitied and placed
inter Catechumenos, amongst those who were catechized in the Church.

The second sort are those who enter in an indirect covenant with the devil;
those were not put to death, sed admonebantur tantum, they were only
admonished.

Those who enter in direct covenant with the devil should die the death.
The third sort were those who entered into the direct covenant with the devil,
and those were to die the death, Deuteronomy. 18.11. For all that do these things are
abomination to the Lord. So Lev. 20.27.

The Jews in their thirteen rules of expounding of the Scripture, this is the
eight rule; when a precept is set down, it is not set down, ut doceat de se
non exivit, sed ut docrat de toto univers^ exivit: Their meaning is, if a thing
be spoken generally elsewhere, and then be explained more plainly, this
clearer explanation is to be referred to the general: Example, the Magitians
indefinitely are commanded to die the death, Exo. 22.18. Thou shall not suffer
a witch to live. But Lev. 20.27. A man also or a woman that had a familiar
spirit, or that is a wizzard shall be surely put to death, they shall stone
them with stones, and their blood shall be upon them. Hence they conclude that
all sort of Magitians should die the death.

The diviners (they hold) should not die the death; first, they say that Kesem,
who is a diviner, and who takes upon him only to foretell things to come, he
should not die the death, but be admonished only.

Secondly, they say that Menaches, Maimonides hujusmodi artium sectatores vel
lapidibus obruendi erunt, ut lidgnom, Bagnal, O^h, and Mekasheph, vel mitiori
poena mulctandi ut Cosem, Menaches, and Megnonan.
who marks the flying of the fowls ought not to die the death, he is to be
admonished, and other ways censured.

Thirdly, incantator, the charmer is not to die the death, non facit opus
peccatoris, as they say in phesikta, that is, they do not any thing that
deserves death.

Fourthly, Hamegronen, qui observat nubes, he is not to die the death, and they
say of him, Non moritur and est liber etiam a plagis; that is, he should not
die, and he is free from stripes.

And lastly, they say, Qui perstringit ^o^l^s, who deceives the sight, as
Inglers, non moritur, sed admonetur, he is not to die the death, but only to
be admonished.

But these three were always to be put to death, first, Mekasheph malefitus,
or pharmacus, they are called veneficae, Exodus 22.18.

Secondly, Obh, those who had a familiar spirit.

Thirdly, Iidgnoni, (...), qui multa novit and praedicit: Targum translates him
Ariolus, these were always put to death, as in Saul's days, he cut off the
wizzards, and those who had familiar spirits 1 Samuel 28.9. and Josias took away
the workers with familiar spirits and wizzards, 2 King. 23.24. Saul, who caused
before familiar spirits and wizzards to be taken away; now because he falls to
consult with them again, therefore justly he falls into the hands of the
Philistines and is killed.

When Tiberius was Emperor he caused to hang up those sorcerers, and put them
to death, ad sacros lucos suspendebantur.

Magitians should lose their temporary estate.
As the Magitians should be put to death, so should they lose their temporal
estate and inheritance; the Canaanites for their same was cast out of Canaan,
Deuteronomy. 18.12. Because of these abominations, the Lord thy God did drive out the
Canaanites before thee, Although children should not be put to death for their
fathers offenses, 2 King. 14.6. yet they may be other ways punished for their
fathers offenses, as to be forfeited, and to lose their fathers inheritance,
Lessius page 53. not. 66.
as the imperial laws have ordained: the Casuists add, that if a Magitian
should find a treasure hid in the ground (whereas a third part of it should
fall to the finder) yet neither the Magitian nor his children should have any
part of it, and ea pars quae inventoris fuit adjudicatur fisco, that is, that
part which should have befallen to the finder, is adjudged to the common
treasure, and besides all these temporary evils, Sorcerers and Witches should
not enter within the holy city, Rev. 21.27. And there shall in no ways enter
into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abhomination^ the
greatest abomination that God abhorred, Magitians are excluded from the
kingdom of God.
is witchcraft, D^^t. 18.12. therefore they shall never enter within the holy
city.

Of the third degenerate Son, the IDOLATER.
IT is not known whence the river Nilus springs; all condescend upon this,
that this river springs first out of the hills called montes Lunae; but out of
what spring it aryseth first, no man can tell; But yet we see that out of these
small beginnings it aryseth to a great river, and runs through Ethiopia,
turning the course now this way, now that way, and then runs into Egypt: at
last it divides it self into seven branches, and runs into the Mediterranean
sea. And so we may judge of the beginning of Idolatry and progress thereof:
This we know in general, that Idolatry is a work of the flesh, Whence
Idolatry took the beginning.
Gal. 5.20. and it comes from a mind obscured with darkness, John 4.24. and
from a corrupt understanding, Hose. 13.2. and they made them Idolles according
to their own understanding, and from a will corrupted; therefore it is called
will worship, Col. 2.23. and from the senses corrupted, and especially from the
sight: therefore we are forbidden to go a whoring after our own eyes, Number.
15.35. But in particular to tell who invented this Idolatry first, or where it
was invented, that we cannot do, for while men slept, the enemy came and
sowed tares, Mat. 13.25. But as men know that Nilus took the beginning from a
small original, and piece and piece increases unto a great river: Such is the
beginning and progress of Idolatry, that it has now overspread the most part
of the world.

SECT. 1. Of the beginning of Idolatry.
IT is most probable that this Idolatry took the beginning from the love
which men carry to their dead parents, to set up images and statues to them in
remembrance of them, which Satan afterward moved them to worship: and then they
began to say to the stock thou art my father, Ier. 2.27. and to the stone that
thou have brought me forth; Men set up first images in remembrance of their
fathers, and afterward fell to worship them.
and hence it was that they were commanded to forget their fathers house when
they were to leave Idolatry, Psalm. 45.10. That is the religion which they had
from their parents, and which was continued amongst them in remembrance of
their fathers: And those Idolaters are more blamed who chose new Gods which
their fathers knew not, Deuteronomy. 32.17.

The devil made them believe that images were sent down from God.
Secondly, the subtle devil deluded people; and made them believe that the
gods sent down images from Heaven, which they called (...) coming down from
Jupiter, Act. 19.35. So he made them believe that gods came down to them in
the likeness of men, The devil made men believe that images made with men's
hands had some divine power assisting them.
Act. 14.11. and so they worshipped them. Thirdly, he made them believe that
those images which were made with men's hands had some divine power assisting
them, and that they were not like other works of men's hands; Acts 19.26. It is
natural for all men to have some god or other; and men according to their
several inclinations found gods to themselves, some one way, and some another;
Men fained gods to themselves according to their several inclinations.
Those who were inclined to war made Mars for their God, and the Scythians a
belicouse people worshipped their sword; and those who inclined to filthiness
or lust, made Venus for their godesse; And the Jews worshipped Tammuz, Ezech.
8.14. with their (...), and from hence sprang all their fabulous theology (as
Varro calls it) of the incests, adulteries, and rapts of their Gods: So men
inclining to coveteousnesse made their gods accordingly, as the Philistines
made Dagon a fish their god, because they lay near the sea coast and used
fishing; So some worshipped a sheep, as the Syrians worshipped gnashtoroth a
sheep, So in Egypt they worshipped an ox; an ox was a sign to them of plenie
of corn, Pro. 14.4. where no oxen are the crib is clean, but much increase is
by the strength of the ox; and those who were given to drunkenness made
Bacchus their god; Vide Amianum dego es de rebus ethiopicis, lib. 3
And even as the Ethiopians because they are black themselves, paint the good
Angels black like themselves, and the devils white; So did men imagine of
their gods, and made them like unto themselves, and that which they affected
most, foolish man imagine that God is like unto him, Psalm. 50. because I held
my peace thou thoughtest I was like unto thee.

When men beheld the stars, first they observed the influx of the stars,
and that bred Physic: secondly they observed the course of the stars, and
that bred Astronomy. Thirdly, they used predictions by the stars, and that
bred Astrology: Fourthly, they worshipped the stars, and that was Idolatry.

They worshipped their gods of gold; silver, iron, wood, and stone, Dan. 5.4.
they represented Jupiter, by gold, Venus, or Diana, by silver, they made silver
shrines to Diana; They represented Caeres, by wood, and Pluto and the infernal
gods, by stone.

To these Idols they gave all honor which was due to God, they called them
their husbands, Hos. 2.7. they called them their kings, Zeph. 1.5. and their
gods, and their kings and their great men took names from those Idols, as
Nebuchadnezer, and Nebuch palassar took their names from their Idol Nebo,
Isa. 46.1. So Balthazar, Hanniball, Hasdruball, took their names from Baal, so
the King of the Sidonians was called Ethbaal, 1 Samuel 6.31. and others took
their names from Bell, which is the contraction of Baal; So they bestowed their
goods upon their Idols, they sacrificed their children unto them, and powered
out all their affections upon them, and they held that all which they did
possess they possessed it by their Idols, Iud. 11.24.

SECT. 2. How great a sin this sin of Idolatry is.
GOd who is the supreme and independent cause, from whom are all things, by
whom are all things, and for whom are all things, who is Alpha and Omega, God
has reserved three things to himself which he will not communicace to
creatures.
is worthy of greatest honor; and he has reserved three things to himself,
which he will not communicate with any creature. The first is absolute and
supreme power in judging man's standing and falling; Who art thou that Iudgest
another man's servant Romans 14.4. there is a great wrong done to this supreme
Lord, when man takes upon him to sit in his judicatorie, which only belongs
to God.

The second thing, which God has reserved to himself is vengeance, Romans
12.19. Vengeance is mine, I will repay (says the Lord) when any creature takes
upon him that which the Lord has reserved for himself, then he dishonors
God. God has reserved his glory for himself.


The third and greatest of all, is his glory and worship; which he has
reserved for himself; and that he will communicate to no creature. God is
liberal enough otherways to man; he communicates to him his goodness, his
mercy, and bountifulness; but he has reserved his worship for himself: He
gave Adam liberty to eat of all the trees of the garden, but he reserved to
himself the tree of knowledge of good and evil; and even as in the
eucharisticall sacrifices, the Priest got a part, and the people got a part,
but the Lord reserved the fat for himself, Levit. 3.3. So the Lord has
reserved his worship for himself, therefore when Idolaters bestow this divine
worship upon creatures, this is a horrible and a fearful sin.

In every sin there concur two things, first aversio a Deo, a turning from
God, and conversio ad creaturam, In every sin there is an a version from God
and a turning to the creature.
a turning to the creature; and the baser and vilder that the creatures be
which a man turns himself to, the sin is the greater; when Demas embraced
this present world, here was a great aversion from God, and a turning to the
creature; but in Idolatry there is a greater aversion from God and a turning to
the creature, for here he turns himself to the Devil, who is most opposite to
God; for the worshipping of Idols is the worshipping of Devils, Deuteronomy. 32.17.
Psalm. 106.7. 1 Cor. 10.21.

To refuse the most excellent, and to choose the vilest, Idolaters refuse the
most excellent and choose the vilest.
this is great madness: when the trees of the field despised the vine tree
Judges 9. which cheered both God and man, and the Olive tree for all his
fatness, and the Fig tree for all his sweetness, and made choice of the
bramble to reign over them, what a miserable choice was this; there came a
fire from the bramble and burnt the trees of the field: So for a man to refuse
the living God, and to make choice of a base Idol, and worship it, what a bad
choice was this: And what marveile is it that there comes not a fire of the
wrath of God, and consume these Idolaters.

The Angels have always refused divine worship.
The most excellent creatures in heaven, the Angels have always refused to
accept of this divine worship, Rev. 19.10. If thou will offer a burnt offering,
thou must offer it to the Lord, Judge. 13.16. but the devils have taken this
worship unto themselves, and by all means sought it: The devil accepted of
this spiritual worship at Saul's hand, when he bowed himself before him: so he
sought it of Christ, Mat. 4. It must be a horrible sin then to commit this
Idolatry; the good Angels and glorified spirits are set down to us for
imitation, and not the devils.

Idolatry dissolves the marriage betwixt Christ and his Church.
This Idolatry is the greatest sin, because it dissolves the marriage betwixt
Christ and his Church: This idolatry is spiritual adultery; for the which the
Lord repudiates his Church: This sin of Idolatry blots the children, and
gives them place to plead against their whoorish mother, Hos. 2.2. Plead with
your mother, plead with your mother, for ye are the children of fornication.

Four things are considered in Religion.
In Religion there are four things which we ought to consider: first, we ought
to consider the infinite majesty of God, and that all things depend on him.
Secondly, we should consider our own baseness and vileness, and that we are
nothing, and have nothing of our selves. Thirdly, there must be an earnest and
true submission of the mind to God, which the mind must acknowledge within it
self. Fourthly, there are external signs, and bodily gestures and actions
required, testifying this inward reverence which we carry to God. The Angels
having no bodies, testify this their reverence by internal and spiritual
submission to God; and when the Angels appeared in visible shapes, they covered
their faces before the Lord, in token of their submission to him: and man must
testify this his obedience both in mind and body. Now when man considers not
the great and high majesty of God, then he begins to resemble God to a
creature, and he gives the creatures that worship which is due only to God,
When men consider not the great majesty of God, and their own baseness they
fall into Idolatry.
and this is Idolatry. Secondly, when he considers not his own baseness and
vileness, but ^ve, ^^^s himself above his own condition, then he comm^^s
Idolatry; take for an example the King of Tire, who elevated himself far
above his own condition, Ezech. 28.3. who thought himself wiser than Daniel,
and that there was no secrets hid from him; his contempt led him yet higher;
he thought himself more glorious than the high priest for all the precious
stones in his breast plate; he thought himself wiser than Adam when he was in
Eden, ver. 13. and yet he ascends more, he thought himself like a Cherub, or
an Angel of God, verse. 14. and lastly, when he can go no higher, he thinks
himself not inferior to God himself, verse 2. And so Antichrist takes that
honor to him which is due only to God, This sin is called (...), Mark.
7.21. ab (...), and (...) ostendo, quasi digit is pedum insistens supra
caeteros caput extollit seque conspiciendum praebet; Sic metitur se perse, 2
Cor. 10.12.
1 These. 2.4. when he sits in the house of God as God; when men consider not
the majesty of God, but begins to resemble him to a creature, than the
balance goes down, and they will give his worship to the very creeping
things; but when man forgets himself; and elevates himself above his
condition, then the balance goes up, and he never makes a stay until he
equal himself with God.

The Lord tanted and mocked those Idolaters, The Lord mocked and tanted
Idolaters and Idols.
showing their madness, how with one piece of the tree he warmed himself,
and of another piece of the tree he made a God, and worshipped; and so the
heathen mocked these worshippers of Idols; Seneca, Quid (inquit) brutalius est,
quam statuis sacrifices, statuarium vero mensa tua excludas, apud statuam genua
tua flectis, pictorem aperto capite coram te stantem despicis and negligis,
what is more senseless and brutish (says Seneca) then for thee to sacrifice to
an Idol, and yet thou will not suffer him who made the Image to come to thy
table; thou bowest thy knee before the Image, and yet thou suffers him who made
the Image to stand ba^^^ded before thee, and him thou despisest and ^^g^^cts.
So Diagoras jested at the Idols of old, and when he saw the Image of Hercules,
he pulled it down, and threw it into the fire, and said, this shall be the
thirteenth labor of Hercules: Thus we see every man a beast in his own
knowledge, No sin has so many shifts for it as Idolatry has.
Ier. 10.14.

There is no sin that has so many shifts for it self as this sin has,
as the whore wiped her mouth, and said, she did it not, Prove. 30.20. So they
deny, extenuate, and cover this sin; therefore it is that the Lord when he
describes this spiritual whoredom; Why the Lord describes Idolatry in such
plain terms.
he describes it in more plain and open terms, then he does bodily
whoredom, Ezech. 16.15. Thou powrest out thy fornications upon every one that
passes by, his it was; and verse 25. Thou have opened thy feet to every one
that passes by; and verse 26. Thou have committed fornications with thy
neighbor, great of flesh; and Chap. 23.30. She doted upon their paramoures,
whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose Issue is as the issue of
horses; but when the Lord speaks of bodily adultery, he speaks in more
covered terms, as Prove. 9.17. Stolen waters are sweet. So he describes by
eating, She eats and wipeth her mouth, Prove. 30.20. and the reason is,
because men are more sensselesse in taking up this spiritual adultery, and
they use more shifts to hide it; and therefore the Lord sets it down in such
plain terms.

The Lord says, What signifies to set up an image before God.
Ye shall not make to thy self any graven image, gnal pani before me, gnal
panai signifies either continuance of time, or notes a place. (...)


First continuance of time, that so long as I am, So long as the Lord lives no
image must set up before him.
ye shall not choose another god, Number. 3.4. And Eleazar and Ithamar ministered
in the Priests office, in the sight of Aaron their father, gnal peni Aharon,
vivente adhuc Aarone. So 1 Samuel 31, 1. and the child Samuel ministered unto the
Lord before Eli, lipne gneli ante Eli, that is while Eli was alive, Deuteronomy.
21.16. (...)
ye may not make the son of the beloved first borne, before the son of the
hated, gnal peni ben, juxta faciem filij exosae, that is, so long as the son
of the hated lives. So Exodus 20. Ye shall have no other Gods before me, gnal
panai, ante seu coram me; that is, so long as I live.

So it is taken for a place; In no place an image must be set up before him.
ye shall neither set up an Idol before me, either privately or publickely,
for Gods face is every where privately: the Lord forbids them, Deuteronomy. 27.15.
Neither privately.
Cursed be he that makes any graven or molten image an abomination of the
Lord, the work of the hand of the craftsman, and puts it in a secret place.
So the Lord abhored the chamber of their imagerie Ezekiel. 8.12. Neither
publickely.
and he forbids them publickely to commit that Idolatry in the visible Church;
Cain fled from the face of the Lord Genes. 4.16. That is from the visible
Church; So the propitiatory in the Church of Jerusalem was called the face of
God Exodus 25. they were called panes facierum, because they stood before the
propitiatory the face of the Lord; therefore the Lord forbids to set up an Idol
before him: It was a great malapertnesse in the Jews to set up their Idols in
mount Olivet, just under the Lords nose; therefore it was called 2 Kings 23.23.
not men's Oliverum hamishka unctionis, but chamishceth perditionis, Elegans
paranomafia.
God never looked out of the holiest of all, but he saw this vile Idolatry: to
set up this image of jealousy in the sight of the Lord, was a vile
abomination Ezekiel. 18.

Before my face; the laws of men at the first commanded, if the husband should
apprehend the adulterer with his wife, then he should kill them both; as Solon
and Draco his Laws ordained; Plutarch in the life of Solon. Codice titulo. l.
Gracchus Covaruvius de matrimonio. 2. p. c. 7 7.
but the Law of the twelve tables mitigates this afterward, Maechum in
adulterio deprehensum necato, si vilis est, the husband might kill the
adulterer with the adulteress, if he was a base person. So when the Lord
apprehends his Church committing abomination with these Idols, and apprehends
her in (...), may he not justly kill the adultresse?

Before my face, the Schoolmen have a good axiom, Bonum nisi ex causa
integra, malu^ vero ex quocunque defectu pessimum vero ex defectu maximo.
Circumstances do much exaggerat a sin, for as in man it is not enough that the
body have all the complete parts to make up the perfection of it; but there is
requisite likewise proportion, color, situation of parts, and if any of these
be wanting, then a man is thought an uncomely man, Bonum hic ex integra causa
nascitur; but if any thing be wanting, then that breeds defect, but the
greatest defect arises of the greatest want, and which is farthest from the
good: It was a great sin in Absalon to lie with his fathers concubines in any
place, but to lie with them in the sight of the sun, before all the people,
this was a double sin and a deformity 2 Samuel 16.23. So for Cozbi and Zimri
to commit their wickedness in any place, was a great sin, but to commit this
sin in the sight of Moses and of all the congregation, when all the people
were weeping before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Number. 25.6. this was a
fearful sin: So to commit this Idolatry in a private place was a great
sin, but for the Israelites to have committed this sin before the Lord in
the sight of the whole Congregation, this was a sin committed with a high
hand against the Lord.

SECT. 3. Of the division of Idolaters.
AN Idolater is either a formal Idolater, A formal Idolater and a material
Idolater.
or a material Idolater; the formal Idolater is he who has a false
conception of God, and worshippes him falsely.

The conception of God is either verus, analogicus, The conception of God is
verus analogicus or falsus.
or falsus. We have either a true conception of God; or a conception of God by
way of Analogy; God only has a true conception of himself.
or a false conception of God. The true conception of God is that which God
has only of himself; for he only conceives himself as he is; A conception
of God by way of analogy is not a false conception.
we take him up only by way of analogy: this conception is not a false
conception of God, for we being but finite creatures, cannot comprehend the
infinite God but finitely, and although our conception answer not to the
infinite God, yet we conceive not here any Idol; for this conception is judged
here after the manner of him who conceives, and not after the manner of him who
is conceived: Our eye when it beholds the fire it receives into it the image of
the fire, but not the essence of the fire; So we conceive of God according to
our conception: When the Cherubims represented the angels in the Temple, this
representation was rather of their qualities and actions, then of their
persons; they were painted with the faces of children to signify their
mildness; and with wings, to signify their agilitie, and with the crist of a
Lion, to signify their strength: So when God is described to us by way of
analogy in the Scripture; the essence of God is not described to us, but only
his actions, that we may take him up by way of analogy.

What is a false conception of God.
The false conception of God is this, when the Idolater thinks he may resemble
God, by a creature, and so worship the creature, or him by the creature, Psalm.
106.20. Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an Ox that eats
grass; and this is a false conception of God, as when these heretics called
(...) thought that God had a body indeed as men have.

To set Christ God and man before us is the way to keep us from a false
conception.
But least our minds should err in conceiving of God, who is infinite, and we
take him up but finitely, therefore let us set Christ God and man, as the
object of our mind when we worship; He that sees the Son sees the Father
John 14.10. If a man should behold himself in a Cristall glass, he should not
see his face in it, but if we put steel in the back of the glass (as we see
in looking glasses) then we behold the reflexe of our face perfectly in the
glass: So when we behold the divinity by it self, our minds waver, and
there comes no comfortable reflex from it; but God assuming the humanity, this
makes a comfortable reflexe as the steel does to the glass, and this helps
our conception, when we look this ways upon God made man.

The formal Idolater worships the image. The material Idolater makes the
image.
The formal Idolater is he who worships the image, and the material Idolater
is he who makes the image; the Israelites said to Aaron, make Gods to us who
may go before us; Aaron made the Calfe and he was the material Idolater: but
the Israelites who worshipped the Calfe, they were the formal Idolaters: If
one had come into the shop of Demetrius the silver smith, and had asked what he
was doing, if he should have answered that he was making gods, he should not
have answered rightly here; for he that worships and adores the image
properly makes a God of it.

Qui fingit sacros auro, vel marmore vultus
Non facit ille deos; qui rogat, ille facit.
SECT. 4. Of the effects of Idolatry.
Sundry are the effects of Idolatry; Idols have sundry names in Scripture.
wherefore in the scripture the Idols get sundry names, they are called
gelilim, gods of dung, because they are loathsome, and defile the conscience of
men proceeding as dung and excrements out of man's corrupt heart, Shickutsim,
(...)
that is loathsome things, Ezeck. 20.8. and they are called Zirim, Isa. 45.16.
as ye would say Tormina, such as a woman has in childbirth: (...)
And they are called gnazthamini sorrows, Psalm. 115.4. 1 Samuel 31.9. which
brings nothing to a man but sorrow, Psalm. 16.4. So they are bosheth pudor, Ier.
5.19. and 11.13. (...)
the same name which is given to a man's privy parts, Deuteronomy. 25.11. So they are
called Miphlezeth horrenda Statua. 1 Kings 15.13. and Isa. 65.4. (...)
they are called custodita in contempt, because they cannot keep themselves,
see Isa. 46.1.2. And Emim terriculamenta, 1 Chro. 15.16. Ier. 50.38. because
they terrify their worshippers, and they get no comfort by them, Apoc. 14.11.
and they are called vanities and lies, Ier. 14.24. and 16.19. and Aven
Iniquitas, Hos. 10.8. and 4.15. And the people who worships them are called a
foolish people, Deuteronomy. 32.11. and no people Hos. 2.23. and 1 Pet. 2.10. And
their Idolatry is not only called foolishness, but Summa malitia, Hos.
10.15. and Idolaters are said to eat the bread of lies, Hos. 10.13. that is a
lie it self, such is that form of speech Prove. 4.17. to eat the bread of
sluggishnesse, that is to be a sluggard; So Ephraim is said to feed upon the
wind, Hos. 12. that is to deceive himself, with vain hopes, depending upon
Idols: So he is said to follow the east wind; The east wind is the worst sort
of any wind, for it brake their ships; so the Idols are called the spiders
cobwebbes, which are easily swept away, Hos. 8.10. and 1 Pet. 4.3. they are
called abominable Idols: this Epithet is added to them, not for distinction
sake, as though there were some Idols which were not abominable, but it is
Adiectivum perpetuum (as the Hebrews call it) Such is that phrase he descended
into the low graves; This distinguishes not one grave from another, but only
signifies a deep grave, see Levit. 11. the creeping thing which is unclean,
Adiectivum perpetuum and adiectivum distinctionis. (...) and (...).
here the adjectivum is adjectivum perpetuum, and not a note of distinction,
Isa. 37.36. they are called dead corpse, which makes not a distinction here,
but is adjectivum perpetuum: So Idols are called abhominatio stupenda, Dan.
9.27. and (...) abhominationes, Mat. 24.15. so the wife that lies in thy bosom
Mic. 7.5. this Epithet is not a note of distinction. Idols are nothing
privative but not negative


These Idols are nothing, 1. Cor. 8.4. They are nothing, not negative, but
privative; they can neither hurt those who abhor them, nor help those who
worship them: therefore Psalm. 106.28. they are called Dii mortui, dead gods,
who could neither help their friends nor hurt their foes.

SECT. 5. Of the progress of Idolatry.
EPiphanius reckons up twenty heresies, which were before Christ's coming in
the flesh, Lib. 1. panariae. Epiphanius reduces, the periods of Idolatry into
four.
which he reduces unto four heads, Barbarism, Schythisme, Hellenisme, and
Samaritanisme.

First Barbarism, which comes from Bar, and in the Syriack, signifies extra,
but being doubled makes barbar, as if ye would say, those who are altogether
without the Church, and at this period of time there were but few gathered into
the Church; How long Barbarism endured.
He makes Barbarism to have lasted from the creation of the world, to the
days of Noah for ten generations: This first period of Idolatry was before
the flood, then they began to profane the name of the Lord, Genesis 6.5. but
seeing this time is tempus (...), Of Barbarism and Schythisme. See Col. 3.2.
and 2.11.
and few things are set down by Moses of the progress of the Church at this
time, and the heathen history begins long after this time, therefore we will
rest here, and enquire no further of it. How long Scythisme endured.


Secondly, he makes Schythisme to have endured from Noah to the building of the
tower of Babell.

Thirdly, How long Hellenisme endured. Why the Syriackes put always an Aramite
for an Idolater.
he makes Hellenisme to have endured from Abraham to the carring away of the
ten tribes.

This Grecian by the Syriack is called an Aramite, Col. 3.11. and so elsewhere
an Aramite is put for a gentile, or an Idolater still in the Syriack; and the
reason why they were so called is this; because the first Idolaters who are
named in the scripture were Syrians, or Aramites, as Terah the father of
Abraham was a Syrian, and Baalam was a Syrian, Deuteronomy. 25.5. and Naaman was a
Syrian; all these were Idolaters.

How long Samaritanisme endured.
Fourthly, he makes Samaritanisme to have endured from the captivity of the ten
Tribes, unto the days of Christ.

The pure worship of God (so long as this Grecisme, or Aramites Idolatrous
worship lasted) was in the family of Abraham, Melchisedecke, and a few
others. The Church was first in a family.


The Church has been divided, first as she lived in a family, and then she
is called an oeconomicall Church. Secondly, dispersed through a nation.
Secondly, when she was dispersed through a nation, and then she was called a
national Church. And thirdly when she was scattered through the world,
Thirdly, scattered through the world.
and then she was called the Catholic Church. When the Church was in a family.


First, the Church was in a family, as in Abraham's family, Isaackes family,
secondly in a nation, as when the Church was spread through Judea: The Church
when she was in Egypt she was not a national Church, because the Church lived
then but in a part of Egypt: So when she was in the wilderness, she was not a
national Church, but when the Church came to Canaan, and expelled the
Cananites, then she was a national Church.

The people of God were ruled three ways.
The people of God were ruled three ways, by Patriarchs, by Judges, and by
Kings: first we will consider how Idolatry increased or decreased under the
Patriarchs; Secondly, under the Judges, and Thirdly under the Kings.

When Idolatry spreads it self over the face of the earth, then it pleased
the Lord to have pity upon Abraham, and Sara, who lived in Chaldea, and
worshipped the Moon, the Sun, and the stars, to call them out of Caldea to
Charran, and there he taught them the true worship of God; They were first
Idolaters as well as Terah was, and Nahor: Therefore Joshua says Joshua 24.2.
Your fathers dwelt beyond the flood of old time, even Terah the father of
Abraham, and of Nahor, and they served other Gods, Amos 2.4. Their lies caused
them to err after the which their fathers have walked; that is, the Idols
which their fathers worshipped: Abraham was an Idolater as well as Terah was,
and as Nahor: therefore, Romans 4.5. when the Lord justified him, he found him
(...), an ungodly man; and Rembam testifies, Lib. 1. Halach. 4. cap. 1.
that first he was a worshipper of the stars.

Abraham left not his Idolatry, when he was in Mesopotamia, when he dwelt in
Vr, of the Chaldeans; but when he came to Carran; therefore the Lord brought
him out of Mesopotamia, that he might leave that Idol service; but as
concerning Terah, and Nahor, they retained something of their old Idolatry, as
Rachel did afterward, who although she was taught by her husband to renounce
Idolatry, yet she stoll her fathers Idols; and so there was some of this
leaven of Idolatry in Jacobs family, which he caused to be purged out, Ge.
15.2. Terah and Nahor got some knowledge of the truth, and they acknowledged
Jehovah to be the true God, but they retained with all their Idols, and
worshipped him in their Idols: And Abraham when he was to provide a wife for
his son of the best that he could find (abhorring the Canaanites altogether)
he made choice to send to his kindred of Nahors house, who (although he was
not free altogether of this Idolatry and superstition) yet he reckons him not
as an infidel, and rather wills his son to marry with him than with the
vile Canaanites. It is said, Genesis 11.31. that Terah the father of Abraham went
out of Vr of the Chaldees, to go unto the land of Canaan, and they came to
Haran and dwelt there, and yet it is said, Genesis 12.1. Now the Lord said to
Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, into a land that I
shall show thee; but God commanded this before Terah went out of Vr, to Haran
as it is clear out of Act. 7.4. The rule of the Hebrews holds here, Non esse
prius and posterius in Scriptura; So Genesis 1.27. Male and female created he
them, and Genesis 2.22. The rib which the Lord had taken from man made he a woman.

He called Abraham and Sarai out of Chaldea, that Idolatrous country; and
commanded his people to flee out of Babylon, lest they should have been
partakers of her punishments, Ier. 51.6. Rev. 18.4.

Quest. For what sins should we leave a Church?

Two sorts of defects in a Church, defects in manners, and defects in doctrine.
We are not to leave a Church for corruption of manners.
Answ. There are two sorts of defects in a Church: The first is, defects in
manners: The second in doctrine; for corruption of manners, a man should not
separate himself from a Church, for then they might have left the Church of
Ephesus, the Church of Pergamus, the Church of Thyatira, the Church of
Laodicea; for the Lord laid something to the charge of all these Churches: But
in this case men should separate themselves from their corruptions, and not
defile their garments, but walk in white, Rev. 3.4. As for errors in doctrine
they are threefold; Errors of doctrine are, 1 Praeter fundamentum.
first, those which are praeter fundamentum; and a man ought not to leave a
Church for these. Secondly, there are errors in doctrine, 2 Circa fundamentum.
circa fundamentum, which weakens the foundation, although they overthrow it
not; and for these, men should not leave a Church. 3 Contra fundamentum.
Thirdly, there are errors, contra fundamentum, and raseth the foundation, for
these a man should not leave a Church, if the Church be not wholly infected with
them and totally. There were amongst the Galathians some who maintained the
doctrine of Justification by works, but because all maintained it not, therefore
they were not to leave the Church for that error. So in the Church of Corinth
there were who maintained, that there was no resurrection from the dead, but
because this was not holden by all, therefore the Church was not to be left for
this. So there were in the Church of Pergamus, who held the doctrine of Balaam,
yet all held it not; therefore the Church was not to be left for that: The
whole head may be sick, and the whole heart faint, Esaias 1.5. and yet may
recover again; as the Church of Thyatira was ready to die, yet the Lord
exhorts her to repent, and to watch, Rev. 3.3. and to strengthen the things
which remain, that are ready to die; but when once she is dead, and no life
to be found in her, then men are to separate themselves from her. Hence it was
that the Priests and Levites in this case, left Israel and came to Judah, 2
Cor. 11.13. because she was a dead Church, and not a decaying: Therefore the
Lords soul has no delight in those who separate themselves from the Church,
and make a rent, finding but small blemish in her.

Quest. But was not this against nature for Abraham to leave his country and
old parents.

Answ. This is only against corrupt nature, Abraham left his father and
country for Gods cause. Primum vinculum est fortius secundo.
which prefers it self to God; but he that loves father or mother better
than God, is not worthy of him. The nearest conjunction of all is betwixt God
and man; and therefore he should leave all for God. It is said of Levi, Deuteronomy.
33.9. That he said unto his father, and to his mother, I have not seen him,
neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children, for they
have observed thy word and kept thy covenant. So the disciples, Matthew. 4.23.
When Christ called them, left their fathers, and the ship, and followed Christ.
When Hanna wept, because she had no children, her husband comforted her,
saying, Am I not better to thee than ten sons, 1 Samuel 1.8. A man should love
his wife better, nor his father, or his mother, yea than ten sons: what
love then should we carry to God, who should be deater to us than ten
fathers, ten wives, twenty sons, and all the world.

God can choose out of any society some to himself, except out of hell.
He called him from the Idolaters; there is no society so bad; but the Lord can
choose out some from amongst them, except only out of hell: As in Nero's
court, he had some, Phil. 4.22. Salute them of Cesars house: And in Creete,
although they were slow bellies, and wild beasts there, yet the Lord planted a
Church there; and in Ahabs house, he had Obadiah, who feared the Lord greatly,
1 King. 18.3. And amongst the Pharisees, the Lord had Nicodemus; and in
superstitious Athens, he had Dionisius, Areopagita, and Damaris, Act. 17.34. By
this we may see that the Lord reigns even amongst the midst of his enemies,
Psalm. 110.2.

He called Abraham and Sarai out of Chaldea, when they were Idolaters, When God
would teach his people thankfulness, he wills them to look back first to
their natural estate.
Josh. 24.2. The Lord when he would teach his people thankfulness, bids them
look back to their former estate; first, how he multiplied them out of a
dry stock, Esa. 51.2. Look unto Abraham your father, and to Sarai who bare
you, and he called him alone and blessed him, and increased him: Look to the
rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are dug:
Secondly to their poor estate.
So he wills them to look back to their poor estate, that they may be
thankful to pay their first fruits, Deuteronomy. 26.4. And the Priest shall take
the basket out of thine hand, and set it down before the altar of the Lord thy
God; and thou shall speak and say before the Lorh thy God, Jacob was called a
Syrian, not that he was borne there, but because he dwelt there with Laban; So
Christ is called a Nazaret, because he dwelt there.
I profess this day unto the Lord, a Syrian ready to perish was my father,
Syrus perditionis, non Syrus perdens, meaning Jacob that served in Syria under
Laban; and then he brought him down to Egypt and sojourned there with a few,
and became there a mighty and a great people; for this the Lord would have him
to be thankful. And thirdly, to remember their Idolatry.
And lastly, he calls them back to remember their Idolatry, how their
fathers were Idolaters, and served Idols beyond the flood, Ios. 24.2. So the
Apostle wills the Corinthians to look back to their former estate, how they
were Idolaters, 1 Cor. 12.2. Ye know that ye were Gentiles carried away unto
dumb Idols, even as ye were led.

SECT. 6. Of the increase and decrease of Idolatry in the family of Jacob.
THis Idolatry took increase in the family of Jacob, The increase.
when Rachel stole her fathers Idols, Genesis 31.19. and in his retinue was
polluted with these strange gods, the Idols that she brought from her father
Labans house; she was not free of Idolatry, yet neither was her sister Leah,
and her handmaid Zilpah free of that Idolatry, Genesis 30.11. Bagad is read two
ways; first, bagad, venit turma, vel exercitus. Secondly, it is read,
conjunctim, bagad, i.e. fortuna vel fortunate: and Rabbi; Solomon reads it,
Venit sidus bonum, seu planeta bonus; and she acknowledged this her child,
fortunae influentis donum, a good gift from fortune, Esa. ^5.11. gad, they
interpret fortunam; and the Arabians (as Abenezra witnesses) called God, Gad, or
Mars, and hence come this word God, and Leah called this her son Gad, or good
fortune, because in Labans family they worshipped Gad or Fortune as a God.

Rachel brought these Idols from her father Labans house, Idols are a dangerous
treasure to carry about.
which was a dangerous treasure for her to carry about with her. Saint John
says in his first Epistle, Chap. 5. verse. 21. Little children keep your
selves from Idols, they are soon ensnared with them; and as children delights
much to play with puppets, so Idolaters are much delighted with their Idols.

Q. But did she not well in taking away her fathers Idols?

Answ. She was but a private woman and had no authority to do this; Rachel
being a private woman should not have taken away her fathers god.
for a good action when it is done by these who have not a calling to do it,
becomes sin. Theodoret tells us how one Abdas, in a preposterous zeal threw
down (...), Hist. tripart. lib. 10. cap. 30.
or the chapel, which the Persians kept their fire in, and which they
worshipped as a God; and he being commanded to build it up again, he
altogether refused: whereupon Iazdigard the Emperor being highly incensed,
caused first to cast down the Churches of the Christians, and search to be
made for the Christians, whom he caused to be put to exquisite torments, which
Theodoret describes most pathetically there, and shows that it was a most
foolish enterprise of Abdas to have cast down this (...), and to give occasion
this way to torment the poor Christians. Saint Paul when he saw the Idolatrous
altar in Athens, Act. 17. he brake not down the Altar, but reasoned against it
out of the inscription that he read into it.

Again ye may mark here the vanity of these Idolaters, Laban cried out that
she had stolen his gods; if they were gods had they not power to save
themselves; If Baal be God let him plead for himself, Judge 6.21. Zephan.
1.13. Their Gods shall become a booty. But Idolaters are wondrous foolish in
this case, as Amaziah when he had killed the Edomites, and taken their gods,
yet he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be his
gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burnt incense unto them: These
gods who could not defend themselves how could he worship them? Although Dagon
brake his neck upon the threshold of the door, yet the Philistines would
never tread upon the threshold of the door thereafter. Zeph. 1.9. I will
punish all those that leap on the threshold But what respect should they have
carried to that Idol who brake his neck there? the Romans when they overcame
any people, they took their gods and put them in (...). But for them to have
worshipped these gods whom they had taken captive, this was great madness. The
decrease.


The decrease of this Idolatry was, when Jacob took their strange gods, and
their earings, and hid them under an Oak which was by Sechem Genesis 35.4.

Jacob was a good father of a family, he purged his house from all Idolatry:
so should Christian magistrates purge the Church from Idolatry.

When Ezekiah had removed the high places, Rabsakeh cried out against him, and
said that he removed the Lords high places, and the Lords altars Esaias 36.7.
and because he said to Judah and Jerusalem, ye shall worship before this Altar,
Rabsakeh seems here to plead for the Lord, as though the high places and the
Idolatrous altars were instituted by the Lord, and not the altar of Jerusalem,
and he blames Ezekiah for removing these, and he shows v. 10. that he had a
commandment from the Lord to come up and destroy this Land, because the high
places were removed: So Papists plead against Christian magistrates, who have
removed Idols out of the Church, crying that they have taken away the Lords
holy images, and defaced his worship, and threaten judgments to come upon
them, for defacing those high places of theirs. The second increase of
Idolatry.


The next increase of Idolatry was, when the Church was in Egypt, for then the
Israelites did secretly commit Idolatry, Ezekiel. 23.3. and they committed
whoredom in the land of Egypt; they committed whoredom, and had the teates of
their virginity bruised.

Because they polluted themselves in Egypt, and lost their virginity there:
therefore the Lord was wroth with Idolatrous Egypt, and lifted up his hand to
bring his people from amongst them, and to execute Judgment both upon their
gods, and upon their first borne, Number. 33.4.

The Lord reckons this as one of his greatest favors to his people, that he
brought them out of Egypt.
The Lord reckoned it as one of his greatest favors shown to his Church that
he delivered them out of Egypt, ten times he reckoned up this great benefit,
first in giving of the Law, Exodus 20.2. secondly when he instituted the
sacrifices, Levit. 22.33. thirdly, when he makes the promise of blessings to
them, Levit. 26.13. fourthly in reckoning up of his great works, which he had
done for them: fifthly he rockons this for the great sign of his love, Deuteronomy.
7.8. sixthly, when he disswades them from ingratitude, Deuteronomy. 8.14. seventhly,
when he instituted the Paschall lamb, Deuteronomy. 16.6. eighthly, when the Angel
reproved the people, Judge. 2.1. ninthly, in hope of the victory against the
Madianites, Judge. 6.10. tenthly, when they were about to set up a King, 1 Samuel
10.18.

But see how forgetful they were of this great benefit, and how they longed to
go back again to Egypt, Exodus 14.11. Exodus 16.3. Exodus 17.3. Number. 11.3. and
14.4. and 20.3.

The Lord commanded them expressly that they should never go back again to
Egypt, Exodus 14.13. Deuteronomy. 28.68. Deuteronomy. 17.16.

Quest. Was it not lawful for the people to go into Egypt again?

In what sense it was forbidden to the people to go back again to Egypt.
Answ. Some of the Jews (as Rabbi Bechai) affirm that it was not lawful for
them to go into Eypt again: Ye shall not henceforth return any more that way
to Egypt again, Deuteronomy. 17.16. that is (says he) ye shall not go the same way
again which ye came out of Egypt, but ye may go out of other Countries to
Egypt; but this interpretation is foolish, secondly Maymonides says, that it
was lawful for them to dwell in Egypt, and to trade there, when they subdued
the Egyptians, thirdly, others say that it was praeceptum horarium, which
endured but for a while, but the prohibition seems to forbid the whole body of
the people to go back again to Egypt, Number. 14.4. And they said one to
another, let us make a Captain, and let us return to Egypt, this way they
might not return to Egypt. Deuteronomy. 17.16. The King shall not multiply horses
unto himself, nor cause the people return to Egypt, the King might not by his
Princely authority send many of the people to Egypt, nor give occasion to the
people of much trading there with the Egyptians; for this continual
intercourse with the Egyptians had been all one as if they should have gone
back to Egypt again to dwell.

But for private men to dwell there it was not simply unlawful; Vriah the
Prophet fled to Egypt Ier. 26.21. and Jeremiah himself was carried to Egypt,
Ier. 43.6. and there were many famous schools and Synagogues of the Jews in
Egypt, which the wise men of God would not have suffered, if it had been
simply unlawful to dwell there: they might dwell there if they were not
partakers of the unfruitful works of the darkness of the Egyptians Levit.
18.3. after the doings of the Land of Egypt ye shall not do. The next increase
of Idolatry in the Wilderness.


The next increase of Idolatry in the wilderness was when they set up a golden
calf to worship there, because they saw the ox worshipped in Egypt, Ezec.
23.19. Yet she multiplied her whoredoms in calling to remembrance the days of
her youth, wherein she played the harlot in the Land of Egypt. The Idolatry of
Egypt was a baser sort of Idolatry, then the Idolatry of the Assirians.


Many were the plagues which they got out of Egypt, first they brought out of
Egypt the filthy leprosy or scab, which lasted so long amongst them in the
land of Canaan. Secondly, they forgot their circumcision for forty years in
the wilderness; and this they learned from the Egyptians who circumcised not:
Therefore when they came to Gilgall, and were circumcised; the Lord said, Ios.
3.9. this day have Irolled away the reproach of the Egyptians from you. Thirdly
the blasphemer who cursed the Lord, Levit. 24. his mother was an Egyptian;
Fourthly, the greatest part of that Miscellanea turba (of whom they learned to
speak with open mouth against the Lord) came out of Egypt, Exodus, 12.38.
Fifthly, they gate the pattern of this golden calfe out of Egypt, and the
second time Jeroboam brought the pattern of the golden calfes, which he fet up
out of Egypt, and Sheshak King of Egypt was the first who robbed the temple of
God, 1 King. 14.26.

The Lord objects to his people, Ier. 2.18. what have thou to do in the way of
Egypt to drink the waters of Sihor? Sihor was a river in Egypt, and to drink
the water of Sihor, was to commit whoredom, and spiritual Adultery: So
Solomon calls bodily Adultery water, stolen waters are sweet, Prove. 9.7. and
they say Abstine ab aqua aliena: This water was called Sihor, which signifies
blackenesse; when they drank this water they committed a baser sort of
Idolatry, The Idolatry of Egypt was a baser sort of Idolatry then the
Idolatry of the Assirians.
then when they drank the water of the river Euphrates: for when they followed
the Idolatry of the Egyptians, they worshipped oxen, but when they drank of
the river Euphrates and followed their Idolatry, they worshipped the Sun, the
Moon, and the stars: The Egyptians were the basest Idolaters, and Sihor was
the blackest water; Therefore the Lord abhors Egypt and calls it the land of
Cham, Psalm. 105. Cham was accursed, so was the land of Egypt.

Now let us consider who made this Idol; secondly whereof they made it. And
thirdly, how great a sin this was in setting up this Idol to worship it.

First, it was Aaron who made the calfe: Aaron made the golden calfe.
It was neither ignorance nor complsio^ that moved him to make this calfe, but
fear only, Metus gravis (say they) potest cadere in virum constantem, a great
fear may overtake a courageous man; But Aaron here was overtaken with a small
fear; Aaron saw not the people stonning him, therefore his fear arose only
upon his own apprehension.

Aaron was the man who committed this sin; Aaron sinned not of ignorance.
the high Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mal. 2.7. he had knowledge
enough to resist the sin; the servant that knows his masters will and does
it not, is worthy of many stripes, Mat. 12. When a Prince does against Justice
who should maintain Justice, there is a special repugnancie betwixt his act
and his calling: So when Aaron to whom was concredit the purity of Gods
worship, committed Idolatry, then there was a special repugnancie betwixt him
and his profession: how scandalous then was Aarons fall to the whole people, In
exemplum culpa vehementer extenditur, quando pro reverentia peccator honoratur,
The fault is much agravated by the example, when the sinner is much respected
and honored. The greatness of Aarons sin may be taken up by the greatness
of the sacrifice of the high Priest which was to expiate the sin.


Again, consider the greatness of Aarons sin by the greatness of the
sacrifice of the High Priest. Moses, Lev. 4. distinguishes sins according to
the difference of persons, if a common man sinned, he was to bring for one
oblation a Kid of the goats, a female without blemish, ver. 28. but if a
Prince of the people sinned he shall bring a Kid of the goats; a male without
blemish, ver. 23. and if the whole congregation sinned, then they shall bring a
young bullock for their sin, ver. 14. and if the Priest who was anointed
sin, (that is the high Priest, for none was anointed after the first
institution as the high Priest was but he alone) he was to bring a young
bullock; here the sacrifice of the Priest, was as great as the sacrifice of
the whole people. If the eye be evil, the whole body is full of darkness,
Matthew. 6.23. and such Priests such people.

By Aarons committing this sin we are taught the infirmities of the
Leviticall Priesthood.
Aaron made the calfe, hence we may learn, what infirmity was in the legal
ceremonies, that they could bring nothing to perfection, Heb. 9.9. And this we
may see in the ingresse, progress, and ending of the Priesthood: Aaron when
the Priesthood was first instituted he committed Idolatry, and Vrias in the
progress of the Priesthood he committs Idolatry; And Cajaphas about the
ending of the priesthood, he condemns the Lord Jesus: therefore Jesus Christ
is our only High Priest that must expiate our sins.

Secondly, consider whereof this Idol was made; the people brought their
Jewels and earings to Aaron, Exodus 32.3. and of these the Idol was made.
Idolaters are very profuse in the bestowing upon their Idols all sort of cost,
Idolaters are very prodigal in bestowing things of great cost upon the Idols.
Ier. 10.9. they brought the most precious gold from Vphaz or Ophir to make
their images of; so from Tarshis they brought their most excellent silver, they
spared noe cost. Nabuchadnezzer set up an Imag of gold, Da. 3.1. whose hight
was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits; And that is it which
the Lord lays to the charge of the whorish Church Israel, Ezech. 16.34. other
whoores take gifts; but thou give gifts.

The three ages of the Church of the Jews, the golden are, the silver age, and
the iron age.
In the Church of Israel there were three ages, the golden age, the silver age,
and the iron age.

The golden age they make to be that time when David gathered all materialles
for the building of the temple, and when Solomon built it. The silver age they
hold begun in Iohash his time, 2 King. 12. when he repaired the temple,
howbeit there was not made for the house of the Lord boules of silver,
Snuffers, Bassens, Trumpets, or vessels of gold, or vessels of silver, that
was brought into the house of the Lord; this was but a silver age in respect of
the former golden age, and now they had but shieldes of brass in the temple,
whereas in the first age they had shields of gold, 1 King. 14.27. The third age
was the iron age, when they stole out of the house of God the sieling and
sieled their own houses with it, Ier. 22.14. so when they dwelt in houses of
Cedar, but the Lords house lay wast, Hagg. 1.4. and when they robbed him of his
tithes, Mal. 3.8. we live now under this iron age; If any man bestow any cost
now for the maintenance of the worship of God misers cry out with Judas Mark
14.4. what needs this wast, and they think it like bread cast upon the
waters, Eccles. 11.1. But the Lord meets with those who robs his Church, for
when they have sown much they find but little increase, because they defraud
him. Rabbi Alsack writing upon Malachi, tells us of a certain man who had a
piece of ground which brought forth yearly a thousand measures of grain, and
when the time of paying his tithe to the Priests came, he paid but nintie
bushels where he ought to have paid a hundred. The next year his increase was
not so great, wherefore he withdrew so much from the Priests: at last his
increase came but to an hundredth, which was the first tenth that he was bound
to pay the Priests: an old man by chance meeting with him, said unto him, that
he was glad of the late dignity that was befallen to his house, how that God
had gotten the increase, and he became the Priest of his family to get the
tenths; Idolatry is a great sin, because it is committed immediately against
God.
at which words he was ashamed and repented him of his former sacrilege.

The greatness of this sin of Idolatry which they committed here may be
considered by the worthiness of the person against whom it is committed, for as
in bodily diseases, those are most hurtful that do annoy the original of our
life most, as the heart; so in sins, those are the greatest which are
committed against God the fountain of life.

There are some carnal sins, and some spiritual sins.
Again we may know the greatness of this sin by the nature of the sin it
self: There are some sins that are carnal sins; and some spiritual,
Ephesians. 6.12. and these are greater then carnal sins; Idolatry is a
spiritual sin, and adultery is a carnal sin; The spirit being delighted
with Idolatry is a greater sin, then when the flesh is delighted with
Adultery, and there is a greater aversion from God in Idolatry, Where there is
a greater motive to sin, the sin is the less.
then the conversion and adhaering to sin in Adultery. Again, where there
is a greater motive to sin, the sin is the less. But these carnal sins
has Concupiscence which draws them away, and moves them to sin; but in
spiritual wickedness there is no such concupiscence to draw men to sin,
their sin resembles the sin of the devil more, who is not led with lust or
concupiscence to sin: He that killes a man in passion, he sins not so
fearful, as he who killes him in cold blood: therefore those sins must be
the greatest which men are not led to by Concupiscence.

Notwithstanding Aaron committed Idolatry in setting up this calfe, yet the
Lord spared him, and always showed great tokens of his mercy to the tribe of
Levi; as to Aaron, Deuteronomy. 9.29. to the posterity of Corah. Numb. 26.11. and to
Abiathar, 1. King. 2.26. and so Josias, when the Priests had committed
Idolatry in sacrificing in the high places, he did not kill them, as he did
the Idolatrous Priests, who were not called by the Lord, 1 King. 23.20. but
only commanded that they should eat of the unleavened bread amongst their
brethren, 2 King. 23.9. which was enjoined to those that had any blemish in
their body, and they were forbidden to eat the bread of their God, Levit.
21.17.

They worshipped the calfe. The ox was a sign of plenty, where the ox is
wanting the cribbe is empty, but much increase is by the strength of the ox,
Prove. 4.4. Joseph who provided corn in the time of famine is called Gods ox,
Deuteronomy. 33.17. Lib. 1. Sacrae scripturae chap. 15. which book is holden, to be
Augustines.
His glory is like the firstling of a bullock, because he provided for the
Egyptians, and for his fathers family in the time of famine; therefore it is
said, that the Egyptians placed the similitude of an ox hard by Iosephes
burial place. Whether the Idol which they worshipped was a calfe or an ox.


It may be asked whether this Idol which was set up, was made in the form of a
calfe or an ox? And the reason of the doubt is, because sometimes this Idol is
called an ox, Ps. 106.20. And they changed their glory into the similitude of
an ox that eats grass; And sometimes it is called a calfe, verse. 14. they
made a calfe in Horeb.

Answ. (...)
This word gnegel vitulus with the Hebrews signifies, either vitulum subrumum,
that is, a sucking calfe, or it signifies vitulam tertiam, Ier. 48.34. when it
is three years old, and then it is called indifferently, Shor, or gnegel bos,
or vitulus; but when it is seven year old, then it is only called Shor, (...)
and not gnegel, that is an ox, and not a calfe, Judge. 6.4.6.

Again, it may be asked whether it was a cow, calfe or an ox calfe, which
they worshipped: The reason of the doubt, is because, Hos. 10.5. he calls them
gnegloth in the feminine gender, which they worshipped in Dan and Bethel, and
they were made after the form of this calfe which they worshipped in the
wilderness?

Answ. David, Esal. 106.20. calls this calfe Shor, an ox calfe which they
worshipped, and the 70. convertes it, (...), which signifies an ox calfe, and
they plowed with oxen and not with kine: And whereas Hos. 10.5. puts them in
the feminine gender, calling them gnegloth, this was spoken per Ligragnon, per
contemptum (as the Jews speak) that is in contempt. (...)
So Tob. 1.5. this calfe is put in the feminine gender, sacrificantes, (...),
sacrificing to the Cow; it should not be read (...), seu potestati, for what
power is in an Idol. In contempt this calfe is called a cow calfe, and not an
ox; So Romans 9.5. I have reserved to me, 7000. men who have not bowed their
knee to Baal, (...), in the feminine gender; and he understands, (...) noting
the infirmity of the sex. So Virgil in his 9. book, when he exprobrates to
the Trojans their cowardlinesse, he calls them not Phryges, but Phrygias. So
Homer calls them not (...), to signify how far degenerate and effeminate
they were.

Whether it was the head of a calfe which they worshipped or not?
Thirdly, it may be asked whether they worshipped the head of the calfe here, or
the whole calfe, and the reason of the doubt is, because S. Cyprian in his
book, De bona conscientia sub finem: S. Ambrose Epist. 6. Lactantius, lib.
4.10. S. Augustine in Psalm. 73. hold that it was not an ox, but caput bubuli
which they worshipped: But this seems not to be probable, seeing the Scripture
every where calls it a calfe; and he resembles him to an ox eating grass,
Psalm. 106.20. The head of an ox alone cannot eat grass; and they resembled
an ox as near as they could.

This ox which they worshipped in Egypt, was marked with strange spots; Bos
(inquit) in Egypto numinis vice colitur, Apin vocant, insigne ei in dextro
latere candicans macula, similis cornibus Lunae crescere incipientis, nodus sub
lingua quem cantbarum appellant; There is an ox in Egypt which is worshipped
as a God, and they call him Apis, he has upon his right side a white spot,
which is like the horns of the Moon when she begins to grow, and he has
under his tongue a knot which they call Cantharus; By what slight the devil
continued this Idolatry in Egypt to worship the calfe.
And S. Augustine holds that the devil (whereby this Idolatry might be
continued in Egypt) used this slight, Phantasiam talis tauri vaccae concipienti
ostendere, ut libido ejus attraheret quod in ejus faetujam corporaliter
appareret, that is, he presented before the Cow, when she was ingendering, and
in her heat, August. de civit. dei. lib. 18. cap. 5.
a Bull marked after the same manner that the ox of Egypt was; which marks
the Cow apprehending in her fantasy, transmitted to the calfe, and by that
means the calfe was marked after the same manner that the ox was; and so the
divill by his slight and cunning, continued this Idolatry in Egypt. But mark
the foolishness of these Idolaters; this ox which they worshipped, when he
grew old, they used to drown him in some lake or poole, and then they lamented
for his death in mourning apparel, knocking upon their breasts, and renting
their clothes; but when they had found annother marked after the same manner,
then they rejoiced exceedingly; this was great madness. Peucerus de
divinatione. page 223.
One jested at the gods of Egypt, when he saw them lament for their gods, Si
dii sunt cur plangitis, si mortui cur adoratis, if they be gods, what need you
to lament, if they be dead, why do you worship them. The decrease of this
Idolatry.


This Idolatrous worship decreased, when Moses caused the calfe to be beaten to
powder, and given to the people to drink, Exodus 32.20. thus he would let them
see when this Idol was turned to excrements; It was but a god of dung, Lev.
26.30. Deuteronomy. 29.17. and because these Idols were but gods of dung, therefore
the Lord commanded that Baals house should be turned into a privy, 2 King.
10.27. and so when the Levites consecrated their hands to kill their neighbors
and brethren, Exodus 32.29. that were Idolaters, their hands were consecrated
with the blood of their brethren; as that day when they were ordained priests,
and the blood of the sacrifice was sprinkled upon the thumb of their right
hand, Exodus 29.20. and this was as acceptable a consecration to the Lord, as
that day when they were consecrated priests unto him.

The second increase of Idolatry in the wilderness.
The second increase of Idolatry in the wilderness was, when God turned and gave
them up to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the
Prophets; O ye house of Israel, have ye offered unto me slain beasts, and
sacrifices, by the space of forty years in the wilderness; yea ye took up
the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Rempham, figures which ye
made to worship them.

How are the Israelites charged by Amos, and by Stephen to have worshipped the
host of heaven in the wilderness, when there is no mention made of this by
Moses.
Here first we are to enquire how the Israelites are charged by the Prophet
Amos, Chap. 5. verse. 25. and by Stephen, Acts 7. that they worshipped the host
of heaven in the wilderness; when as the Lord never charged them with this
sort of Idolatry in the books of Moses. Secondly, how they are said never to
have sacrificed all the time that they were in the wilderness, when as they
sacrificed to the Lord in the wilderness? Exo. 24.5. and Levit. 8.21. and 9.2.
Thirdly, what these Idols were which they worshipped and sacrificed to in the
wilderness?

As to the first, How can they be said by the Prophet, and by Stephen, to offer
to the host of heaven, seeing the Lord blames them not for that; and we read
nothing in the history of Moses of it?

An. Rabbi Solomon reads it in the future tense, portabitis, ye shall bear,
as though the Lord were threatening a judgment against them for the time to
come, but this is neither the meaning of the Prophet, nor of S. Stephen for
they charged the Israelites with that Idolatry which they committed whiles they
were in the wilderness. Beza upon the 7. Act. holds that the Israelites
committed not this Idolatry while they were in the wilderness; but the
Prophet blames them that they worshipped God, but hypocritically, and not
sincerely in the wilderness; and so David blames them, Psalm. 95. and Psalm.
106. and therefore the Lord gave them up afterward to this open Idolatry, to
worship the host of heaven: But the Prophet Amos expressly says, Amos 5.25.
that they worshipped the host of heaven (...), which signifies a particular
wilderness; the wilderness of Arabian, where they wandered forty years.

Object. But if it be said that there is no mention of this Idolatry in the
history of Exodus, neither are they charged with it as with other Idolatry?

I answer, that the Scripture, The Scripture sets down in some places that
which is omitted in others, and that makes up the full sense of the Scriptures.
sometimes sets down in one place, that which is omitted in another: Example,
it is set down in Exodus how the Magitians were called who resisted Moses, and
yet the Apostle calls them Iannes and Iambres, 2 Timothy 3.8. So the strife which
was betwixt the devil and Michael about the body of Moses, the Apostle Jude
sets it down, ver. 9. So it is set not down in the history of Genesis, that
Joseph when he was in prison, his feet were put into the stocks, and Iron
entered into his soul, and yet David sets it down, Psalm. 105.18. So the
Israelites worshipping of the Host of heaven in the wilderness, although it
be not mentioned by Moses; yet it is set down by Amos, and by Saint Stephen
Act. 7. and many things are omitted in some places of Scriptures, which are
clearly set down in other places, which being conferred together makes up the
full sense of the Scripture.

The second thing to be required here is, In what sense the Israelites are said
not to have sacrificed to the Lord all the time they were in the wilderness.
how it can be said that they sacrificed not 40 years in the wilderness,
seeing they sacrificed at mount Sinai, Exodus 24.4.5. and Levit. 8.21 and 9.2.

Answ. The scripture when it speaks of numbers, sometimes expresses the full
number (after the manner of men) although there be more or less then is set
down, as Judge. 16.27. they were about 3000 on the roof of the Temple. So John
6.10. there sat down about 5000 upon the grass, and Act. 1.15. there was
about 120 that is few, more or less. Secondly, although there be some wanting
in the number, yet the Scripture expresses the full number; and this is called
rotundatio numeri, as Genesis Eederech ketzera.
35.26. these are the 12 children that were borne to Jacob in Padan Aram, that
is almost 12 children, for Benjamin was not borne there, but in the way as they
returned from Syria. So Genesis 42.13. we are the 12 sons of Jacob, that is
almost 12 sons, for they thought Joseph had bin dead then. So Judge. 9.5.
Abimeleth killed, the 70 brethren; they were not all killed, for Iothan
escaped. So Numb. 14.34. ye shall carry your iniquities 40 years in the
wilderness, that is, almost 40 years; for this judgment was pronounced
against them the second year that they came out of Egypt: and 1 Cor. 15.5.
Christ appeared to the 12, that is, almost to 12 for Judas was hanged then. So
2 Samuel 5.5. David reigned over Judah 7 years and six months, and in
Jerusalem 33 years, he reigned but 32 years and 6 months yet to make the
number round, it is said that he did reign 33 years. Thirdly the Scripture
sometimes sets down the greater number and leaves out the lesser ob
rotundatione^ numeri as Judge. 20.46. all those that fell that day of Benjamin
were 25 thousand, the whole number that fell were 25 thousand, and one hundred,
but when the Scripture sums them up, it sets down the greater number and
leaves out the hundredth: so 2 Samuel 5.4. David reigned 40 years; he reigned 40
years and six months, but to make the number round, the 6 months are left
out. Fourthly when the thing numbered comes far short of the number, then the
Scripture draws it not that aed rotundationem numeri, but acknowledges it in
effect to be nothing, because it has bin so seldom done: as ye sacrificed not
unto me 40 years in the wilderness, because they sacrificed so seldom unto him
in the wilderness, therefore the Scripture says, ye sacrificed not to me in the
wilderness. Some reckons this time that they sacrificed not in the wilderness,
to be from the time that the spies returned from the searching of the Land of
Canaan; and all that time they sacrificed not: as Theodoret and Ribera upon
Amos affirm.

The third thing to be inquired here is this: what these Idols were which they
worshipped in the wilderness Amos 5.26. But ye have borne the Tabernacle of
your Moloch and Chium your images, the star of your god which you made to
your selves, ver. 27. Therefore I will cause you to go into captivity beyond
Damascus says the Lord. But Acts 7.42. Yea ye took up the Tabernacle of
Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, figures which ye made to worship
them, and I will carry you beyond Babylon.

First it is to be considered, that the Lord gave them up to worship the Host
of heaven. Secondly, what they worshipped. Thirdly, the punishment, they shall
be carried beyond Babylon for their Idolatry.

First the Lord gave them up to worship the Host of heaven, that is, as they
turned to the Idolatry of Egypt so the Lord turned to give them up to serve the
Host of heaven. Their Idolatry.


Ye have borne the Tabernacle of your Moloch, or Regis vestri, of your King.
The Israelites at this time had no earthly King, but by King here is meant the
sun which those in the East called Bagnal and in the Syriack Begnel and Beel
Bell their Lord, Seldon de dijs Syriis.
and their Melech King or Molech, and Amos says Regis vestri. Luke reads it
Moloch and Succoth he turns it (...) Tabernaculum, because they carried their
Gods about with them in a tent or Tabernacle. Succoth is Tabernaculum, and
Succoth was the proper name of the Idol, these he calls imagines vestras,
figures which ye made to worship them, because they carried about with them in
a Tabernacle their Succoth or Moloch the image of the heaven in the which the
Sun or Moloch (that great King over all the stars, and having dominion over
all sublunary things) was placed in his Tabernacle. The Lord has set a
Tabernacle for the sun in the heavens Psalm. 19.4. So they carried Moloch the
sun in a Tabernacle.

For Chiun Saint Luke reads it the star of your god Remphan, all grant
Remphan to be put for Chiun or Chevan, but what this Remphan was here is the
doubt; Lodovicus de deiu shows us learnedly out of Acts the 7 that this Cheven
was Saturnus, where he reckons up the names of the planets ex lexico Arabico,
this Saturnus was Moloch also, therefore they sacrificed men both to Saturn
and to Moloch, and therefore Moloch and Chiun Saturnus are fitly joined
together by Amos. And next he shows why Saturnus is called Chiun, from
Cunstabilire, disponere, and Keina quae a Syris, natura dicitur quae vivificat
omnia which is called by the Syrians, nature it self that quickneth all
things. Then he adds Remphan or Rephan, which in the Egyptian tongue
signifies that which we call Saturn, and this (he says) Claudius Salmatius
did first clear unto him that in the Egyptian tongue (...) signifies Saturn,
and for proof of this he brought forth the Egyptiacke Alphabet sent from Rome
to him, where the Planets are set down after this manner, the first is (...)
Sol, (...) Luna, (...) Saturnus, (...) Jupiter, and sic de caeteris. The
seventy when they Translated the Bible into Greek, they made choice of a
known word to the Egyptians, Rephan in place of Chiun, a word which was not
known to them, he adds the star of your god, stella Saturni, idest,
Saturnus as Fluvius Euphratis, id est, Euphrates.

Stephen. adds figures which they made to themselves; the Lord made them not,
but they made them to themselves.

God was only the God of Jacob, and he chooses Israel only for his
inheritance, but so soon as they choosed gods to themselves, and set up the
golden Calfe to worship it, Exodus 32.9. He will be their God no more. Then he
said to Moses, thy people have corrupted themselves, they are no more my
people, neither will I be their God any more.

Their punishment follows, Amos 5.27. Therefore I will cause you to go into
captivity beyond Damascus, and Stephan. adds beyond Babylon, for here he is
speaking of the ten Tribes, which were carried captive by Salmanazar beyond
Babylon into Media, and the reason which moved Amos to say beyond Damascus,
was because Hasael the King of Damascus had plagued Israel, or the ten tribes
fearfully, many of them he killed, many of them he carried captives away to
Syria, and yet the stiff necked people were never a whit the better, and
therefore he threatens that shortly after they shall be carried a great way
beyond Damascus, even to Babylon when they were transported to Media and
Armenia: and so Saint Stephen expressed that clearly which the Prophet aimed
at.

The third increase of Idolatry in the wilderness was, The third increase of
Idolatry in the wilderness.
when Balaam persuaded Balack to take the daughters of the Madianites, and set
them before the Israelites: first they committed whoredom with them; And then
they committed a trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor, Number. 31.16.
2 Pet. 5.15. He cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel to eat
and to sacrifice, Rev. 2.14. Psalm. 106.28.

The Israelites beholding the Madianitish women with their adulterous eyes,
they committed fornication with them: The eyes have been well resembled to the
moon; and the heart to the sun: and as in an eclipse when the moon is
interposed betwixt our sight and the sun; then there is an eclipse in the
sun: So when the Adulterous eye is interposed betwixt the heart and us, that
makes the eclipse of the heart.

Secondly, they stumbled in eating these things which were sacrificed to Baal
Peor.

Here we may learn how easy a thing it is for men to fall from bodily
whoredom to spiritual, and what great affinity is betwixt these two, It is an
easy thing for men to fall from spiritual adultery to corporal. and contra.
the breaking of the seventh Commandment by bodily adultery, and the second,
by spiritual adultery. When a man commits sin (says Saint Gregory) he breaks
all the commands, Iam. 2.10. But there is some more affinity betwixt the
breach of some commands then of others: And he illustrates the matter by this
comparison; As he who plays upon a Lute; when he touches one of the strings,
all the rest tremble, but that string only which is upon the same note gives
the sound with the string which is touched: So every sin touches as it were
all the commandments, and makes them to tremble, but these who stand upon the
same concord, sin touches them most, and men fall easily from Idolatry to
whoredom, and from whoredom to Idolatry, Romans 1.24. because Idolaters
changed the glory of God into corruptible things; Therefore the Lord gave them
up to uncleanness, and to the lusts of their own heart, and to defile their
bodies: here bodily whoredom is the punishment of Idolatry, which is spiritual
whoredom. Great is the affinity betwixt these two sorts of whoredoms; and
therefore it is, that Antichrists seat, Rev. 11.8. is called spiritual
Sodom: and because of the resemblance betwixt these two sins Ezechiel compared
Idolaters of Israel, Ezeh. 23.2.3.5. to a woman inflamed with love to a godly
young man, on whom she had cast her eyes, and fixed her affections upon, and
forgetting all modesty sends messengers for him. ver. 16. and brings him
unto her, ver. 17. into the bed of Love, ver. 18. And abstinence from Idolatry
is called virginity, Rev. 14.4. and not defiling themselves with women.

The Lord by the Prophet Micah wills the people to remember, Mic. 6.5. what
Balack the king of Moab consulted against them, and what Balaam the son of
Beor answered him from Shitim to Gilgall, that they might know the righteousness
of the Lord: The meaning of the place is, that Baalam endeavored by all means
(when the people of God were traveling through the wilderness) to corrupt
them; therefore he strove first to corrupt them, and he prevailed with them at
Shittim, when they committed whoredom with the daughters of Moab, Number. 25.1.
and there the Lord plagued them for their offense, and then they repented and
wept bitterly for their offense at Abel Shittim (Abell is called mourning) and
then they came to Gilgal where the Lord renewed the covenant with them, and
last to Canaan

This pilgrimage of theirs through the wilderness is a lively type of a poor
Christians pilgrimage through the world, first he is baptized; The Israelites
pilgrimage through the wilderness, fitly resembles the estate of a Christian
man's life here.
then he is at the red sea with the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10. They were baptized
in the red sea; then through the tentations of the devil he falls, and is
whipped, and chastised for his offenses; then he is in Shittim with the
Israelites. Thirdly he laments and weeps for his offenses, and then he is in
Abell Shittim a place of mourning with the Israelites. Fourthly, he renues the
covenant with God, and then he is in Gilgall with the Israelites: and at the
last he is brought to heaven, and then he is in Canaan with the Israelites.

The decrease.
When the Lord commanded the Israelites to revenge themselves on the Madianites,
Number. 30.2.3. and they slew all the males and the Kings of Midian, and Baalam,
also the son of Peor slew they with the sword verse. 8. and they killed all
the males amongst the little ones, and all the women that had known a man; and
thus the Idolatry of worshipping of Baal Peor decreased amongst the people. The
fourth increase of Idolatry in the wilderness.


The fourth increase of Idolatry in the wilderness was when the devil would
have set up the body of Moses to have been worshipped, Jude 9. Some hold that
this strife which was betwixt Michael and the devil about the body of Moses
was about the ceremonial law, Iunius upon Jude.
which they call Moses his body; But that place, Deuteronomy. 34.4.6. shows that the
strife was about Moses natural body, for Moses the servant of the Lord died
in the land of the Moabites, according to the appointment of the Lord, and he
buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, in a place where no man knows unto
this day.

After that Moses died, before he was buried, the devil would have taken his
body and made an Idol of it, But Michael resisted him, and would not suffer
his body to be made an Idol. Great has been the strife always about
religion.


Great has been the strife always about religion: the first strife that ever
was in the world was about religion, as betwixt Cain and Abel, Genesis 4. so
betwixt Ierubbaal and the men of Sechem for casting down Baals altar, Iud.
6.28. and betwixt Michael and the devil, for the worshipping of Moses his body:
so betwixt Christ and the devil about Gods worship, Mat. 4. So betwixt the
image of the beast which was wounded by the sword, by revived again, and the
saints who would not take the mark of the beast neither in their hand, nor in
their forehead, Rev. 13. This strife about religion will set the fathers
against the children, and the children against the parents.

Satan would have set up Moses his body to have made an Idol of it. The bodies
of the saints may be made Idols both living and dead.
The bodies of the saints may be made Idols both when they are dead as here
of the body of Moses, and when they are alive, as when Cornelius fell down at
Peter's feet and worshipped him, Peter refused that worship, Act. 10.26, 27.
and said, stand up, for I my self am a man, Peter refused this worship,
because it was divine worship or inclining too far to it: So when the Priests
would have sacrificed to the Apostles, Act. 14. they rent their clothes, and
ran in amongst the people, crying, and saying, why do ye these things? we are
men of like passions with you, preaching to you, that ye should turn from
these vanities. They would have made the Apostles to be in the number of these
Idol vanities, when they would have given him divine worship. Satan goes from
an exte^mitie to another.


Again ye may observe here how Satan goes from one extremity to another;
when Moses was alive, how often moved he the people to have stoned him: but now
when he is dead, he would have him to make an Idol of his body, so the Jews
in die Palmarum, did sing, Hosanna to Christ; and the next day they cried
Crucifige. So when the viper lept on Paul's hand, they said he was a murderer;
but when he shook it off, and it hurt him not, they said he was a God, and
those are unstable in all their ways, Iam. 1.8.

He would have set up Moses his body to have been worshipped, if the Lord had
suffered this body to have remained in the Church, how would the devil
afterward have made up a ground for the continuance of Idolatry in the Church?
then he would have said, If all sort of worship be denied to the bodies of the
saints, why would the Lord have suffered the body of Moses the man of God, to
stand this way in the Church as a stock without all honor to be given to it?
would he not rather have thrown it down, as he did the Idol Dagon? The
Lord forbad only this divine worship to be given to the heathen gods, as to
Jupiter, Mars, Venus: But it was never his mind that the divine worship should
not be given to the bodies of the saints departed; and if Moses himself were
redivivus, he would explain himself in this point, that it was forbidden
only to give this worship to heathen Idols, but not to saints, which is
forbidden in the Law; for he communicating so many dignities with the saints,
would not refuse to communicate with them a part of his honor.

Michael resisted the devil, and would not suffer him to take the body of
Moses and make an Idol thereof: The Apostle Jude 5. borrows from the Apocripha
book called, (...) Origenes (...) Libro 3. cap. 2.
Pethirath moshe dimissio mosis (...); This strife which was betwixt Michael
and the devil about the body of Moses.

What duties we are bound to perfore to the dead.
Quest. What duties are we bound to perform to the bodies of the Saints when
they are dead?

Answ. We are to use them with comeliness, Acts 9.37. they washed the body of
Dorcas, and laid her in an upper chamber; and to wrap them in linen, as
Christ's body was; and to bury them in an honest burial place: we ought to
esteem reverendly of their bodies, because they are the members of Christ's
mystical body, and they wait for the blessed resurection: and to suffer them
to rest in peace in their graves, 2 Kin. 22.20. But we are never to worship
them or their relics; if we follow the example of Michael, who would not
suffer Moses his body to be worshipped. The decrease of this Idolatry.


The decrease of this Idolatry was, when Michaell buried the body of Moses
where no man knew.

Great is the care which the Lord has over his children in their infancy, in
their old age, in their death, and after they are dead; and as the eyes of the
Lord was upon Canaan from the beginning of the year to the end, Deuteronomy. 11.12.
so are the eyes of the Lord upon his children from their infancy, to their old
age, from their old age to their death, and after they are dead; and first from
their infancy to their old age, Esaias 46.3. Hear O house of Jacob, and the
remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me from the womb; and
brought up with me from the birth, therefore until thy old age, I the same,
even I, will carry you to your hoarie heads; the Prophet points at these two
times of our life especially; because these two periods are most weak in all
our life; our infancy, and decrepit age; then the death of his Saints is
precious in the fight of the Lord, Psalm. 116.18. and then after they are dead,
the Lord has a singular care of them: What a care had the Lord of Moses in his
birth when he was cast out to be drowned? The Lord preserved him and drew him
out of many waters: therefore he was called Moshe from Masha, extrahere; and
David alludes to this, Psalm. 18.16. Thou have drawn me out of many waters:
Hence the Poets from this feign, that some were (...), borne in the waters
because Moses was drawn out of the waters; and in his death the Lord shows
his singular love to It is said of Moses, D^ut. 34.7. that he dyed ad osculum
oris dei, which Solomon Iarchi paraphraseth, at a kiss: of the mouth of God:
Death was a kiss of the mouth of God to him.
him; and here after he is dead, the Lord suffers not his body to be made an
Idol of: Good King Josias when he was killed in the battle, a man might have
thought that the Lord had little respect unto him, who made him fall before his
enemies: but see what respect the Lord carried unto him, when he says, Thou
shall be gathered in peace to thy fathers, 2 King. 22.20. Who would have
thought that the Lord had such a care of him; and yet his soul was bound up in
the bundell of life, and he was gathered in peace to his fathers; So he had a
great care of the body of Jacob; he promised to go down to Egypt with him,
and to bring him back again, Genesis 46.4. But how is it said that he brought him
back again then, seeing he died in Egypt? The Lord attended his very corpse,
when he brought it back, and saw it buried in Machpelah, in the place which
Abraham, bought for a burial place, Genesis 50.13.

The Lord buried Moses his body. It is most probable which Josephus holds, that
Joshua, Eleazar, and some of the elders of Israel, went up with Moses to the
mount Nebo; but after his death; that the Angels carried his body to the
valley of Moab, and then it was buried where no man knows.

The Angels buried Moses his body: The Angels are ministering spirits to the
godly in this life, and at their death they carry their souls to heaven, but
they carry not their bodies to the grave. This was a singular favor shown to
Moses, that the Lord buried him by the ministry of Angels: They attended
Christ's grave; but yet they buried him not as they did the body of Moses.

Not to be buried is a great judgment, Eccles. 6.3. An untimely birth is
better, than he that gets no burial. It was a great judgment upon Iehojakim,
Ier. 22.18. who got insepultam sepulturam, and no man lamented his death,
saying, Ah my brother, ah my sister, or ah my Lord, ah my glory. verse. 18. The
Jews pray to deliver them from four things, first, from the circumcision of
the Sechemites, Genesis 34.26. Secondly from the Religion of the Samaritans.
Thirdly from the death of the uncircumcised, Ezech. 28.10. And fourthly, from
the burial of Iehojakim; that they get not the burial of an ass, Ierem.
22.19.

Moses his burial was the most honorable burial that ever was; it was more
honorable than their burial, who got the burning of their fathers, 2 Chro.
21.19. 1 Chro. 16.14. And more honorable than the burial of Gamaliel, for whom
Onkelos burnt an hundredth pound of frankincense, for the honor of the dead.:
It was a more honorable burial, than the burial of those who were buried in
the garden of their fathers burial, 2 Kin. 21.18. It was more honorable, then
these who were buried in the city of David. But consider the attendants who
attended his burial: Abner his burial was an honorable burial, when all the
people mourned for him, and the King himself followed the hearse, and wept, 2 Samuel 3.31. But here the Angels waited upon his burial, and God himself
attended the hearse to the burial, and was the chief mourner there: When a
private man died, lamentation was made but seven days for him, Syrac. 22.13.
but they lamented for Moses thirty days; and they cried out, ah our brother,
ah our Lord; ah our glory, Ier. 22.18. thus God honors them who honor him.

He buried him in a place where no man knew, He buried his body Where no man
knew, ad (...) for the abolishing of Idolatry.
yet Moses was present with Christ at the transfiguration, Mat. 17.3. So these
who are buried in the sea, blown in the air, and burnt to ashes, and no man
knows what is become of their bodies; yet they shall appear before the Lord
in the day of the resurrection.

Michael buried the body of Moses: What if the Church of Rome had the body of
Moses now, and knew it to be his body, would they bury it or not? Whether
would they stand for Michael or the devil? They might say that it was a fit
thing to bury it at that time, because the people was an ignorant people then,
and Satan was ready to move them to Idolatry: But now seeing they would give
no worship to it but (...), they might safely set it up to be worshipped.

In the time of Joshua Idolatry did not so increase; the elders who out lived
Joshua, and who were in age, when they came out of Egypt, and remembered what
the Lord had done for Israel; the iniquity of Baalpeor did not cleave unto
them, but the rest were not cleansed from the iniquity of Baalpeor, Josh.
22.17. Is the iniquity of Baalpeor to little for us from which we are not
cleansed unto this day: they committed no new Idolatry, but the filthiness of
Baalpeor clave unto them, because they repented not of that iniquity. In every
sin there are four things to be considered; first, (...), that is, the
transgression of the Law: secondly, reatus, the guilt which obliges the party
who sins to undergo the punishment. Thirdly, macula, the blot which
defiles the soul; and lastly, the punishment it self.

The first is, (...), the transgression of the Law; and the consequents of the
transgression are the guilt, the blot, and the punishment.

The guilt of sin binds a man to answer for the transgression of the Law,
and it stands in the midst betwixt the sin and the punishment, and goes
immediately before the punishment, and it is more terrible than the punishment:
Cap. 4. de divinis nomi nibus part. 4.
Therefore Dionysius said well, non est malum puniri, sed fieri poena dignum,
that is, it is not evil to be punished, but to deserve punishment; yet
wretched sinners are afraid of the punishment, but not of the guilt; but the
martyrs of God chose rather to endure the greatest torments, then to incur
the guilt of sin. If we would escape the punishment, we must first look that
the guilt be removed. Many think when the sin is past and forgotten in
their minds, then there is no more punishment to follow, but if the guilt lie
still unpardoned, the sin remains still: Joseph's brethrens sin lay over
twenty years, and this sin which they committed at Baalpeor lay over a long
time unrepented of, but as long as the guilt remained, so long were they
subject to punishment; the punishment always follows the guilt, as the
shadow does the body. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. faith ye shall be guilty of the
body and blood of Christ; that is, of the punishment which he deserves, who
abuses the body and blood of our Lord.

The third thing considerable in sin is the blot or stain of sin in the
soul. This stain blots the soul, as Ink cast upon a Laune cloth defiles
it; and even as in bodily things, spots takes away that nitor and brightness
which is in the body, so does sin deprive the soul of grace, and makes it
deformed; Saul was as comely and proper a man as was in all Israel and he was
Tobh bonus id est pulcher, Tobh
2 Samuel 9.2. Yet this blot of sin so defiled him, that he was no more the
son of Kish the Benjamite, Kish. Kush.
but the son of Kush the Blacke-more or Ethiopian, Psalm. 7. in the
inscription.

The Lord that he may take away this guilt, and this blot, he opened a
fountain in the house of David, for sin and uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. for
sin, to take away the guilt, and for uncleanness to take away the blot,
Christ was not only (...) the price of our redemption, Math. 20.28. but also
(...) a Laver of regeneration to wash away these spots Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5.
He came not by blood only nor by water only, but both by blood and water; by
blood, for our justification, and by water for our sanctification; He that is
washed (says Christ) has no need but that his feet be washed, that is, he
who is washed in the blood of Christ, has no need to be washed over again,
but yet he has need that his feet be washen, that is, the remnants of sin
which cleaves daily unto us, has need to be washed away by the water of
sanctification; and here he alludes to the custom of those who went into a
bath to be washed, when their bodies were washed the filth ran down to
their feet, and they were last washed.

The fourth is the punishment which is dew for the transgression of the Law:
The fourth is the punishment.
every sinner violates an order set down; and therefore is justly punished by
him whose ordinance he breaks. The will of man is subject to three superiors.
Gershon par. 3.
First it is subject to reason. Secondly, it is subject to the magistrate, and
lastly and above all to God: Therefore man is justly punished by all those three:
and first he is punished by the sting of conscience, because he transgressed
against reason: Secondly, he is punished by the magistrate, because he
disobeyed him; and thirdly by God himself, in tormenting him in the hels; Nam
quaecun que res aberratab uno ordine impellitur in alterum, ut quod aberrat ab
ordine misericordiae reponitur in ordine justitiae: unde non minus ordinate
collocatur damnatus in inferno quam beatus in paradiso: i. e. that which
declines from one order is brought into another, as that which declines from
mercy is reduced to justice, and therefore the damned are as justly placed in
the hels, as the blessed in the heavens.

The Israelites in Joshua his time were guilty of the sin which their fathers
committed with Baal Peor; because they did not beg pardon for it: therefore
the Saints pray Ps. 97.8. Remember not against us the faults of our
predecessors, that is, which we have allowed and not repented of, being taught
by the example of our predecessors

Of the increase of Idolatry in the time of the Judges.
When they forgot the great works of the Lord, they served Baalim and the
groves, Judge. 3.7.

All their Idols were called Baalim and it was nomen transcendens amongst them;
and sometimes it was contracted into Bell, All their Idols were Baalim and some
had a proper name for distinction sake.
Esaias 46.1. and for distinction sake some of the particular idols were called
Baal Peor; some Baal berith; and some Baal zebub.

Baal signifies him who has power and dominion over one. Man was made a free
creature, only to serve the Lord; and for him to become a slave to an Idol
what a base subjection was this?

This word Baal so displeased the Lord, that he refused to be called any more
Baal, but Ishi. The Lord refused to be called Baal.
Hos. 2.16. 17. The first was nomen dominii; the second familiaritatis: Names
that are degenerate, Verbum sublatum.
men will not be content to be called by them: Magus was a good name at the
first, but now it is degenerate, and no man will be content to be called a
magitian. So Idiota at the first signified a private man, 1 Cor. 14.23. If
there come in the unlearned. In the greek it is (...) Idiots, but now this
word (...) is degenerate, and taken for a fool; and no man will be content to
be called an Idiot: The Christians at the first were called Nazarets Acts 24.5.
but because this name did degenerate into a sect therefore it was changed, and
they were called Christians Act. 11.26.

So words that were exoleta and out of use, Verbum exoletum.
may now be used, being come in use again: there was no name more hated of
old, then to be called wise, Romans 1.22. Professing themselves to be wise: The
most excellent men of old, would not be called wise men, but Philosophers
Lovers of wisdom, they shunned that name of wisdom, they took not that title
to themselves nor would be content that others should give them it: but now it
is come in use; So this word mysterium, was at the first a heathenish word,
used in their heathenish worship; But now the Lord has sanctified it, and it
is come in use.

This word Baal was so degenerate, that God would not be called after it any
more, God charges his Church not to take this name Baal in their mouth.
and as God would not be called by this name Baal; So he charges his Church not
to take the name of their heathenish gods in her mouth, Exodus 23.13. Psa. 16.4.
I will not take their names in my mouth; To take their names in her mouth
signifies the naming and retaining of their names, as they conduced any way to
the upholding of their superstition: even as on the contrary by Putting of the
true Gods name unto a place, Deuteronomy. 12.5. signifies, the placing of his
religion and ordinances there; and his name is said to be forgotten, when false
worship is set up, Psalm. 44.20.

To name the names of Idols for distinction sake and for a civil use is no
sin.
To name the names of Idols for civil use, and distinction; but not for
religion; that was a thing lawful, and not forbidden; as Daniel named often
the name of Baalthasar, although he had his name from Baal: So Nabuchadnezzer
although he had his name from Nebo that Idol, Esaias 46.1. and Paul himself
named Areopagus, Mars street, Acts 17.19. for distinction sake in a civil
use; as he sailed in a ship, which had the badge of Castor and Pollux, Act.
28.11. when Rabsekah called God Jehovah. Esaias 36.7. he honored not God: So
they dishonored not God when they used these names for a civil distinction.

Why the tribe of Reuben changed the names of Neb and Baalmeon.
Ob. But the tribe of Reuben changed those Idolatrous names of Nebo and Baal
meon, Number. 32.38. why did they not retain those names, and keep them for a
civil use and distinction.

Answ. This they did, because now they had made a new conquest of the Land, and
the ancient inhabitants were to be cast out of it: they gave these names now as
if it had never been possessed before. It is not unlawful to call a man
Balthazar for distinction sake; but if a man were to baptize his child, and
should call him Balthazar, that were to Initiate him to Baal, and to use this
name not in a civil use, but in a religious: And thus he should honor Baal.

The Lord would not communicate in any thing with Idols.
The Lord would not be named by the Idol Baal: He would not communicate with
Idols in any thing. First in the name, as he refused to be called Baal.
Secondly, he would not be worshipped in the same place with the Idol:
therefore when Dagon was set up beside the Arc, he threw it down and brake
the neck of it. Thirdly, he will not be worshipped with the same sacrifice 1
Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils. When
the whore would entice the young man to commit folly with her, Prove. 7.14. she
says I have peace offerings with me, and this day have I paid my vows: In
the peace offerings; God got a part, the Priest got a part, and the offerer got
a part, and to this part of the offering which belonged to her she invites this
foo^e; the whore and the whoremonger, shall they have a part of Gods peace
offerings? the Lord will not have a share in such a sacrifice: So the Lord will
not have a share in a sacrifice where this spiritual adultery is committed.
Fourthly he will not be served with the same Priests: The Lord would never
accept of the Levites (that went back from the Lord, when Israel went astray
after their Idols) to slay the burnt offerings, and sacrifice for the people:
but only to keep the gates of his house, and minister in these base offices,
Ezech. 44.10. And as Joshua, when he fought against the Cananites, Josh. 11.6.
took their horses, and did hough them, that they might not serve the enemy
for war any more, yet they might serve for baser uses, as to carry loades. So
the Lord would not have those Priests who had dishonored him in serving
Idols, to serve at his altar any more but to serve in base offices, as to keep
the gates in the house of God.

So they served the Groves, Judges 3.7. they are called there Ashera; because
they thought themselves happy, Why the groves are: called Ashera. (...)
when they worshipped their Idols there: but the groves may be called happy
per (...), because they were unhappie who worshipped there: So it is called
Lucus, quod minime Luceat: So Job 39. Struthio camelus is called Chasida, per
antiphrasin, because she hatches not her eggs as other fowls do, but leave
them in the sand.

It is said they served the groves; that is, their Idols in the groves: There
was a tree also amongst the midest of the trees of the grove which they
worshipped, Isa. 66.17. they that sanctify and purify themselves in the
garden behind one tree in the midst. This tree in the midst they worshipped, as
they did the other Idols; and they esteemed it as the tree of knowledge of good
and evil that was in the midst of the garden.

They planted groves for their Idols. These Idolaters alleged Abraham's
example; Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and worshipped there, Genesis 21.33.
So when they would sacrifice their children to Molech, they alleged the
example of Abraham, The Idolaters pretended the example of the saints for their
Idolatry.
who would have offered his son Isaake to the Lord: So when Jeroboam set up
his Idol at Bethel, he alleged the example of Jacob, who worshipped in Bethel:
So when the Prophet rebuked the profane music of the Jews, Amos 6.5. they
alleged the example of David, why might not they play on instruments as well
as David. These vile Idolaters did still pretend the example of the saints of
God, and labored to shelter themselves under them.

They planted groves that they might worship their Idols there, Deuteronomy. 16.21.
Judge. 6.25. The Rabbines tell us in Zonorenna, that Salomones throne of Ivorie,
was gilded, P. Shophet.
and had six steps, by the which he ascended into it, as we see 1 King.
10.9. And when the King stood in the lowest step, the Herald cried unto him;
Iudicium ne inclinato, wrest not judgment: when he stood upon the second
step, he cried unto him, accept not persons in Judgment: when he stood
upon the third step, he cried unto him, take no gifts: when he ascended to the
fourth step, he said unto him, Noli plantare Lucum, plant no groves for
Idols: and when he stood upon the fifth step he cried unto him, Noli erigere
statuam, erect not any pillar to an Idol: and when he stood upon the highest
step, he said unto him, noli mactare bovem, that is, take not the priests
part upon thee, to offer sacrifice. And so the King was admonished here both
to have a care of Justice and Religion, and these may be fitly called
admonitiones graduum; as they were called Psalms of degrees, which the Priests
sang when they ascended by stairs into the Temple.

The decrease of this Idolatry; the children of Israel cried to the Lord; The
decrease of this Idolatry.
then the spirit of the Lord came upon Othniel, and he delivered them, Judge.
3.10. So the spirit of the Lord came upon Gedeon, Judge. 6.34. so 2 Chro. 24.
the spirit of the Lord came upon Zachariah, and we say indifferently either he
put on the spirit, Act. 1.8. or the spirit came upon him. So he put on
Justice, or the spirit of Justice came upon him. This spirit which came upon
him was the spirit of Judgment, and the spirit of strength; the spirit of
Judgment, Judge the people aright, and the spirit of strength, to defend them;
Because those Judges were but extraordinary, and for a time, therefore the
Lord sent his spirit upon them in a singular manner, for the deliverance of his
people.

The spirit of the Lord came upon Othniel. Five illapses of the spirit.
There are four illapses of the spirit noted in the scripture which has
fallen upon men. The first is illapsus spiritus roboris, the illaps of the
spirit of strength; So the spirit came upon the Judges, and upon Amasa, David's
chief captain, 1 Chro. 12.18. The second is illapsus spiritus regiminis,
illaps of the spirit of government which came upon Saul and David when they
became to be Kings, 1 Samuel 16.13. The third illapse is spiritus illuminationis,
of the spirit of illumination, as the spirit of the Lord came upon Baalam, when
his eyes were shut, were opened, Number. 24.3. And the fourth is illapsus spiritus
sanctificationis and illuminationis, the illapse of sanctification and
illumination, as when the spirit of the Lord came upon Zechariah the son of
Iehoiada the priest, when he said unto the people, Why transgress ye the
commandment of the Lord, 2 Chro. 24.20.

When the spirit came upon them then they were said to be clothed with the
spirit, 1 Chronicles. 12.18. The spirit of the Lord clothed Amasai; so Christ bids
his Disciples stay at Jerusalem, donec induamini virtute ex alto, Luke 24.49.
Tarry ye at Jerusalem till ye be endued with power from on high, or until ye
be clothed from on high.

The second increase of Idolatry.
The second increase of Idolatry under the Judges was, Judge. 3.12. And the
children Israel committed evil again in the sight of the Lord. It is not
specified in particular, what Idolatry they committed at this time; but only
it is said, that they committed evil, which is meant of Idolatry; for in a
special manner it is called evil: So Jeroboam caused Israel to sin; that
is, to commit Idolatry.

The decrease of this Idolatry, Iud. 3.15. then they cried to the Lord, The
decrease.
and the Lord sent Ehud a man left handed to deliver them: In the original it
is Ittar Iad, (...)
shut of the right hand, It is not well translated Ambidexter, a man who could
use both the hands; he was not like those who could hurl stones both with the
right hand and with the left, 1 Chronicles. 12.2. he had the use of the left hand
only, but he was lame in his right hand, or his right hand was shut together,
and he only used his left hand, the strok whereof is most dangerous.

God in delivering of his own chooses often times weak means, that his
glory may appear the more, as here: when Gideon was to fight against the
Madianites he cashired two and twenty thousand, and then there remained ten
thousand, and they were too many, therefore he made only choice of three
hundredth, and the Lord said I will try them, (...)
Iud. 7.4. Hebraice, constabo eos, that is I will separate the dross from the
gold, that is the weak from the strong, and I will choose the dross that all the glory may return to me in the victory; for the fewer there was in number,
the greater was the Lords glory. So when he delivered his Church by Gideon
that barley cake: and when he overthrew the enemy by Samgars ox goad, Judge.
3.31. and by Deborah a woman, when there was neither spear, nor shield seen
in Israel, Judge. 5.8. and when there was no smith in Israel to make sword or
spear, yet they overthrew the Philistines, who were in number like the sand of
the sea, 1. Sam. 13.5.

The third increase of Idolatry was in Deborah her time, Iud. 5.8. when they
chose new gods, The third increase of Idolatry. A difference between nest gods
and strange gods.
that is strange gods: So new tongues are called strange tongues, Mar. 16.17.
Acts 2.4. They may be called strange gods, which are not new gods, for the
Idols which their fathers worshipped cannot be called new gods, yet they were
strange gods, what ever god they fained to themselves, that was a strange god.

The Jews who worshipped Idols were of three sorts. The Jews who worshipped
Idols were of three sorts. First, those who worshipped Iebovah by their Idods.
First, those who worshipped Jehovah the true God by the Idols, Judge. 17.13.
Then said Micha, now know I that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a
Levite to my Priest, so 2 King. 17.28. One of the Priests whom they carried out
of Samaria, came and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the
Lord; That is how to worship the calfe, whom they thought represented the Lord.
So when they set up the calfe in the wilderness, they said, to morrow shall be
afeast to the Lord, Exodus 32.5. they thought they worshipped the Lord by that
calfe.

The second were those who worshipped strange Gods, but not the gods of their
fathers.
The second sort of Idolaters amongst the Jews, were those who worshipped
strange gods, but not the gods of their fathers, Deuteronomy. 32.17. they sacrificed
to new gods whom their fathers knew not.

Thirdly, those who willingly chose new gods and not by the persuasion of
others.
The third sort were those who willingly made choice of new gods; they were
worse than those who choose new gods by the persuasion of others, as Amazia^
who took the gods of the King of Edom, and worshipped them, after he had come
from the killing of the Edomites, and carried away their gods, 2 Chronicles. 25.14.
he did this freely, and of his own choice; but Solomon when he fell to
Idolatry, he did it by the persuasion of others, 1 King. 9.48. Chron. 25.4.

Whether those sinned more, who worsh^pped the true God by false means, or
those who worshipped false gods by false means?
Quest. Whether sinned they more who worshipped the true God Jehovah by false
means, then those who worshipped the false gods by false means?

Ans. In one respect they sinned more, who worshipped the true. God by false
means, because they had a greater knowledge of the true God, that made their
sin the greater; but in those again who worshipped false gods by false
means, there was a double sin, first in respect of the object, because they
worshipped a false god. Secondly, in respect of the means, because they chose
false means to worship their God by.

Quest. If one man should swear a falsehood by the true God, and another
should swear a truth by a false God, which of these two sins were the
greater?

Answ. The sin of him who swears a truth by the false god is greater than his
sin, who swears a falsehood by the true God; the reason is because Idolatry
is a greater sin than perjurie; The sin of him who swear: a truth by a false
god is greater than his sin who swears a falsehood by the true god.
Perjurie is but a sin against the third command, and Idolatry is a sin against
the second commandment which is greater than perjurie: He that swears a
falsehood by the true God denies but the verity of God, but he that swears
the truth by false gods, he does wrong to the very essence of God; for he gives
to a creature that which is true only to God. The Lord objects to his people,
Ier. 5. that they swear by false Gods, they that swear by false gods profess
that their Idols know all things, and cannot be deceived, which is only proper
to God: if we respect perjurie, it is a greater evil to swear a falsehood by
the true God, then to swear a truth by the false gods; But Idolatry is
always a greater sin then perjury; therefore to swear the truth by a false
god, must be a greatter sin then to swear a falsehood by the true God. The
decrease.


The decrease of this Idolatry; When the children of Israel cried unto the Lord
for the oppression of Iabin King of Canaan, the Lord sent Deborah and Baracke
to deliver them, Judge. 4.

The fourth increase of Idolatry under the Judges, The fourth increase of
Idolatry.
was when the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, Judge. 6.
And the Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian for seven years.

The decrease, The decrease.
ver. 7. And it came to pass when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord,
because of the Midianites, that the Lord sent the Prophet Gideon to the
children of Israel to deliver them.

Gideon cast down Baals altar, and sets up an altar to the Lord, and calls it
Jehovah Shalom, that is, the Lord send peace, Judge. 7.^4. He would not suffer
the altar of peace to stand with the alter of strife; no more than the Lord
would suffer Dagon to stand with the ark of God, what communion has light
with darkness; and what communion has the temple of God with Idols, 2 Cor.
6.14.

Gideon strove with the men of Sechem, and his fathers house against Baal, and
therefore he was called Ierubbaal, and Ierubasheth, 2 Samuel 9.21. because he
put Baal to shame and disgrace.

When they fell from the Lord and worshipped Idols at this time, they were sore
oppressed by the Madianites; then the Lord sendes Gideon to deliver them;
Gideon desired a sign of the Lord to confirm him, when he was to go against
the Madianites.

Whether Gideon tempted the Lord when he asked a sign of him.
Quest. Was not this a tempting of the Lord to ask a sign of him so often.

An. God is tempted two manner of ways, by men; first, when they seek not a
sign directly of God, but when they mistrust his power, then they are said to
tempt the Lord: he tempted him ten times in the wilderness, Number. 14.22. which
Rabbi Solomon reckons up this way; The Israelites tempted the Lord ten times
in the wilderness through unbelief.
first they tempted him at the red sea, Exo. 1^. Secondly, in Marah, Exo. 15.
Thirdly, in the desert of Sin. Enod. 16. Fourthly, when they left Manna while
the morrow, Exo. 16. Fifthly, when they sought Manna upon the seventh day, and
found it not. Sixthly, at ^ap^dim, at the waters of contradiction, Nu. 21.
Seventhly, at Herob, by the golden calfe, Exo. 32. Eighthly, at Habara, Number. 11.
Ninthly, at the graves of concupiscence. Tenthly, at Pharon, which the spies
made when they went to spie^ the land. Secondly, God is tempted when we desire
of him a sign for curiosity, as doubting of his power, so the devil desired
Christ to turn stones into bread, We tempt God when we desire of him a sign
for curiosity.
Matthew. 4. And they of Nazaret would have had a sign of him, when they said;
Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy own country,
Luke 4.23. So the Pharisees and Saduces would have had a sign of him from
heaven, Matthew. 16.1. But Gideon who had a singular warrant from the Lord to
ask a sign, tempted him not through doubting or curiosity; neither Zachary
when he said, whereby shall I know this, Luke 1.18. Neither Marie when she
said, how can this be, Luke 1.34. when the Angel gave her a sign of her
conception, that she should conceive: This (how) in Marie was admirantes, not
dubitantes: In Zachary it was mixed with doubting, but it was not of
infidelity, as the doubting of the Pharisees and Saducees was. The first
increase of Idolatry.


The first increase of Idolatry was when the Sechemites took the Ephod which
Gideon had made, and set it up for an Idol in the house of Baal berith in
Sechem, Judge. 9.4. and 46.

Quest. Gideon made this Ephod not to be an Idol, but to be a remembrance of
thanksgiving for their deliverance as the Reubenites set up an altar in the
other side Jordan.
Whether did Gideon purpose to make an Idol of this Ephod or not?

Answ. Gideon caused not a new Ephod to be made, neither minded he to have set
it up as an Idol, but as a remembrance to the Lord; when the Rubenites and
Gadites erected and attar on the other side of Jordan, Josh. 22.9. they did it
not of that mind to sacrifice upon that altar, but only they set it up for a
memorial of thanksgiving to the Lord. And it is clear that the Israelites
went a whooring after this Ephod but after the death of Gideon, verse 27.
therefore they interpret not well this place, who interpret it thus, fornicatu^
est omnis populus post eum, all the people went a whoring after him, as though
they followed Gideon in this Idolatry; but Iunius translates it better,
fornicatus est post eum, scilicet Ephodem, seu in eo Ephode, that is, they went
a whoring after the Ephod.

The reasons which proves that Gideon intended no such thing, as to erect an
Idol in Ophrah are these.

First, Judge. 8.32. Gideon dyed in a good old age; To die in a good old age
comprehends four things.
a good old age comprehends four things in it, first, fullness of days,
secondly, peace of conscience, thirdly, a good name, fourthly, when one dies in
the favor of God; neither is this phrase found in the Scripture, but of such
who dyed the death of the righteous: So Abraham is said to have died in a good
old age, Genesis 25.15. So David, 1 Chror. 29.28.

The second Reason, it is objected of the Israelites, ver. 35. that they showed
no kindness to the house of Gideon according to all the goodness which he had
showed to Israel? But if Gideon had erected this Idol of purpose, that the
people might go a whoring after it how should they be bound to have showed
any favor to him; they should rather have hated him, if he had set up any
Idol to have been their ruin.

Ob. Burn this Idol became a snare to Gideon and to his house, Then it might
seem that Gideon himself was ensnared by this Idol.

Answ. By Gideon here is understood Gideons children and posterity, as 1 King.
12.16. what portion have we in David, that is in the posterity of David, so 2 Chronicles. 13.1. it is said that Jeroboam made war against Rehoboam; Rehoboam was
dead, Chap. 12. And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the City
of David: it was against his son Abija. So Act. 7.16. Abraham bought a
burial from the father of Sechem, it was not Abraham himself who bought it,
but the posterity of Abraham. So this Idol became a snare to Gideon; that is
to Gideons children; and to his house, that is, to his friends.

Gideon his Ephod was afterward made an Idol.
This Ephod which Gideon appointed for an holy use, was afterward abused, and
turned to an Idol; as the best wine is turned into vinegar; so the brazen
serpent was erected in the wilderness for an holy use; yet the people
afterward made an Idol of it, and burnt incense to it. So the first
institution of the love feasts of the Christians were commendable, and for a
good end; but afterward they were turned into abuse, so the comemoration of the
saints departed, was afterward turned to invocation.

Gideon his house was ensnared by this ephod. Solomon says, Eccles. 7.26. And
I found more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is fordres and ^ettes,
and her hands as bands. Whose pleases God, shall escape from her, but the
sinner shall be taken by her. This lewd woman had snares to ensnare men, as the
not takes the Foul and the Fish: She leads the foolish men captive, and none
without the special grace of God is safe from her: So the Idols lay snares
and ginnes to catch men, and it is hard to escape the snares of the Idol; but
he who pleases the Lord shall escape from them.

This Baal berith was the Idol of the Sechemites, and they bound themselves by
a solemn stipulation to serve this Baal berith,

They made a covenant with Baal berith, yet they covenant with Abimelech to
kill his to. brethren. A false religion has no more power to bind men long to
them, then ropes of sand. The Kings of Syria and Egypt made many covenants
together, and mingled themselves with the seed of men, Dan. 2.43: that is,
they married together, yet these covenants could no more hold then iron and
clay when they are mixed together.

Religion is called a religande; But a false Religion has no power to bind,
but true Religion has power indeed to bind people one to another: Where there
is one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, Ephe. 4.5. that makes the multitude of
believers to be of one heart and of one soul.

A good conscience when it stipulates with god, Four singular privileges of a
good conscience when it stipulates with God which an evil conscience has not,
when it stipulates with Idols.
1 Pet. 3.21. has four singular privileges which a bad conscience has not
when it stipulates with an Idol. First it has a privilege suptase, when it
tookes up to God, 1 Pet. 2.19. Secondly, it has this privilege in se. It has
the peace of God within it, and is a pure conscience and undefiled, 2 Timothy 1.3.
Thirdly, Iuxta se; a good conscience shows it self toward men, Act. 24.16.
and fourthly infra se: I am persuaded that neither height nor depth shall
separate me, Romans 8.38. depth, that is, the devils who dwell in the depth: But
an Idolatrous conscience when it looks above, it finds no comfort: for it
worships dead Gods, Ps. 106.28. and within it self it is defiled, Tit. 1.15.
and I^ntase those Idolaters cared not to murder the 70. brethren of Abimelech
and infra se, it is always in fear of the internal spirits.

Abimelech killed his 70. brethren, and poor Jonathan escaped only: The Jews
have a proverb, esto canda leonum, and nesiscaput vulpium, that is, it is
better to have a mean place amongst the righteous, than to be a ringleades
amongst the wicked, it was better to be in Ioas place then Abimelechs.

They robbed their God Baal berith and took out 70. pieces of silver to hire
vain and light braind men, Rekim, light braind men; Hence comes Raka, which is
a word of disgrace in the Gospel, Matthew. 5. and hence comes this word
Saracenis, because they lived upon excurtions and robberies, and men of light
fashions: The treasures of the Church have been opened to help captives,
Perkiavoth cap. 4.
and those that were in prison; but these opened their treasure here to hire
light and vain persons.

What a judgment befell Abimelech for robbing of his Idol.
They robbed their god Baal berith and gave Abimelech 70. pieces of silver. See
what a Judgment befell Abimelech for robbing of his Idol; he perished
miserably, not only for murdering of his brethren, but also for robbing
Baal, whom he took to be his God, Judge. 9.53. We have anotable example of
this that men should not rob their Idols; Caelius Rodoginum. page 298.
Amiande Marcellinus testifies, that in the days of Marcus Antonius and Verus
the emperors, that the soldiers spoiled the temple of Apollo, and brought his
image to Rome; There was a little chest of gold which stood in the temple of
Apollo, that had a little hole in it, which the Caldee soothsayers had shut up
before, the soldiers through covetousness opened this hole, thinking to have
found a treasure in this chest, but there came out such a vile and deadly smell
out of it, that it raised a plague from the bounds of Persia, even unto France,
and went into Parthia and Media also, and killed thousand of thousands there.
See what it is for the Idolater to rob his ^doll.

Quest. Whether he commits Sacrilege who robes an Idols
Whether does he commit Sacrilege who robbes a false god or not?

Answ. An erroneous conscience (as the Apostle witnesses Romans 14.35. and by
the consent of all divines) binds a man, for he that does contrary to the
Law given by the superior (holding in his conscience that it is the Law of the
superior) despises his superior in his conscience, and is guiltly of that
same sin, whereof he is, who transgresses the Law of him who is the
magistrate indeed. If the Kings Herald should give out the Law otherways,
then it was first ordained by the King, the people are bound to obey this Law,
and they who contemn it are justly to be punished; which obligation is taken
away, when the Kings mind is rightly understood; not that this obligation was
any thing before in it self; but only in the mind of the people who
believed, that that law was truly promulgated, as it was given out by the
King, which apprehension of the people binds them to obey the Law: So he who
makes a promise and swears by a false god, is more strictly bound to perform
it, then he who simply promises only, without an oath; for although this
oath considered in it self, binds no ways a man more than he had simply
promised; for this is not an oath when one swears simply by a god who cannot
testify the truth, yet notwithstanding because in his erroneous conscience, he
takes the Idol to be a god, if he perform not that which he promised by an
oath, then he is perjured for although this ^^th be nothing (...) part r^^ yet
as he esteems of it, it is a sin not to perform it: A good conscience and
an erroneous conscience bind, but after a diverse manner: A good conscience
simply binds, but an erroneous conscience only upon supposition, because it
takes that to be the Law of God, which indeed is not; Hence we see that the
Sechemites were guilty of Sacrilege, robbing their Idol Baal berith, whom
they took to be a god; and the tribe of Dan was in the same case, Judge. 18.
when they took away the Idol of Micah.

If Abimelech perished miserably for robbing of his Idol, what marvel is it
then that these perish miserably who rob the true God, as Iehoiakim who cut out
the Lords windows and sealed his own house with Cedar, and painted it with
Vermilion; Ier. 22.14. He got the burial of an ass for it. v. 19. Athaliah
was worse, she brake up the house of the Lord, and bestowed all things
dedicated to the Lord, upon ^aalim; She was slain by the guard, 2 Chronicles.
23.15. But Balthazar was most Sacrilegious of all, who took the vessel of the
house of the Lord, and dedicated them to his Idols; and when he was in all his
jollitie the Medes and the Persians came and killed him that same night, Dan.
5.30.

The sixth increase.
The sixth increase of Idolatry, Judge. 10.6. Then the children of Israel did
evil again in the sight of the Lord, and they served Baalim, and Ashtaroth,
the gods of Syria, and the gods of Zidan, the gods of Moab, and the gods of the
children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and they forsook the Lord,
and served (...) him.

Now their Idolatry was mightily increased, when they served the gods of all
the nations round about them: It is a question in the Ethickes, whether a man
may keep entire and true friendship with many or not? So we may ask what
(...) of worship could the Jews perform to all these gods?

They served Baalim and Ashtaroth: When the Hebrews joins the masculine and
the faeminine together then they signify many.
it is usual w^^^ the Hebrews (when they join the masculine and the
faeminine together) to comprehend the whole, o^ very many of the kind which
they speak of; as Genesis 5.7. He begat sons and daughters, that is many
children: So Eccles. 2.8. I got me men fingers and women fingers, than is,
diverse sorts of Musicians: So they worshipped Baal and Ashtaroth, that is
sundry sorts of Idols.

They served gnashteroth the gods of Syria 1 King. 9.5. and they are put in the
faeminine gender, (...).
because they fained to themselves, as well women gods, as men gods diverse
fe^^s are only for preservation of mortal kinds, but they held their gods to
be immortal, why then should they imagine male and female amongst them? Yet
the Platonickes held, that there were male and female amongst them; and
Trismogish (...) faemini^^^.

They worshipped the gods of Syria: There were many gods in Syria according to
the several divisions of it.
There were many of the gods of Syria, according as it was diversely divided.
Syria interam^^^, or Mesopotamia: So Syria Seba; and Syria Macha, and Syria
Damascena: These had all sundry gods 2 Chro. 23.

They worshipped the gods of the Philistines and of the Ammonites, and yet the
Ammonites and Philistines oppressed them eighteen years, Judges 10.8.

Mark a difference betwixt the true religion and the false: A difference
between the true religion and the false.
when they came to serve the gods of the Philistines, and the Ammonites they
were their deadly enemies; but when they turned from the false religion to the
true, then they cherished and loved them. When men came from Gentilisme to
Judaisme, they were called proselytes, and the Jews showed them all the
favors that they did to any Jew: So when they were converted from Iudaisme to
Christianity, they called them fratres Iudai Act. 15. accounted of them as
their brethren. So when men were converted from Gentilisme to Christianity
then they were called (...), 1 Timothy 3.6. and they cherished them as young
plants; therefore the Lord says to Jeremy 15.19. Go not thou to them, but
let them come to thee.

When they cried unto the Lord in this trespass, the Lord answered them with a
bitter tant, Judges 10.14. Go and cry unto your Gods whom ye have chosen, let
them deliver you in the time of your tribulation: Bernard says well, Quod deus
dicit cum risu, tu debes audire cum luctu.

The decrease.
The decrease, Judges 10.15. when the children of Israel said unto the Lord; We
have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems good unto thee, only deliver
us we pray thee this day, and ver. 16. And they put away the strange gods from
amongst them, and served the Lord, and his soul was grived for the misery of
Israel. In the original it is, Anima ejus fuit contracta, and opposite to this
is 2 Cor. 6.11. Our heart is enlarged.

Verbum kum conti^^^ alteri verbo absque copula praemissum agilitatem and
expeditionem notat atta takum:
Here is the nature of our gracious God shown to us, who is slow to anger, and
soon pacified, and at whatsoever time a sinner repents him, he will put away
all his sins out of his mind; then the Lord arose and had mercy upon Sion,
Psalm. 102.13.

The seventh increase.
The seventh increase of Idolatry Judge. 17.4. when Micah sets up molten gods and
graven gods to be worshipped.

Rabbi David observes that this word (God) in all this part of Scripture, which
entreates of Micah his Idolatry, is always prophanum nomen, a profane name,
taken for Idols, except only in two places: The first in these words (all the
time that the house of the Lord was in Shilo) The second is Judges 18.10. The
Lord has given the Land into your hands.

Micah consecrated one of his sons to be a Priest to him, Many irregularities
in this, when Micah consecrated his son to be a Priest.
verse 5. Here concurres many irregularities contrary to the Law, in the
consecration of this his son. The first irregularity is in him who
consecrates. The second in him who was consecrated. The third in making an
Ephod to him to serve, who was consecrate. The fourth in the place where he
served after he was consecrated, and that was in a private house.

The first irregularitie was this, The first irregularitie.
that he took upon him to consecrate his son: No man takes this honor upon
him, but he that is called of God as Aaron.

Que. How could Moses consecrate Aaron and his sons, Levit. 8.12, 13. seeing he
was not of the sons of Aaron? Moses was first a Priest and consecrated the
Priests to the Lord.


The common Answer here is this, that he did it at the commandment of God
extraordinarily, at the first establishing of the Priesthood; But there is more
in it then this, for Moses was a Priest of God, Psalm. 99.6. Moses and Aaron
amongst the Priests: Here David terms Moses a Priest as well as Aaron; and
Moses Gerundensis says, that he was a Priest, and therefore offered incense
first; and the Hebrews call him, Sacerdotem Sacerdotum the greatest Priest,
and that Moses offered a burnt offering on the Altar, it is clear Lev. 8.28.
and Hiscuini says, that all the seven days Moses offered, and in the eight
day, he said to Aaron from henceforth come thou, and serve in this ministry,
after that Moses had consecrated Aaron and his sons, Moses children are not
reckoned amongst the Priests, but amongst the Levites, 1 Chronicles. 23.14.

Qu^st. 1. Aaron and his sons were those who consecrate: who was it then that
consecrate when the Priesthood was out of the right line, from the time of Eli
(who descended from Ithamar and not from Eleazar) ^ Chron. 24.3.) to the time
of Sadock, who was restored by Solomon to the Priesthood? The Priesthood in the
wrong line in Eli his time, in Ahitob his time, in Ahi^^ his time, and his
brother Abimelech, his time, in Abiather, his time, and the restored to the
right line in Sadock.

The Priests who came of Ithamar and did consecrate, being in the wrong line,
peccarunt usurpatione tituli, yet there consecration was valid.




Answ. These Priests although they were not in the right line, when they
entered into the preisthood and although there entry was by usurpation, yet
being entered their consecration was lawful, for even as a tyrant Peccat
usurpatione tituli, yet he sins not in Judging and giving out sentence; and
the subjects are bound to obey him, and until he be divested of those usurped
titles, his edicts have strength to bind the subjects; so long as the tyrant
stands they are to obey him, and implicit^ he has the approbation of the
subjects, that is, they wish that he may do Justice so long as he rules: The
Romans subdued the Jews and made them their captives, and the Jews by their
tacit consent acknowledged them as their Lords and masters: therefore Christ
bidds them, gave tribute to Caesar, Mat. 22. So when they were carried captives
to Babylon, the Lord bidds them pray for the peace of Babylon, Ier. 29.7. the
people gave there tacit consent to the Babylonians, and although they led them
captive, yet they were to pray for them as there superiors; so the Priests
although they sinned in usurpation of the priesthood, as not being descended of
Aaron, yet durante tali statu, so long as they continued, their consecration
was valide, and they had gotten the tacit consent of the people by
prescription of time.

Quest. 3. Who consecrated the high Priest after his fathers death?

Answ. An inferior Priest did consecrate him; see Exodus 29.29. Number. 20.26.28.

Quest. 4. When the Idolatrous Priests hand was filled and a piece of flesh put
therein, whether had be right to sacrifice and consecrate or not?

Answ. None at ^ll; for out of the Church there is no consecration, therefore
Jonathan in his (...) Paraphrase, calls him, not Cohen, but Cumer, that is, No
consecration (...) of the Church. (...)
a heathen then Priest, Iud. 18.30. the same phrase of sitting of the hand is
used in consecrating of Ieroboams Priests, a Chro. 13.9. and yet Jeroboam had
no power to consecrate them; and the water which came out of the rock, 3 Cor.
10. was a sacrament to the Israelites when they drank of it, but when the
beasts drank of it, it was no Sacrament to them: so this consecration was no
consecration to them, who were out of the true Church. And as Ishmael although
he was truly circumcised by Abraham, yet to his posterity who left the true
Church; and used circumcision still, it was no Sacrament. So this consecration
out of the Church, was no consecration to them, and they had no more right to
it, then the thief has to the true man's purse, when he takes it.

The third irregularitie in this consecration was this; that he made an Ephod.
for his son to serve this Idol with.

There were three sorts of Ephods, the first was a religious Ephod, such was
the Ephod of the Priests. Three sorts of Ephod.
The second sort of Ephod was a politic, or civil Ephod, which David wore
when he danced before the arc, and that which Gid^on made, and left at Ophrah.
The third was an Idolatrous Ephod, which is joined here with Teraphim, and not
with Vri^^ and Tha^^^^^^, as the Lords Ephod was.

The fourth irregularitie was this when he were consecrate, he sacrificed in a
private place, his fathers house, and not in Shilo, in the place where the
worship of God was performed at that time, and this was as badde as if he had
sacrificed in the high places, or in the groves.

Then it was added, they did this because there was no king in Israel.

Kingly government of the best government.
Observe here first that Kingly government is the best government, and a King
here is put for a best magistrate; because the Lord was to bring in this kingly
government amongst them; Therefore they were called Kings, before the
institution of Kings, as Moses is called a King, Genesis 36.31. Deuteronomy. 33.5. And
because Kingly government was the most excellent government, therefore it is
that sundry things take their denomination from a King, at the King, laws,
Iam. 2.8. so the Kings highway, Number. 20.17. so the shout of a King, Number. 23.22,
that is a joyful shout, as when they were choosing a King.

A magistrate must have a care both for maintenance of religion and Justice.
They committed this Idolatry, because there was no King in Israel: so they
abused the Levites wife, because there was no King in Israel, Judge. 19.1. Here
we see th^^ the magistrate is custos utrinsque tabulae, and it belongs to him
to vindicate the worship of God. Idolatry is iniquit^s Iudicum, Job 31.28.
That is, it is to be punished by the Judge, and to punish wrongs done by men
to men: there are two pillars strong like Iakin, and Bag^as, 1 King 7.21.
Justice and religion, when these two fail; then the land^elts, Psalm. 75.3. the
Hebrews say the world is upholden by three things, Super lege, super
cultusacro, and super retributione benificiorum, when these three fail, then
the world goes to decoy.

Now Micah will have another Priest then his son, a Levite of Judah to be his
Priest.

Quest: How could he be a Levite, and of Judah, for the Levites were not of the
tribe of Judah.

Answ: He has been of the tribe of Levi by his mother, for women of one
tribe might marie with men of another tribe; providing that they were not
heretics, then they were always bound to marry within their own tribe, to
keep the inheritance distinct.

Micah chused this Levit to sacrifice; but the Levites might not sacrifice, nor
inquire any thing of the Lord, The Levites might not sacrifice.
but by the priests. When the Tabernacle was to be taken up, or set down, no
stranger might come near it; here all are called strangers, who are not
priests or Levites, Number. 1.51. But when they were to sacrifice, no stranger
might sacrifice, that is, neither Israelite, nor Levite, Number. 3.10. Therefore
when he chose a Levite to sacrifice, here there was a great irregularitie:
their callings were two distinct callings: The calling of the Levites and the
priests were two distinct callings.
the Levites did some things which the priests might not do, as to carry the
Arc: therefore Vzza was killed who touched the Arc being a priest; and the
Levites might not sacrifice under the pain of death, Number. 3.10.

This wandering Levite was redacted to great misery, and he was content with a
poor portion: It was a great curse upon the posterity of Eli, when they should
come and crouch for a piece of silver, and a morsel of bread, and should say,
Put me I pray thee into one of the priests offices, that I may eat a piece of
bread, 1 Samuel 2.36. So when this base Levite sought to be a priest, and was
content with ten shekells of silver a year, and a suite of apparel, and his
victuals, Judge. 17.10. then he came and crouched down for a piece of silver
and a morsel of bread.

None that served in the temple or tabernacle in the basest office did it for
naught, as they that shut the doors, and kindled the fire, Mal. 1.10. or the
Nethinims, Josh. 9.27. who hewed the wood for the sacrifices, and drew water
for the temple, or the Levites that flead the beasts, or the Priests that
offered the sacrifices; all had plenty enough, there was bread enough in their
fathers house: but this miserable man contents himself in his Idol service,
with a suit of apparel, his victuals, and ten pieces of silver.

He desires to be a priest that he might eat bread, 1 Samuel 2.26. When they
desired to be in this holy calling only to eat, and not to serve God in it,
then they were mercenaries. The Moralists observe, that some games and
recreations are honest, when men use them only for recreation, as to fish, and
to hunt; but if a man do fish only for gain, or go a hunting only to make
profit by it, then it becomes ignoble, and questus est sordidus, it is base
gain: much more if a man turn this high calling to gain, it becomes a base
calling: When these greedy dogs, Esaias 56.11. cannot be satisfied; and when
they seek the peoples goods, but not themselves, 2 Cor. 13.14. and fleece the
flock, but feed it not; Ezech. 34.3. tunc mercantur animas, they sell the
fowls of men, 2 Pet. 2.3. and sell the souls of the people for handfulls of
barley, and pieces of bread, Ezech. 13.19. then they feed the flock for filthy
lucre, 1 Pet. 5.2.

The eight increase.
The eight increase of Idolatry; when the whole tribe of Dan fell to Idolatry,
Judge. 18. and went a whoring after those Teraphims. Jonathan who was a priest
to a poor family before; now he becomes a priest to the whole family of Dan.
This Jonathan was the grand child of Moses, Moses begat Gershon, and Gershon
begat Manasseh, and Manasseh begat Jonathan, Judge. 18.30. This Menasseth was
the father of Jonathan, but because he and his son Jonathan were so unlike to
Moses; therefore they write him in the text Manasseh, but in the margin they
write him Moshe, (...) Manasses studio, and imitatione impietatis, Mosis silius
prosapia.
elevating the Nun; they write him Manasseth, because they held him to be an
Idolater like Manasseh; and they write him in the margin Moshe, because he
was naturally descended of Moses.

This might seem strange that Moses, (who was such a faithful servant in all
the house of God, Heb. 3.5. and always hated Idolatry) should have a
grandchild who is such an apostate and open Idolater: this a man might think
should breed great discouragement in the hearts of faithful men, when they see
their posterity so degenerate from the truth: The faithful who are within the
covenant, must comfort themselves by looking up to their good predecessors, and
not to their bad posterity.
but men who are faithful, and stand within the covenant, must comfort
themselves, not by looking down to those who come of them, but by looking up,
and marking their antecessors of whom they are descended: And even as in the
right succession of the inheritance in Israel, they reckoned upward always; So
must we do in the spiritual covenant. The Jews says, if a man died and had
no children, then the inheritance came to the father, both the inheritance of
the male and the female, unless there came in one who married his brothers
wife after his death; and they make the dead father as though he were alive,
that the right order of succession might be known, and so the male children
succeeded; and if there were no males, then the females succeeded, and if they
failed, then the inheritance ascended to the grandfather, and to his other
children if he had any more, and they ascended still up to Adam: therefore the
Jews say that there is not a man in Israel, who wants an heir, but he may
reckon it up to Adam.

Abraham. Isaac. Jacob. Esau. Levi, Dina a daughter. Noah. Gershon, Merari.
Ccohebed a daughter. Amram. Izzar. Hebron. Vzziel. Moses. Aaron. Miriam a
daughter.
Now in this genealogy Amram dying, the question is, who shall be his heir:
If Moses and Aaron be alive; first, Vide Sheldan de sucsuccessione haebreorum.
Moses succeeds, and if he die, Aaron; and if both die, then Miram; but if all
the three die without posterity; then from him it descends to the sons of
Amram, Izzar, Hebron and Vzziel, and so at last ascends to Abraham. So here in
this spiritual reckoning we must ascend upward; although Manasseh be an
Idolater, and his son Jonathan, Judge. 18.30. yet Moses will not want an
heir; Let him look to his faithful predecessors, they are his heirs, and
he may reckon up to them.

This will minister great comfort to the faithful parents, Verna domus quid.
who have bad children, that they are descended of godly parents: This was
David's comfort (who had lewd children) Psalm. 86.16. Have mercy upon me, and
give strength unto thy servant, and save the son of thy handmaid. The
children of the handmaid were their masters, and David alludes to this.
This was his comfort, that he was the son of the Lords handmaid; for they
that were the children of the handmaides were their masters, Exodus 21.4. and
they were said to be home borne, Ier. 2.14. So David being borne within the
Church of the Lords handmaid, rejoices that he is Gods child; and although
these pedegrees in our ascending be often broken off, yet the covenant is valid
and of force still, in respect of the first promise, Esaias 64.3. Thou art our
father, although Abraham has forgotten us, and Israel does not know us; that
is, although we have broken the covenant and have not followed the footsteeps
of our faithful predecessors Abram and Isaac, who (if they were alive) would
not acknowledge us for their children, neither do we think ourselves worthy
so to be reckoned; we lean only on the free promise of God in Christ Jesus,
which we know to be most sure, as God himself is constant.

Ianathan descending of Moses fell to Idolatry; All fathers transmit to their
children original sin, Genesis 5. Fathers transmits to their children original
sin only.
It is said of Adam, that he begat a son to his own Image, that is, to his
corrupt Image; but other things parents cannot trasmit to their children, as a
seeing father sometimes begets a blind son, John 9. neither can he transmit
those things which he has acquired by Art to his child; as a Musician begets
not a Musician; So he cannot transmit his infused gifts to his child; as
Solomon could not transmit his wisdom to his foolish son Rehoboam, far
less can he transmit grace unto his posterity, as Abraham could not transmit
grace to Ishmael, neither could Moses to his grandchild Jonathan; but God only
can beget children to his own Image: Therefore the Lord says; Be ye holy as
your heavenly Father is holy, 1 Pet. 1.16.

In this last increase of Idolatry under the Judges, it is to be considered
that first the Danites commit sin in taking away Micahs Idols, and by seducing
his Priest. Secondly, that Jonathan and his sons become Priests to the tribe.
And lastly how long this Idol remained in Dan.

First they take away Micah his Idols by violence Judge. 18.18. they stole them
not away secretly, but took them by violence, six hundred men came to take
them away: these were called aggressores, who came by force to take a thing.

They steal his gods; The Idolaters preferred their Idols to all that which
was most dear to them.
the gods which they affected so much, and loved so dearly. See how Laban
expostulates with Rachel for stealing his gods: The Idolaters preferred their
Idol gods to all their ornaments and comeliness: when the Gaulles beseiged
the Capitol, because they had no strings to their crosebowes, Caelius page 689.
the women caused to shave off their hair to make strings thereof, in defense
of their Palladium, and their gods. And they preferred their Idols to their
dear parents; When the Grecians burnt Troy, pitying their captive enemies,
they gave every one their choice to carry away that which they liked best,
Aeneas made choice to carry away his gods, before his old father, and therefore
he was called Pius Aeneas: they preferred not only their gods to their
Parents, but also to their lives; As Metellus when he saw the temple of Vesta
burning, Seneca declamationum. 4
he ran into the fire to save the Palladium, and very hardly he escaped with
his life, yet he lost his eyes and his Priesthood; for no man who wanted a
member might be a Priest in the temple of Vesta.

They took away his gods: If a Christian should steal the Idols of an
Idolater, that were but theft, but for an Idolater (who holds Idols to be gods)
to steal Idols were sacrilegious theft; And they being men of the same
profession and zealous as it might seem in their profession, this aggravates
their sin; for the unity of profession should bind men one to another.

In Israel they had sundry dialects whereby they were discerned.
They knew the Levites voice. In Israel they had sundry dialects, as some said
Shibboleth, and others said Sibboleth; The Ephraimites were discerned by their
lisping: and Peter was known to be a Galilaean by his speech: And so they had
about Jerusalem a peculiar dialect of their own Act. 2.8. some of them said
Aceldama, and others Akaldama, so here they knew the Levite by his peculiar
dialect.

They desire this Priest to ask couns^ll of God for them, And he answers them
according to their humor: Go in peace, for the Lord is in your way where ye
go, he will go before you and assist you: flattering Prophets spoke always
placentia, as the false Prophets did to Ahab. These are bad Physicians who give
always physic according to the patients humor.

Next they persuade him to go with them, and to leave Micah his house.

Micah and his family follow tO restore their gods, and Micah seeing that he
was not able to recover them, he falls out into this pitiful speech; Ye have
taken away my gods, and my priest, and what have I move.

We may learn of this Idolater Micah to esteem more of God and his worship
then of all things beside: Eli his daughter in law, when the Ark of God was
taken, called her son Ichabod no glory: That is, (...)
when the Arc was taken, all glory was gone from Israel; She was more sorry
for the taking of the Arc, then for the death of her father in law, and of her
husband.

They dissuade Micah from following of them for fear of his life verse 25.
Least thou lose thy life with the lives of thy household. In the original it
is, What the Hebrews mean by gathering of the soul.
Ne colligas animam tuam, and animam domus tuae, that is, least thou dye and
thy household: (to gather) is usually put for (to dye) in the Scripture; as Genesis
49.33. (...)
Jacob is said to be gathered unto his people. So Psalm. 26.9. Gather not my
soul with sinners, neither my life with bloody men. So. Number. 20.24 Aaron shall
be gathered to his people. So Hosea 4.3. fishes shall be gathered, that is,
they shall be taken away. This phrase to be gathered to their fathers, is as
well spoken of the wicked as of the godly; as Ishmael was as well gathered to
his fathers as Abraham, Genesis 25.17. Therefore this will not follow, such a man
was gathered to his fathers; therefore he was elect and chosen of God: this is
meant only of death, which is common both to the good and the bad.

Jonathan and his sons become Priests to this tribe of Dan. This tribe fell
first to Idolatry; The Tribe of Dan fell first to Idolatry, and therefore were
carried away first to captivity.
and therefore was first carried away to the captivity, Ier. 8.16. the
snorting of the horses is heard in Dan, that is of Salmanassar who carried away
this tribe first: So that when all the tribes were sealed in the forehead, This
Idolatry of the tribe of Dan laffed to the captivity.
Dan is omitted, Revelation 7. which wants not a mystery.

Lastly this Idolatry lasted in the tribe of Dan, unto the day of the Captivity
of the Land, and verse 31. all the time that the house of God was in Shilo: By
the day of the captivity of the Land, here is meant, that time when the
Philistimes oppressed Israel mightily: it must not be taken here for captivity,
which was in the time of Senacherib; By the day of the captivity is meant the
captivity of the Phistimes when the Arc was taken.
for David would not have suffered this Idol to have been in Dan all this
time; it must be taken then for this captivity of the Philistimes, and all
the time that the house of God was in Shilo; then the scourge of the
Philistimes came upon Israel: confer 1 Samuel 4.3. with Psalm. 78.60. and ye
will see this clearly Psalm. 78.58. He gave his strength to the captivity, and
they provoked him with their high places, and moved him to Jealousy with
their graven Images. This Micah his image was one of them that moved the Lord
to Jealousy most.

The Ark of the Lord was in Gilgal, Shilo, Nob, Gibeon: It was in Gilgal all
the time that they were subduing the Land, and dividing of it for four and
twenty years: it was in Shilo till the death of Eli three hundred sixty and
nine years: after the death of Eli, Shilo was destroyed, and the Arc was
carried to Nob, where it remained to the death of Saul thirteen years, and it
stayed in Gibeon until the Temple of Solomon was builded; fifty years after
Eli his death, fell this captivity of the Land, the Arc was taken; then the
Lord forsook the habitation of Shilo; and delivered his power and strength to
the captivity, Psalm. 78.

The greatest Judgment befell them when the Arc was taken away.
Greater was the judgment which fell upon Israel for this Idolatry, then for
all the former: for this Idolatry he left Shilo, the Arc was taken captive,
and the people; Eli brake his neck, and his sons were kil^ed.

Idolaters think that they have all happiness and prosperity by their Idols,
Ier. 44.18. Since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, we
have wanted all things; But mark what the Lord says of these Idols, and makes
the Israelites confess the same, Ier. 3.24. Shame has devoured the labor of
your fathers from your youth, (that is, from your Idols) their flocks and
their herds, their sons and their daughters. Micah when he set up his Idols
flattered himself, Judge. 17.13. Now I know that the Lord will do me good. But
the Lord says Deuteronomy. 27.15. Cursed be the man that makes any graven or molten
Image an abomination unto the Lord, and all the people shall say Amen. But
happy is the Church when she says, Hos. 2. I will go and return to my first
husband, for then it was better with me then now.

At this time there fell out a filthy fact in Gibeah in the tribe of Benjamin;
A filthy fact committed in Gibeah at this time.
for there the men of Gibeah abused the Levites concubine, so that she died by
the violence done unto her: there the ten tribes made war against the
Beniamites, The Beniamines prevail against the Israelites because of their
Idolatry.
and although Benjamin were the children of iniquity, yet they prevailed
against the ten tribes, because the ten tribes at this time were infected with
Micha his Idolatry.

Idolatry is a viler sin then the sin of Gibeah, Ho. 10.9. Idolatry exceedes
the sin of Gibeah and the sin of Sodom, and matcheth bestialitie.
It is a viler sin then the sin of Sodom, Eze 16.46. It is a sin like unto
beastialitie, when a man lies with a beast, Eze. 23.20. what sin then can be
greater then Idolatry.

And thus they committed Idolatry from age to age, while the Judges ruled them,
until God was wroth and greatly abhorred Israel, Psalm. 78.

In Samuels days they worshipped Baal, Of the increase of Idolatry under
Somuel.
and Ashta- 1. Sam. 7.

The decrease of this Idolatry was 1 Samuel 7.6. when the people gathered
themselves together to Mizpeh and drew water, and powered it out before the
Lord, and fasted on that day and said there, What is signified by pouring out
water before the Lord.
we have sinned against the Lord: to power out water in the Scripture signifies
to power out a thing abundantly, Deuteronomy. 12.16. ye shall not eat the blood, but
power it out upon the ground like water. So Genesis 49. Reuben is powered forth lik
water; that is, he has given himself over altogether to lust; And the
Scripture expresses this their repentance by pouring out of water rather then
by pouring out of any other liquor; for although ye should power out oil, or
honey out of a vessel, yet some of the liquor would still remain in the
vessel, and the smell also, But when water is powered out of a vessel, nothing
remains, no not the smell. By this pouring out of water, they signify that
they would altogether renounce their Idolatry, and that not so much as the
tangue or smell of it should remain among them.

Samuel reprooves them for choosing of a King; then they are terrified with
thunder in the time of the wheat harvest: Lastly, he diswades them from
Idolatry, 1 Samuel 12.12. and 17.21.

He rebukes them for choosing of a King. Kingly government, was the government
which God was minded to erect amongst them, they had three commandments given
to them, when they were to enter into Canaan, first to cast out the Canaanites,
the second to choose a King; and the third to build the temple. The Lord was
minded then to give them a King, but he was angry with them, because they
would have had a King; such as the nations had. Again he was angry with them,
because they were weary of Samuels government, and likewise for anticipating
the time, the Jews said of them comederunt immaturum avam, they eat the grape
before it was ripe.

He terrifies the people, calling upon the Lord to send thunder in the wheat
harvest, when it was the most clear and fair season of the whole year, at
the Pentecost, or about the Pentecost, therefore it is called festum messis. If
it had been in the time of the Barley harvest, at the Pascha, it had not
seemed so strange a thing to the people to have heard thunder, for then the
clouds abounded more, and Jordan did over flow the banks thereof by the
melting of the snow upon the mountains.

The Lord caused it to thunder, God has two sorts of voices by which he
speaks to men. The first by his voice in the thunder, Psalm. 29. secondly by
his voice in the Temple, Psalm. 26.9. The first is an inarticulate voice, the
other is articulate; sometimes he both thundered and spoke at once; and when
they came together, then his articulate voice was called has col filia vocis
He gave his law with thunder, Exodus 19. and in sundry of the Revelations shown
to John, with the voice there was thunder Chapter 4.5. and 6.1. and 10.3.
therefore we read, John 12.18. when there came a voice from heaven, the people
who stood by, some of them said it thundereth, and others of them said, an
Angel speaks unto him, the reason of this was because the Lord usually spoke
to them in the thunder, but here when the people were terrified, he spoke not
to them in the thunder, but terrified them and comforted them by Samuel.

Lastly, he prays for the people, and diswadeth them to turn aside; for then
they should go after vain things which cannot profit nor deliver, 1 Samuel
12.21.

This Idolatry spread more in the time of the Kings, then it did under the
Judges; all the Kings of Judah committed Idolatry, or else by their oversight
tolerated it.

All the Kings of Judah sinned except three, Syrac. 49. David, Ezekias, and
Josias, There were three kings of Judah most excellent Kings.
that is all committed Idolatry or did tolerate it, except these three
Iehosaphat he did not tolerate Idolatry, yet because he made affinity with
Ahab, 2 Chro. 18.2. and joined himself with Ahaziah King of Israel, who did
very wickedly, 2 Chronicles. 20.36. because he did these things, he is not
reckoned amongst the first three of the Lords worthies, amongst the Kings of
Judah, David was most zealous for the glory of God, and is set down as a
pattern to other Kings, 2 Chronicles. 29.2. Ezekias did uprightly as his father
David did, therefore Ecclesiasticus 47.2. David is compared to the fatt of the
peace offerings; All the peace offerings was the Lords, but the fat was his
after a special manner, because it was wholly burnt to him; So David exceeded
all the rest of the Kings in zeal; Therefore the zeal of Gods house did eat
him up, Ps. 69.9

Amongst the Kings of Egypt or Pharaohes, some of them were (...) minime mali;
they favored the people of God, A collation betwixt the Kings of Egypt, the
kings of Israel, and the kings of Judah.
as Abraham's, Pharaoh, Jacobs Pharaoh, and Iosephes Pharaoh. Others of them
were (...) badde, as Pharaoh Ophrah, Ier. 44. and Pharaoh Neco, Ier. 46. and
some of them were (...), as Moses his Pharaoh.

Among the Kings of Israel there were none good, they were either (...), they
were either bad, or very bad, none of them were (...) not evil; They sucked the
milk of Idolatrous superstition in the days of Jeroboam, whereunto they were
addicted always, so long as the common wealth endured even the reign of
ninteene Kings.

But amongst the Kings of Judah some were (...) optimi, as David, Ezekias and
Josias; some of them were (...) boni, as Iehosaphat, Asa, and Manasseh.
Manasseh is reckoned amongst the good kings; because his end was good Eze. 18.
Some of them were (...) as Vzziah was, who began well, but his heart was lifted
up and he fell away from the Lord afterward, and some of them were (...) most
wicked, as Ammon and Ahaz but there were none of them (...) minime mali.

Object. But it may be said of Josias, that the remnants of Baal were not taken
away in his time, Zepha. 1.4. why then should he be reckoned amongst the best
Kings?

Answ. He studies to cut away the remnants of Baal, which he could not find
out at the first, because Idolaters are very subject to cover their Idolatry.

The first increase of Idolatry under the Kings was in Salomons days, 1 Kings
11.5. The first increase of Idolatry amongst the kings was in Solomon time.
When Solomon went after Ashtaroth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after
Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites. The Lord gave Solomon wisdom above
any, he exceelled the wisdom of the East country, What great blessings the
Lord bestowed upon Solomon before he fell.
and all the wisdom of Egypt in natural wisdom; The Lord gave him a heart
as large as the sand of the sea, 1 Kin. 4.29. the Lord loved him and called his
name Iedidiah, 2 Samuel 12.25. The Lord appeared twice to him, 1 King. 9.10. The
Lord made choice of him to be one of his secretaries to write a part of the
holy scriptures: It was he who builded the temple, and bestowed infinite
charges upon building of it; It was he who consecrated the Temple; It was he
who offered when the Temple was consecrated ^0000. oxen, 1 King. 8.63. and
120000. sheep; It was he who prayed for the people and blessed them, 1. King.
8.55. It was he who was a special type of Christ: It was he who fell not
away until his old age, and although the Lord threatened him, that he would
rent his Kingdom for this his Idolatry, yet he continued still in it, 1
King. 9.11. and was not a whit bettered by the threatenings of the prophet, and
herein he seems to be worse then his foolish son Rehoboam, for when the
Prophet Semajah came to diswade him, for to fight against Jeroboam, he left
off his purpose, and went back again, but Solomon lay long in a Lethargy,
before he awoke; who would have thought that the dragon with his tail could
have pulled down so far this shining star; and when we see such a great
Cedar of Lebanon as this to have fallen, Let us with fear and reverence work
out our salvation.

The decrease of this Idolatry when Solomon wrote his book of Ecclesiastes.
The decrease of this Idolatry was, when Solomon wrote his book of Ecclesiastes
in a public testimony of his repentance. Solomon wrote three books: the first
is his Proverbes, and it is entitled, The Proverbs of Solomon the son of
David King of Israel; a fit book of moral instructions for a King to write to
his subjects: then he wrote his book of Ecclesiastes to the Church after his
fall, when he was gathered to the Church again, Cohe^eth from Cabal congregare.
and he begins this book thus, Vanity of vanities; and by vanities here he
means especially Idolatry; for Idols are the Gentiles vanities, Jonah 2. and
(...), Act. 14.15. and he shuts up this book thus, fear God and keep, his
commandments; which shows that Solomon renounced the vanities of those Idols:
And the last book which he wrote, was, the Song of Songs, which is the most
excellent of all songs, yea, and of all Salomons Songs, wherein his heart is
elevated in describing this spiritual conjunction between Christ and his
Church, under the terms of a marriage made with his queen, when he married
Pharaos daughter.

Reasons proving that Solomon wrote this book after his repentance.
It is clear that Solomon wrote his book after his repentance, and after that
he had tried all sorts of vanities, and not before his fall: for in this book
he describes his wisdom, his power, the buildings, and the glory of his
house, which answers to that which is spoken of him, 1 King. 7.9, 10. at the
least he spent twenty years before all these things were done; then he spent
thirteen years in building of his house; then add to these five or six in
repairing the city, and in building of the cities in the desert so that by
this time he had been forty or fifty years old; and add to these the
sending of the ships to Ophir, which he sent to fetch home gold, Eccles. 2.
then he tells how much he was given to women ( J found a woman more bitter
than death, Eccles. 7.26.) and of a thousand wives and concubines which he had,
there was not one which he could trust, Eccles. 7 and these all he found but
vanities. He could not do all those things, and have experience of all these
vanities; but in a long time.

Bellarmine goes about to prove out of the text, that this book was written
before Salomons fall, because he says, my wisdom remained with me, Eccles.
2.9. but his wisdom could not remain with him, when he fell so filthily:
therefore (says he) this book was written before his fall.

Answ. The wisdom which remained with him, so long as he went astray from the
Lord, was his carnal wisdom; and his spiritual wisdom was buried all this
while until the time that he repented.

The reasons in particular which shows Solomon his repentance, are those.

First, Solomon was a Prophet of God, Solomon was a holy Prophet of God,
therefore he was not a reprobate.
and a Pen man of holy Scriptures; now all the Prophets of God were holy men,
Luke 1.70. therefore Solomon was a holy man, although he was overtaken with
those vanities for a while.

The second reason is taken from the promise of God, The second reason that he
was not a reprobate is taken from the promise of God made to him.
2 Samuel 7.14. I will be his father (says the Lord) and he shall be my son;
if he commit iniquity, I will chastise him with the rods of men, and with the
stripes of the children of men (that is, with stripes that men are able to
bear) but (...) mercy shall not depart away from him, The third reason because
Solomon is set down for an example of imitation, and he is commended who
followed him.
as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.

The third reason, Solomon is set down for an example of imitation, and he is
commended who follows him; Rehoboam walked in the way of David and Solomon,
the first three years, 2 Chro. 11.17. Hence it follows, that Solomon has
repented him of his former vanities, and died a son reconciled to his God:
and as the evil beginning of Manasseh shows the bad end of Ammon; So the good
beginnings of Rehoboam shows the good end of Solomon.

What things are to be observed when the Kings of Israel and Judah are set
down for examples.
When the Kings of Judah and Israel are set down for examples; these things are
to be observed. First, if the wicked son follow his fathers wicked
footesteppes, without repentance, then both perish, 2. King. 15.9. Secondly, if
the wicked king repent him of his sin, and his son be said to follow his
fathers footsteppes; then he is said to follow his fathers footsteppes only in
the time of his vanities. It is said of Ammon, 2 King. 21.21. that he followed
his father, and he worshipped those Idols which his father worshipped: This is
to be understood that he followed his father in his badde days, and not in
his last days, when he repented him of his sins. Thirdly, when the King
repents him of his former lewd life, and his son is commended for following his
fathers footsteppes; then it is to be understood, that the son followed his
fathers footsteppes in the end of his life, and not in his former wicked days;
and thus Rehoboam is said to have walked in the ways of David and Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 11.17. that is, he followed Solomon his father in his last years when
he repented. Fourthly, if the King carry himself well in the beginning of his
reign, and fall afterward, then his son is said not to follow his
footsteppes; and the reason of this is given Ezech. 16.24. The second in crease
of Idolatry.


The second increase of Idolatry under the Kings, was after the days of
Solomon, when the ten tribes fell away from the house of David; and Jeroboam
erected golden calves to be worshipped in Dan and Bethel.

After that, the ten tribes separated themselves from the house of David: The
ten tribes are called the house of Israel; and those that cleaved to David,
are called the house of Judah: So the ten tribes are called Ephraim, and
Joseph; they are called Ephraim, Psalm. 80.2. because their first king was of
Ephraim.

Jeroboam changed four things in the worship of God at this time; and
therefore it is said, Jeroboam changed four things in the worship of God.
he drove away Israel from the Lord, and made them to sin a great sin, 2
Kin. 17.21. or fecit Jeroboam Israel avolare a domino; he made them to fly
away from the Lord.

He changed first the place, The text reading, and the marginall reading.
2 Chronicles. 7.16. 1 King. 12.14. He placed those calves in Bethel, and Dan. The
name of this Bethel (because the Idol was erected there) was changed, and it
was called Bethhaven, the house of vanity, and not ^^thel the house of God, 1
Kin. 12.30. And this thing became a sin; for the people went to worship
before the one, even to Dan; Jeroboam pretended the ease of the people, when
he set up those calves; he would not have them to go up to Jerusalem to
worship. Therefore he set up one Idol in Bethel, in the South side of the
country, and an other in Dan, in the North side of the country, that they
might go there the more commodiously to worship; yet notwithstanding they were
carried after their Idols, as with a whirlewinde, 1 Cor. 12.2. that they would
run from the South to the North, for the worshipping of those Idols, and
would not be content with their Idol which they had near hand in Bethel, but
they would run to Dan also and worship.

Secondly, He changed the sign of Gods presence.
Jeroboam changed the signs of Gods presence, and put in two golden calves in
their place.

Thirdly, he changed the time of Gods worship, He changed the time of Gods
worship.
1 King. 12.32. he offered on the altar which he made in Bethel, the fifteenth
day of the eight month which he had devised of his own heart.

He made the basest of the people priests.
Fourthly, he made the basest of the people priests, 1 King. 12.31. And
Josephus holds that Jeroboam himself played the part of the highpriest, 1
King. 12.33. It is said in the original, that he went up upon the Altar
sacrificing to the calves that he had made.

Whether the sin of the ten tribes, or the sin of Judah was greater.
Quest. Whether was the sin of the ten tribes, or the sin of Judah greater
when they committed Idolatry.

Answ. The Idolatry of the ten tribes was greater extensive: It was further
extended and dured longer than the Idolatry of Judah, but intensive, Judah his
Idolatry was greater, The sin of Judah was written with a pen of iron, and
with a point of a diamond, it was graven upon the table of their heart and upon
the horns of their altar, Ier. 17.1. and Jerusalem Aholibah was more corrupted
in her fornications than Aholah or Samaria, Ezech 23.11. The promise of the
Messiah was made more clearly to Judah than to Israel; Judah had some very
good Kings, who were types of Christ; Israel had none; Judah had the temple,
which Israel had not at all; Judah had many prophets, Israel few; Judah saw
Israel carried away, and plagued for their Idolatry, and yet Judah repented
not; therefore Judah's sin was greater than Isreal's; she exceeded Samaria
and Sodom in her filthiness, Ezechiel chapter 16. verse 46. Whether the Kings
of Israel or the Kings of Judah who were Idolaters were the viler.


The Kings of Israel were viler than the Kings of Judah: Therefore when the
wicked Kings of Judah are blamed they are said to walk in the ways of the
Kings of Israel, 2 King. 16.1.^, 3. The Kings of Israel were worse than the
Kings of Judah, because all of them were badde, and some of them as bad or
badder than any of the Kings of Judah; as wicked Ahab.

The pride of the ten tribes was greater, than the pride of Judah, they compare
themselves to the Cedar of Lebanon; and they compare Judah but to the thistle,
2 King. 14.9.

Object. But God gave an express commandment to the ten tribes that they
would separate themselves from Judah.

Answ. But he never commanded them to separate themselves from the worship of
Judah.

Because Jeroboam drew away the people to this fearful Idolatry; therefore
the Lord threatens that none of his posterity shall succeed.

The Lord punishes the Idolatry of the fathers upon the children. There is a
personal sin, The Lord punishes the Idolatry of the fathers upon the
children in haereditarie sins, but not in personal.
and there is an haereditary sin. A personal sin is that which the father
is only guilty of, and not the son: an haereditary sin is that which both
the father and the children are guilty of; but in a personal sin the
posterity follows not the father: it is said of Zelophehad, Number. 27 3. That he
dyed in his own sin, that is, in a sin which his posterity was not guilty
of, it was not that common sin in murmuring against God through misbeleefe,
for the which none of them entered into Canaan; but it was a peculiar sin of
his own; which his posterity was not guilty of; but if they do follow the
foot steps of their wicked fathers, then it is an haereditary sin, and it
is imputed to them.

If the Idolatrous son follow the Idolatrous father, then he is guilty of his
fathers sin; as Ammon was guilty of Manasseh his sin: So if they follow the
footesteppes of their Idolatrous mother, then they are guilry of her Idolatry:
when the mothers baked the cakes to the Queen of heaven, Ier. 7.18. The
children gathered the sticks to kindle the fire, here they were guilty of
their mothers Idolatry: it is a terrible imprecation of David Psalm. 109.14. Let
the iniquity of his father be remembered, and let not the sin of his mother
be blotted out: when the Idolaters have to answer both for their fathers
Idolatry, and for their mothers, this is a fearful case; (...)
then they receive Kephalaiim Esaias 40. double for all their sins, that is,
both for their own sins, and for the sins of their parents.

Although the Idolater repent him of his Idolatry yet his son may be punished
for it.
And it is to be marked that although the Idolater repent him of his Idolatry;
yet the Lord may charge his posterity with that sin: Manasseh was a great
Idolater, and shed innocent blood; these sins were pardoned in Manasseh; yet
his posterity were punished (according to all that he did) that is, both for
his Idolatry, and for shedding of innocent blood: and these sins were not
pardoned in his posterity.

There was never any decrease of Idolatry in the ten tribes, but it overspread
all their Kings, as a Leprosy.

The Kings of Israel all of them successively for nineteen generations were
Idolaters, yet amongst them all, there was none like Ahab who did sell himself
to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, 1 King. chap. 21. ver. 25:

Of the sins of Ahab the wickedest King in Israel.
This Ahab persecuted the Prophets of God, and killed them. Secondly, he threw
down the Altars of the Lord. Thirdly, he entertained four hundred Priests of
Baal at his table: and fourthly he worshipped Baal.

Ahab persecuted the Prophets and killed them.
First he persecuted the Prophets of God, and killed them: Those who are most
dear to the Lord, whom the Lord expressly forbad to meddle with, Psalm. 105 15.
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And they that touched
them touched the Aple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. He that receives a Prophet (says
Christ Math. 10.41) in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward,
Then Ahab who killed the Prophets knowing that they were Prophets, what reward
got he? The Prophets of God most resemble the great Prophet the Lord Jesus
Christ, who did two things for us: first the things which he did from God to
us, in revealing Gods will to us: The second is which he did from us to god,
interceding at his hands for us. So the Prophets of God, first they revealed
the will of God to us, and secondly they interceded for us Genesis 20.7. He is a
Prophet and he will pray for thee: therefore the Prophets were called the
strength and the Chariots of Israel, 2 King. 13.14. and where prophecy was
wanting there the people were naked, Prove. 20.12.

Secondly Ahab threw down the Altars of God. 1 King. 19.10.

Quest. What Altars of God were in Israel at this time?

Answ. 1 King. 18.30. And Elijah repaired the Altar of the Lord that was broken
down, which Altar Elijah erected in Carmell.

There were many that were injurious to the Lords Altars; Ahab, threw down the
Lords Altar; Whosoever meddled with the Altar of the Lord, the Lord plagued them.
Achaz caused to remove the Lords Altar: Vzziah went about to offer incense at
the Lords golden Altar: Vriah the high priest offered upon the Altar of
Damascus in place of the Altar of the Lord: Nadab and Abihu that brought
strange fire to the Lords Altar; and there was never one of these who meddled
with the Lords Altar, but the Lord plagued them for it The Altar of God was
called Arriel. Ezch. 43.15. the Lion of god; (...)
and whosoever meddled with this Lion, he devoured them: when Esaiah was called
to be a Prophet, Esaias 6. there came an Angel flying from the Altar, with a
pair of tongs in his hand, and a living coal in it, and touched the lips of
the Prophet, and sanctified him: But when God was wroth with those for meddling
with his Altar, there came a messenger of Gods wrath from the altar and plagued
them; as the leprosy came flying from the Altar and smote Vzzia, and fire came
from the Altar and burnt Nadab and Abihu; and so upon the rest who meddled with
this Altar, who ever threw it down or polluted it. Ahaz meddled with the brazen
Altar a type of Christ's death, and Vzziah meddled with the golden Altar a type
of Christ's intercession, therefore God poured out his wrath upon them and
plagued them both.

Mark a difference betwixt the Prophets of the Lord and Baals Priests; A
difference betwixt the Lords Prophets and the Priests of Baal.
if ye will respect their number, they are eight hundredth and fifty, The
prophets of the Lord were but few in respect of them, Obadiah took an hundredth
Prophets and hid them by fifties in a cave, 1 King 18.4. If ye will respect
their fare; there was a great difference also, the poor Prophets were fed
only with bread and water; but the Priests of the groves were fed at the
court. 1 King. 18.19. Thirdly, if ye will respect their apparel, and the
places where they lived; ye shall see great difference, the Prophets of God
went in sheep skins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented, of whom the world was not worthy of, they wandered in deserts, and in
mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth, Heb. 11.37.38. But Baals
priests lived daintily in all plenty: But if we shall look to their end; and
how they were miserably killed, and how the Prophets of God were delivered, how
they were separate for the day of slaughter, and all killed in one day; then
we would make choice rather with Moses to suffer affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.25. and with
David rather to be a doorekeeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the
tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84.10.

Fourthly, Achab worshipped Baall: In the scripture we read of three sorts
that were diversely affected to Baal, Three sorts that were diversely affected
toward Baal.
first those who pleaded against Baal, as Gideon called Ierubaal, of
Ierubash^th, 2 Samuel 9.23. and Elijah; secondly those who stoop for Baal, as
Ahab and Iezebell, and the Priests of Baal. And thirdly those who halted
betwixt God and Baal, in the politickes they were said (...) as Dion said of
Cicero, because he now clave to the people, and now to the Senate, and Homer
called such a one (...), that is he who cleaves to this point, and now to that,
and this was called (...) when the mind is carried now this way now that way.

Quest. Which of those two was worst?

An: Those who halted betwixt God and Baal; therefore the Lord says, Reve. 3. I
would thou were hot or cold, but because thou art lukewarm, I will spue thee
out of my mouth; lukewarmenes here is not the midst betwixt hot and cold, as
it is in Physical things, but it is farthest from the virtue, heat, and the
Lord detests more the lukewarm then the cold; The Philosopher Ethic. 7. marks
four sorts of men, the first is continens and temperans, The worst sort of all
were those, who halted betwixt God and Baal.
the second is incontinens and intemperans, the third is, temperans and
incontinens, the fourth is, continens and intemperans. Continens and temperans
is he who bridles his passions, and suffers them not to burst forth into
action. Incontinens and inte^perans, is he who rules not his passions, but
suffers them to burst forth into action. Incontinens and te^perans, is he who
rules not his passion, but yet suffers not his passion to burst forth into
action, as he that suffers not the sun to go down upon his wrath, Psalm. 4. Be
angry, but sin not, as if he should say, when ye are angry (for to this
passion of anger all men are prone) sin not, that is, execut not this your
anger with a deliberate purpose; the fourth is, continens and intemperans, and
he refraines his passion, and bridles it, yet executes it in action, as he who
killes in cold blood.

Quest. Which of these four sorts are worst?

Answ. A man would think that he were worst, who were both incontinent and
temperate, but yet it is not so, for he that is continent and bridles his
passions and intemperate and refraines not from the action he is the worst
sort of men, for he does deliberately sin, and not miscarried by his
passion: so he that is lukewarm in the service of God, is farther from the
virtue, then he that is cold, and he that halts betwixt God and Baal, is by
the Lord more abhorred then he who directly stands for Baal: The people that
were brought from strange nations to Samaria, they are said to have feared the
Lord, and worshipped their own Gods, 2 King. 17.33. yet because they
worshipped both, it is said, ver. 34. that they feared not the Lord, for the
Lord detests those most of all; so those lukewarm people are most hated of
him: and as the stomach cannot brook lukewarm things, so well as it does hot
or cold, for hot or cold things do contract the stomach, and make it keep
things the better; but lukewarm things delates the stomach, and makes it spew
them out; so the Lord spewes out these lukewarm people, and cannot brook them
by any people.

Elijah reproved Ahab to his face.
Now Elijah, who opposes himself to Baal and to Ahab the maintainer of Baal,
comes and reprooves Ahab to his face, and says that it was he that troubled
Israel; So Paul came and withstood Peter to his face: These are called the
faithful wounds of a friend; The Physicians call the wounds opposite to these
(...) unfaithful; Those that are given behind a man's back, as detraction or
backbiting are most dangerous wounds. Elijah contesteth with the Pristes of
Baal, for the worship of God.


The second thing which Elijah did here, was his conteste with the Priests of
Baal. There was a great dispute here about Religion, and to end the
controversy they will try it this way, that the Lord would be pleased to send
down a fire from heaven to burn their sacrifices who were accepted of him,
but not upon theirs who were not excepted.

By this sign of sending down fire upon the sacrifices, The people knew that
God accepted of their sacrifices when he sent down fire from heaven to burn
them.
the people of God knew when their sacrifices were accepted; it is said, Genesis
4. that the Lord looked upon Abel, and upon his sacrifice. Aquila translates
it, (...) he set it on fire, so when the tabernacle was erected, the Lord sent
down a fire upon their sacrifices, and when the temple was erected, he sent
down a fire upon their sacrifices, and ordinarily when there sacrifices were
burnt to ashes, then they knew that God accepted of them, Psalm. 20.3. Remember
all thy offerings, and turn to ashes thy burnt sacrifice.

There came down a fire and burnt Elijah his sacrifice, The fire came down
four times upon the Altar to burn the sacrifices.
this fire came down four times from heaven upon their sacrifices: First upon
Abel his sacrifice, secondly upon the sacrifice of the Tabernacle, when they
had sacrificed seven days, Le. 8.33. Then the glory of the Lord appeared on
the eight day, and the fire came down upon their sacrifice; Levit. 9.23, 24.
Thirdly the fire came down upon their sacrifice when the Temple was erected,
and fourthly the fire came down upon Elijah his sacrifice; But the fire came
not down in the second Temple to burn the sacrifices.

Quest. How was their sacrifices then accepted in the second Temple, The
Hebrews hold that the fire in the tabernable went up to heaven again from
whence it came down 2 Chro. 7.1.
seeing the fire came not down from heaven to burn them?

Answ. The Prophets and the Priests consecrated this fire in the second Temple,
and then it was an heavenly fire, and whosoever brought any other fire into the
altar, that was strange fire: The fire in the first temple was divinohumanus
ignis, How the fire in the second temple, was accepted when it came not down
from heaven.
that is, it came from heaven; but it was maintained by wood, as our fire is;
but the fire in the second temple was humanodivinus, that is, it was at the
first but humane fire, which came not from heaven, but being consecrate by the
prophets, and the Priests it became heavenly fire.

The Jews are uncertain concerning the fire of the second temple; for some
say, 2 Mac. 1.19. that the Priests hid the fire of the first temple in a pit,
and that it was kindled again in the second temple after the captivity; R.
David, Hag. 1.8.
But others of them hold that there were five things wanting in the second
temple, which were in the first; the Arc, Vrim, Thummim, the holy fire, and
Shechina the majesty of God who dwelt between the Cherubines.

Because this fire came from heaven, therefore when they wanted it, they
studied by rubbing the stones of the altar one upon another to kindle the fire
again, 2 Mac. 10.3. and the vest all virgins imitating them, (when their holy
fire went out) they kindled it again with the beams of the sun contracted
into a crystal glass.

The third thing which Elijah did was this, He caused all the Priests of Baal
to be killed; this was Opimum Sacrificium Deo; when the Levites consecrated
their hands to kill their neighbors and brethren that were Idolaters, Exodus
32.29. their hands were consecrate with their blood of the brethren, as that
day when they were ordained Priests, the blood of the sacrifice was sprinkled
upon the thumb of their right hand, Exodus 29.20. And this was as acceptable a
consecration to the Lord, as that day when they were consecrate priests unto
him; so the shedding of the blood of these Idolatrous Priests was as acceptable
a sacrifice to the Lord as any could be.

Elijah for his good service done to God in that great famine, the Lord
preserves him wonderfully; first by Ravens at the river Cherith, who brought
him bread and flesh twice in the day: secondly by the widow of Zarepta, who
had but a little meal which she was to dress, and then to die, 1 King.
17.12. Chrysostom considering the fact of this widow, Homil 19. 2. Cor.
marks the great charity of this widow, that she gives not out of her
poverty to help the prophet, but out of her mere necessity, when both she
and her child were like to starve, neither having any hope to be helped by her
neighbors; and here he compares Abraham his fact, and her fact when Abraham
entertained the strangers, and he preferres her charity to Abraham's, she
ran not to the flock as Abraham (...) ^nely to her poor handful of meal
which was reserved for her and her son. We are bound to give of things that
are profitable for us, to help our neighbors necessity, as the Samaritan
took his oil and his wine, and powered it into the hurt man's wounds. So he
who has two coats should impart to him that has none, Luke 3.11. but this
poor widow gaver her one coat, and consumsit (...), Luke 15.13. to save the
Prophets life; thirdly he was fed by the Angel. The bowed their knees to Baal.


The Idolaters in Ahabs time bowed their knees to Baal. The Hebrews have four
words, (...)
by the which they express the signs of bodily worship. The first is Barach,
the bowing of the knee. The second is Cadad, the bowing of the head, from the
neck upward. The third is Carang, the bowing down of the head, (...)
with the bulk of the body: and the fourth is hishtahave, to cast down the
whole body before them. The Apostle, Romans 6.13. wills us that we should make
all our members instruments of righteousness to God; but the Idolaters made
all their members the instruments of sin to worship their Idols.

The steod with their heads uncovered before their Idols.
First, their head; they prayed before their Idols with their heads covered,
because the people of the East worshipped their great men with their heads
covered, therefore they prayed after the same manner, and honored their Idols
standing before them with their heads covered. Mishna Tom. 1. l. 2.
Maymonides says, that religious outward worship should be given after the
same manner as they worshipped great men, and he adds, nisi forte sit mos
illius loci, ut quis stet coram magnatibus aperto capite, that is, unless it
be the manner of men in that place to stand bareheaded, when they do reverence
to great men; where we see that the gesture and the manner of praying is to be
accommodated to the custom of the place where one lives, and they should
testify their outward reverence b^ such signs as men testify their reverence
to gre^^ (...). This manner of worship varies in sundry parts. Maymonides wrote
his Mishna in Egypt, and amongst the Mahumetans who uncover not their heads
before great men, but bow only their head before them; and therefore when they
pray they uncover not their head: So the Jews both the priests and people
uncover, not the head in time of divine service. The priests had such bonnets
upon their heads which could not easily be taken off and put on as ours, and
when they came abroad they never uncovered their heads; but when they made
great lamentation they uncovered their heads, and cast ashes upon them: But the
Christians in the West, when they do reverence to their superiors, they
always uncover their heads; and therefore it is the fittest gesture for us to
uncover our heads when we pray. The Jews who live here in Europe, when they
are in their synagogues, they never uncover their heads, which is altogether
contrary to the custom of Europe: They salute great men here uncovering their
heads, and so should they pray according to the canon of Maimonides; but they
do this in despite of the Christians: The Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. wills men to be
uncovered, and women to be covered, when they pray, because that was the usual
form amongst the Grecians, for the men did uncover their heads, when they did
any reverence to their superiors; and the women had vailes which covered their
heads and faces when they came abroad: therefore he would not have them
uncovered in time of prayer.

Secondly, They worshipped their Idols turning their faces to them.
they worshipped their Idols by turning their faces to them, and this is
properly adorare, ad os orare. So the Lord commands his people that they should
not turn their backs to him, but their faces, Ier. 2.27. And the Jews say,
that it was not lawful for any when they came to the temple to worship (if
they entered in at the East gate) to go out at the same gate again, but to
go out at the North gate, least they should turn their backs upon the Lord.
The Jews were commanded when they worshipped the Lord, to turn their faces
toward the temple, when they were without it, 1 King. 8. This was to be
understood only in their public worship, then they were bound to turn their
faces toward the temple: and so when they worshipped in their synagogues, they
turned their faces always toward the temple; and Daniel, The Jews when they
worshipped God publicly, turned their faces toward the temple, which they
did not in their private prayers.
when he was in captivity opened his window and looked toward the temple when
he worshipped; but when they worshipped privately in their chambers, they did
not this, as when Ezekias turned his face toward the wall and prayed to the
Lord: So David in his secret chamber prayed to the Lord, and watered his couch
with tears; and Manasseh when he was prisoner in Babylon, repented, and prayed
to the Lord, we cannot think that he did this, they turned not their faces
toward the temple then.

They lifted up their eyes to their Idols. Si dederis mihi cor and oculos suos
meus eris dicit dominum. Occulus and corsunt proxinetae peccati.
Thirdly, they lifted up their eyes to their Idols, Eze. 18.15. neither has
lifted up his eyes to the Idols of the house of Israel. The eye is the
messenger of the mind, when the eye is lifted up to the Idols, it testifies
that it has a directon from the mind: The Lord forbiddes them to go a
whoring after their own eyes, Number. 15.39. When David testifies that he
worshipped God sincerely, be says, unto thee I lift up mine eyes, O thou that
dwell in the heavens, Ps. 123.1. Our eyes then should wait upon the Lord,
as the eyes of the servants look unto the hands of their masters, and as the
eye of the handmaind unto the hand of her mistrisse, Psalm. 123.

They honored their Idols with their mouth, kissing the Idol.
Fourthly, they kissed their Idols, 1 King. 19.18. Hos. 13.2. they kissed the
calves. This kissing was an usual thing in worshipping of their Idols, and
they used to kiss, either the mouth of the Idol, or their own hand; for when
they could not reach to kiss the Idol, they kissed their own hand in sign
of homage to their Idol: and Job purged himself of this kind of Idolatry,
neither kissed I my hand, Job 31. They gave this kiss to their Idols which is
due only to Christ, Kiss the son, Psalm. 2. So to eat before the Idols,
this is called eating upon the mountains, Ezech. 22.9. and this is Idolatry.

They praised God three manner of ways.
Fifthly, they praised their gods, and that three manner of ways: first, they
called upon them with a loud voice, as they did to Baal, 1 King. 18.16. they
called upon him from the morning to the noonetide of the day, and then they
were vocales. Secondly, they played upon instruments before their Idols, Dan.
3.15. and then they had vocem femivocalem. Thirdly, they called upon their
Idols secretly within themselves, and then they were muti; and this they
called favere linguis in their Liturgy. So the Church of God had these three
sorts of wroship which they gave to the true God. First, they had there public
prayers to the Lord, and there they were vocales. Secondly, they offered the
burnt offerings, and played upon all sorts of instruments; then they were
semivocales, 2 Chronicles. 29.27, 28. And lastly, they prayed within themselves, for
so long as the incense was in offering all the people prayed privately by
themselves, and all this while there was no voice heard Luke 1.10. then they
were muti, and John Revel. 8. seems to allude to this custom when he says,
there was silence in the heavens for half an hour.

Sixthly, they carried their Idols upon their shoulders; Ier. 10.5. Acts 7.43.
Bajulastis in humeris vestris even as the Levites carried the Arc of the
covenant upon their shoulders, 1 Kin. 2.26. So they carried their Idols.

Seventhly, they held up their hands to their Idols: The hand is instrumentum
instrumentorum, They held up their hands to their Iodols.
by it (says Fabius) pollicemur, we promise, vocamus we call, in vocamus we
incal, dimittimus we dismis; Minamur we threaten, supplicania we entreat,
timemus we fear, interrogamus we ask, negamus we deny; by the hand we show
our sadness, our confession, and our repentance; we speak by the hand, Prove.
6.13. He reaches by his fingers, and he promises by his hand, we swear
holding up our hand, or laying on the hand; other parts of the body help a man
to speak, but a hand seems to speak for it self; we stretch out the hand to
that which we would most earnestly apprehend Psalm. 119.47. Mine hands also will
I l^ft up to thy Commandments whom I have loved, that is, to the Commandments
which I desire most earnestly to embrace and lay hold on: So Lament. 3.41. We
lift up our heart with our hands to thee Lord: Ethiopia shall stretch out her
hands to God, Psalm. 68.31. but the Idolaters lifted their hand to their Idols.

Eighthly, they bowed their knees to them, that is, They bowed their knees to
their Idols.
(...), Math. 17.14. they that came to suit for any thing they took their Lord
by the knees; because the knees was a sign of mercy, power, and life: and
therefore the knees were dedicated to mercy, Servius Aenead. 3.

Dixerat, and genua amplexus genibusque volutans Haerebat. He says that the
gods had sundry parts of the body dedicated to them, as the ear was dedicated
to memory; the forehead was dedicated to Genius, and the knees to mercy:
therefore when they begged for any thing, they took them by the knees of whom
they begged: in our knees lies our ability to go; they are a sign of
strength, Esaias 35.3. Strengthen our weak knees; and when the Lord threatens a
judgment that their strength shall fail them, then he says, All knees shall
be weak like water, Ezeck. 7.17. And as to bow the knee is a sign of
weakness, and indigencie; so to bow the knee is a sign of dignity and power;
And therefore the Egyptians made choice to put the Elephant in their colors,
which was a sign of their Kingly power that bowed not his knee, nor needed not
to supplicate or beg any thing from another; therefore when the Idolaters
bowed their knees before Baal, and touched his knee, they acknowledged his
power, that he had knees like the Elephant, that could not bow; and also their
own weakness, falling down and bowing the knee to him to seek his help:
Contrary to this bowing before the Idol, is the bowing of the knee to the Lord
Jesus Christ, Philip. 3. To whom all knees in heaven and earth should bow, Act.
20.36. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. All bowed their knees in the Temple of Jerusalem, or
stood, but none sat but the King only, 2 Samuel 7.18. Psalm. 135.2.

They stood barefooted before their Idols.
Ninthly, they stood barefooted before their Idols: The people of God when they
came before the Lord, he commanded them to reverence his sanctuary; and the
Jews infer from this, that they stood barefooted in the Temple, Exodus 3.7.
Take off thy shoes because the place where thou stand is holy. So the
Temple is a holy place, therefore they infer that they stood barefooted in
the Temple: And Exodus 30.19. the Priests are commanded to wash their feet
morning and evening; Therefore it seems that they stood barefooted before the
Lord; and when all the Priests clothes are reckoned up, there is nothing
spoken of their shoes; by which we may probably gather, that the Jews stood
barefooted before the Lord: as that of Iuvenal. Satyr. 7.

Observant ubi festa mero pede Sabbatha Reges,
Et vetus indulget senibus clementia porcis.
And Solomon seems to allude to this, Eccles. 5.1. when he says, When thou
come to the house of the Lord look to thy feet; and with what great
reverence thou ascends to the house of Lord: the Chaldee paraphrast
paraphrasing upon Cant. 7.2. (how beautiful are thy feet) paraphraseth it
thus: How beautiful are thy feet, when thou go up three times in the year
to the feasts with thy shoes of badgers skins: shoes of badgers skins
were the most excellent shoes, Ezech. 16.10. but when they entered into the
Temple they laid aside their shoes and stood barefooted. The Jews at this
day before their Synagogues have Iron fastened in the wall wherewith they make
clean their shoes, before they enter into the Synagogue: the Idolatrous
Priests of Egypt wore nothing but shoes of paper, when they went to worship
their Idol: Herodotus lib. 2. cap. 5.
and amongst the Romans it was not lawful for the Priests to wear any shoes
made of the skin of the beast which dyed of it self: Apollonius lib. 5.
and the Sarafeus learned this from the Jews, that enter not into their Temple
but barefooted: so when the Priests go barefooted in their procession, they
do this for the honor of some Idol.

They leaned down before their Idols.
Lastly, they dishonored God with their whole body, and worshipped their Idols,
Amos 2.8. and they lay down upon clothes, taken into pledge at every Altar,
and drank the wine of the condemned, first they leaned themselves when they
did eat at their feasts, this is (...), Luke 24.30. and then they drank the
wine of the condemned; that is the most excellent wine; for they gave the most
excellent wine to those who were going to execution; according to Salomons
counsel, Prove. 31.6. Give wine to him that is of a sad heart: This religious
falling down is dew only to God. 1 Cor. 14.25, he falls down upon his face
and worshippeth God.

Whether it be lawful to be present at Idol service and to give external
worship there having no intention to worship the Idol.
A question may be moved here, whether it be lawful to be present at Idol
service or not, and to give external worship to the Idol by bowing before it,
providing that in their mind they have no respect to it, but do it for some
other civil ends? Some go about by the example of Naaman the Syrian to show
that this is lawful: Caietan chiefly labors to prove that this fact of
Naamans was lawful; Cajetan goes about to prove Naamans fact.
and first he says that this word hishtakave, which the Greeks translate
(...) to bow down, signifies as well civil worship as spiritual, and that
Naaman minded nothing else than spiritual worship, he confesses the true God,
and promises that he will serve none but the true God, and that he would
erect an altar after he returned to his Country to the true God, and intended
only after his accustomed manner to go to the temple of Rimmon, Cajetan makes
two sorts of bowing of the knee, the first for obedience, the second for
imitation.
and there to perform civil homage to his King as before; he makes a double
bowing of the knee, the first is genuflexio imitationis, the second is
genuflexio obsequij: that is, the one for imitation, and the other for
obedience: Naamans bowing, of his knee was not for imitation, but only for
obedience, and it was not of the same kind with the Kings bowing: The question
is then only de genuflexione obsequij, and that is, for bowing for obedience,
and this bowing he holds altogether to be lawful, and that he bowed himself
with the King having no respect to the Idol; but only the respect which he
carried to the King made him to bow. The servant bowed himself with the King,
and performed that homage to him which he ought; for that is Adoratio absoluta:
But when he bows and worships with him, this is cultus relativus a relative
worship, having relation to the Idol: and he goes about to clear the matter
by this comparison; If a noble man should go to a baudy-house, and commit
villainy there, the servants follow their master now as at other times, but not
as he goes to a whore, but if they should flatter their Lord and approve this
fact, then they should be guilty of his sin, so (says he) Naaman goes to
the house of Rimmon now as at other times, and it was only but civil worship
which he performed there: And when it is objected that it had a show of evil
to bow in such a place; at such a time with the King; Cajetane answers, that
Naaman protested the contrary both in word and deed; but Cajetans comparison
halts down right here; for if the Noble man's servant should go into the
baudi-house with him, and see him commit that villainy, could they excuse
themselves after this manner, that they gave him but only civil homage, and
respect here. Therefore this that Cajetan pleades for Naaman, will not serve
the turn.

Now for the Prophets answer to Naaman (Go in peace) Naaman comes to be
resolved in a case of conscience by the Prophet: What is the meaning of the
Prophets answer to Naaman (go in peace.)
The case is whether he may go with the King to the house of Rimmon or not,
and the Prophet is bound to satisfy him in this case, and to setle his
conscience. Now for the better understanding of this, we must remember that
there are four sorts of conscience, There are four sorts of consciences.
first a good conscience; Secondly, a badde conscience; Thirdly, a doubtful
conscience; Fourthly, A good conscience.
a scrupulous conscience: A good conscience is that conscience which concludes
truly and comfortablie after this manner; Every commandment of God is to be
kept; but to love God is the principal and chief command, therefore it is to
be kept.

A bad conscience.
A bad conscience is that which reasons quite contrary to the truth; as when
the Anabaptist reasons thus, a man must do no unlawful thing; to swear is
an unlawful thing, therefore we must not swear: He takes to swear, to be
an unlawful thing, mistaking the place, A Doubtful conscience.
Mat. 5. Swear not at all. A doubtful conscience knows not which way to
incline, but yet it inclines more to the one then the other, Sed cum formidine
ad oppositum; that is with some fear to the contrary; Example, when the weak
Christian doubted in conscience whether he might eat of that part of the
flesh which was sold in the shambles or not, seeing the other parts had been
offered to the Idol, here he doubts whether he might eat or not eat, and
yet he inclines more not to eat, but with some fear to the opposite parts.

A scrupulous conscience.
A scrupulous conscience is that which cleaves only to one part, yet so cleaves
to it, that it troubles the mind: A superstitious mind although it be settled
in that superstion, yet that conscience is never free without some scruple.

Now to apply this to the question in hand; the prophet had not to do here
with a man that had a good conscience, as yet, neither had he to do with a
man that had a badde conscience, neither with a man that had a scrupulous
conscience; but with a man of a doubtful conscience, doubting which way he
should incline; but yet he inclined more to go with the King to the house of
Rimmon, as he used to do before, The Prophet had to deal with a man who had a
doubtful conscience as yet.
rather then not to go: Now if the Prophet should have answered him this way,
Go in peace, that is, go there for civil worship, and reserve your
spiritual worship to God, were not this to daube with untempered mortar, Eze.
13.10. he could not do both civil worship and spiritual worship at once, and
at one act: Naaman sought two things of the Prophet, that he might have so
much of that earth to carry with him, that he might build an Altar within his
own country. Now apply the Prophets answer (go in peace) to this, Go in
peace, is not concedentis but optantis
would the Prophet grant that to him, to erect an Altar to the worship of God
by himself? It cannot be concedentis here; granting to him that which he
seeks, but it is only optantis: The Lord grant you peace in mind, and
trouble not your selves with these things, that might breed greater trouble in
your conscience: The Prophet sometimes says, Lech be Shalom, abi in pace, (...)
and sometimes Lech le shalom vade ad pacem, Exo. 4.18. (...)
which are optantis pacem.

If the Prophet had approved that deed of his, The martyrs of God would not
communicate with Idols in the least piece of service.
we marvel, and that justly, why the martyrs have suffered such cruel
torments, rather then they would communicate with the Idolles in the least
piece of service. The Jews would not so much as cast one stone to the Idol
Mercurius, Vide in lexico Iuris quid mercalis dicitur cuius cullos fie bat hoc
modo.
The which the heathen used in token of homage: The primitive Church held them
who burnt but three grains of frankincense to an Idol, to be apostates:
Suidas in Auxentio.
There was a fountain very curiously built (in the time of Licinius the
Emperor) in the midest of the Kings court, and the Image of Bacchus placed
above it, and a vine tree had spread her branches round about the court* It was
a fit place to walk in the shadow in the time of heat: Licinius the Emperor
comes in into the court attended with a great number; amongst the rest was
Auxentius a Christian; Licinius (perceiving a branch laden with a cluster of
grapes) he biddes Auxentius cut it down, which he does presently. Secondly,
he biddes Auxentius set that branch at the feet of Bacchus, what answers
Auxentius? God forbid Emperor that I should do this, for I am a Christian;
Then Licinius says unto him, either do this, or get you gone and serve me no
more; and he presently loosing his military girdle went his way. Those who
studdie to be holy, will neither eat the swines flesh, nor keep the broth in
their vessels, Isa. 55.4. In this new convert Naaman, there was many
infirmities yet, first he refuses the mean which the Prophet commanded him to
use, to wash him seven times in Jordan; then he prescribes means which he
would have the prophet to use in curing of him; The Lord bears with this new
convert although there were many infirmities in him.
Thirdly, he thinks that the place of Gods worship may be changed, yet
notwithstanding the Lord will not quench this smoking flax; and as in weighing
of things, we grant something to supply the defect of the thing weighed; so
the Lord favors his own, although many things be wanting in them. When a man
beholds his face in a round glass like a boule, his face seems much less
then it is, but when a man beholds his face in speculo concavo, in a hollow
glass, then it seems more then it is; but when he beholds it in a plain
glass, it seems just as it is, neither more nor less; so when God looks
upon the sins of his children, either he sees them not at all, or they seem
very little in his sight, he looks upon them as in a round glass; but when
Satan looks upon the sins of the children of God, they appear to him in a
hollow glass, and they seem more to him then they are; but when God looks
upon the sins of the wicked, he sees them in a plain glass just as they
are. Although Iehu did destroy Baals priests, There was no decrease of Idolatry
in Iehu his time.
and overthrew his altars, yet there was no decrease of Idolatry all this
while, for he out of a blind devotion blessed himself in his evil, faining
that he was high in Gods favor, and should have peace, although he walked in
the obstinacy of his own heart, Deuteronomy. 20.19. and because he was innocent,
therefore Gods wrath should turn from him, Ier. 2.35. For he followed no
Idols (what ever men say) Ier. 2.23. but he swears the Lord lives, Ier. 5.2.
and he will show by his works the zeal that he had for the Lord against
Idolaters, 2 King. 10.16. he will bring his sacrifices and his tithes, Amos
4.5. proclaim free offerings: yea, willing he is to please the Lord, although
it should cost him thousands of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil, and to
give his first borne the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul, Micah
6.7. and though he burn incense unto Baal, yet will he come and stand before
God in the house whereupon his name is called; and say, I am delivered, Ier.
7.9.10. he will lean upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord with me, no evil
shall come upon me, neither shall the plague come unto me, neither shall I see
the famine, Ier. 5.12. Iehu all this time flattered himself, as zealous for
the Lord, and he clave still to the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who
made Israel to sin, and never said, there is a lie in my right hand, Es
4^.10.29.

Leaving the Kings of Israel, let us now proceed to the Kings of Judah.

The first increase of Idolatry in Judah, The first increase of Idolatry in
Judah after the separation of the ten tribes.
after the division of the ten tribes, was in the days of Rehoboam, 1 King.
14.22. And Judah did evil in the sight of the Lord, -- and they provoked him
to jealousy with their sins which they had committed, above all that their
fathers had done; for they also built high places, and Images, and groves on
every high hill, and under every green tree.

The decrease of this Idolatry was in the days of Asa 1 King. 15.11. The
decrease.
He did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, as did David his father,
He took away the Idols and destroyed them, and burnt thm by the brook
Kidron, and his heart was perfect with the Lord all his days, verse. 14.

Quest. How could his heart be said to be a perfect heart, seeing he is taxed
with so many gross sins; First, the high places were not removed in his
time, 2 Chronicles. 15.7. Then he was wroth with the Seer, and put him in prison,
because he reproved him, 2 Chronicles. 16. he oppressed the people at that same
time, verse. 10. and in his disease he sought not the Lord but to the
Physicians, verse. 12. how could his heart then be a perfect heart with the Lord
all his days?

An. A perfect heart is called in the scripture, (...) Sincerum non fucatum cor,
and it is composed of (...), which signifies the brightness of the Sun, and
(...) because in brightness it studieth to follow the Sun. The Sun may
sometimes be overclouded, What is a sincere heart
but yet appears in his brightness again. So a sincere and a perfect heart,
although sometimes it be overclouded with sin, yet it strives to recover its
brightness again. Every sin makes not a heart cease to be a perfect heart;
but a man that is (...), of a double mind, or having cor divisum, a divided
heart, Hos. 10.2. or a heart and a heart, Psalm. 12.2. he cannot be said to
have a perfect heart. The Lord says, Deuteronomy. 25.13. Thou shall not have in thy
bag, a stone and a stone, that is, a false weight. So verse. 15. Thou shall
not have an Ephah, and an Ephah, that is, as false measure: so thou shall not
have a heart and a heart, that is a false heart. Those the Apostle, 1 Timothy
3.10. calls (...), double tongued. The Philosopher proves that a creature is to
be judged to be one or more by the heart, and not by the brain, for if the
heart be one, then the creature is but one, but if there be two hearts, then
the creatures are two. There have been men who have had two heads but one
heart; such a one was but one man, although he had two heads, and having but
one heart his motion was but one, and his imagination one. Duo corda exposcunt
duo capita non contra Serpens qui habet ^^^^dam linguam habet ^^^plicem gustum
rest Aristot. So he that ha^^ two hearts, etc.
But if one have two hearts of a necessity he must have two heads; Animal est
unum per unam animam: So it is in the spiritual life of a man, if a man have a
heart and a heart, then he cannot be said to have a perfect heart, then he
makes two men, one for God, and another for the devil, and he has two sorts
of motion and imagination; Solomon calls such a man perversus duarum viarum,
Prove. 28.6. and Syrac. 2. Vae peccatori ingredienti duas vias: A tree if the
root and the stock be one, although the grafts be diverse, yet it is but one
tree. So the heart if it be one, although it bring forth some good and some bad
fruit, yet it may be a perfect heart.

The heart, The heart so long as it falls not to Idolatry may be a sinceere
heart.
although it be blotted with the sins against the second table, as David was
in the matter of Vriah; yet if it be not tainted with Idolatry, it may be a
perfect heart still. Secondly, a perfect heart may come short in the internal
duties of the first table through incredulity and misbeleefe; as Asa put too
much trust in the Physicians in his disease; yet his heart was a perfect heart.
Thirdly, a man may have a perfect heart, notwithstanding that sins of
omission be found in him in the worship of God, but not sins of commission,
as Asa took not away the high places, yet his heart was perfect with the Lord.

Let us make a comparison betwixt David, Josiah, A comparison betwixt David,
Josias, and Asa.
and Asa: David when he brought the Arc from Baal of Judah, to the house of
Obed Edom, he brought it upon a new cart, 2 Samuel 6.3. The Philistines carried
the Ark of the Lord upon a cart (It should have been carried upon the Levites
shoulders) David took away the Philistines Emrods and Mice which they put with
the Arc, but he left the cart. Josiah took not away the remnants of Baal,
Zephan. 1.4. and Asa left the high places unremoved.

A comparison betwixt Amaziah, Vzziah, and Asa.
Secondly, let us compare these three Kings together, Amaziah, Vzziah, and Asa;
Amaziah did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. the Lord liked of his work, but not of his
heart, he did bonum opus, sed non been, sed Deus magis delectatur adverbiis
quam nominibus, as the Schoolmen speak. Secondly, Vzziah, he sought the Lord
and prospered, 2 Chronicles. 26.5. he had some beginnings of Grace in him; this was
more than Amaziah had, yet his heart was lifted up, and he fell away from the
Lord, verse. 16. but Asa his heart was a perfect heart with the Lord all the
days of his life. These three Kings have been not unfitly compared to the
three sort of fruit which the vine brings forth; The first is called Samadar,
(...)
uva minutula, a little berrie, but very imperfect, which appears first when
the flower falls away, and it withers and decaieth with the least cold or
frost. The second fruit of the vine, is called Bozer Omphax, (...) Omphax
librusca
which is a sour grape, but draws near to the nature of the ripe grape, yet
when it ripens not, it sets men's teeth on edge, and the third is gnanabh, (...)
uva matura, the ripe grape; and they say that Amaziah was but uva minutula,
and that Vzziah was Omphax, and Asa was uva matura.

Whether did Asa sin when he made a league with Benhabad or not?
Quest. Did not Asa sin when he made a league with Benhadad King of Syria, he
being an Idolater, 1 King. 15.19?

Answ. All leagues with Idolaters are not unlawful; Abraham made a league with
Eshcol, and Aner, Genesis 13.18. So with Abimelech and Phicol, Genes. 21.24. So
Isaac with Abimelech, Genesis 26.28. So Jacob with Laban, and David with the King
of Ammon; 2 Samuel 10.1. and Asa with Benhadad.

Object. Deuteronomy. 17.3. Ye shall not make a league with those nations?

Answ. That is, with the Canaanites, whom they were commanded to destroy.
Secondly, the Lord commands, Exodus 22.32. Ye shall not make a covenant with
them, and their gods; if their gods came within the covenant, then it was not
lawful to covenant with them, for they would have always worship given to
their gods: Asa is reprooved 2 Chronicles. 16.2.7. for distrusting the Lord, and
trusting in the King of Syria; Asa sinned trusting more in Benhaded than in the
Lord.
So he is blamed for putting his trust too much in the Physicians in his
sickness; and not in the Lord; it was no more unlawful for Asa to make a
covenant with Benhadad the King of Syria, no more than it was unlawful for him
to send for the Physicians in his sickness; But to distrust the Lord and trust
too much in the King of Syria, that was Asa his fault.

It was never lawful to make a league offensive or defensive with Idolaters,
It was never lawful to make a league offensive or defensive with Idolaters.
Such was the league which was made betwixt Iehosaphat and Ahab, King of
Israel, when Iehosaphat said to Ahab, 1 King. 22.4. I am as thou art, and my
people as thy people. When the Hebrews compare two things, Quid valet sicut
geminatum apud haebreos.
and would signify a paritie betwixt them, then they double the particle
Sicut, and the first signifies the (...), and the second the (...) as Genesis
44.18. Sicut tu, sicut Pharaoh, that is, Pharaoh is like thee, and thou art
like Pharaoh, So Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall respect no persons in Judgment, sed
sicut parvum, Sicut magnum judicato, that is, have no more respect to the one
then to the other, So Genesis 13.10. Sicut hortus domini, sicut terra Egypti, that
is, Egypt was like Canaan, and Canaan was like Egypt; So Esaias 24.2. Sicut
sacerdos, sicut populus, that is, the Priest was like the people, and the
people were like the priest; So 1 King. 22.4. I am as thou art, and my people
as thy people, that is, thy cause shall be my cause, and my cause shall be thy
cause. This league offensive and defensive was not lawful, and Iehosaphat his
league which he made with Ahaziah, 1 King. 22.29. seems to be more than a
league of peace; for first, he refuses to join with Ahaziah, but afterward he
yielded and joined with him; and when he was about to send his ships to the
sea, 2 Chronicles. 2.25. Eleazer the Prophet prophesied against him, saying, Because
thou have joined thy self with Ahaziah, the Lord has broken thy works that
they were not able to go to Tarshis.

Quest. What sort of confederacy was this when the Church gave her hand to
Egypt? Lament. 5.6.

Dare manum quid significat aliquando est mendicantis signum vel subiectionis.
Answ. It was not the hand of confederacy, or a league that they made with
Egypt here, but they held out their hand here to beg of the Egyptians, or
they gave their hand, that is, they acknowledged them to be subject to the
Egyptians, Ter. 50.15. So they gave their hand to Ashur, and begged to be
satisfied with bread from him, verse. 6.

The second increase of Idolatry in Judah after the division of the tribes.
The second increase of Idolatry under the Kings of Judah, was under Ahaz, 2
King: 16.3. He walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, and made his son
to pass through the fire.

Of the sins of Ahaz.
There are three things especially laid to the charge of Ahaz: first, that he
made his sons pass through the fire: Secondly, that he brought the pattern
of the altar from Damascus, and caused them to make the like, and set it up in
Jerusalem: Thirdly, that he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus who smote him, 2 Chronicles. 28.23.

He caused his children to pass through the fire.
First, he caused his children to pass through the fire according to the
abominations of the Gentiles: The Gentiles used first to carry their children
round about the fire, and these were called (...): Secondly, they caused their
children to pass through the fire, and this was called Lustratio: Thirdly some
of them cruelly murdered and offered their children to Moloch, Psalm. 130.4.
Praestat deos non credere quam crudeles opinari and sanguinarios.
The Lord complained Ezech. 16.21. that they slew his children and caused them
to pass through the fire: They offered the Lords children to Baal.
he calls them his children, that is, the first borne who opened the womb who
belonged to the Lord; They did not only offer (...) that is, the child who was
first borne, But also (...) the first begotten child, 2 Kings 1.23. they were
not only content to offer (...), and (...), yea if they had but one son
(...) they would have offered him to Moloch; Abraham had but one son who was
his (...) whom he begat in his old age; and him he would have offered to the
Lord, So they neither spared (...), nor (...). The Carthaginians sacrificed
their children to Moloch; and those who had no children of their own, they
would go and buy the poor children, as though they had been Lambs, and the
mother stood by not weeping or crying; and if they cried there was a fine set
upon their head, and there was nothing heard in the mean time, but beating of
drums, and sounding of instruments, that they might not hear the screaches
of the poor infants; Plutarch de superstitione
this was just after the manner of the Jews, who burnt their children in
Tophet, and beat upon drums, and sounded instruments, (...)
that they should not hear their cries, and therefore the place was called
Tophet from Taphath pulsare.

When the father offered one of the children to Moloch, When the father offered
one of his children to Moloch he thought all the rest should be saved, but God
threatens the subversion of all for that sin.
he believed that for the offering of this one child God would bless all the
rest; But see what the Lord says against this abomination, Levit. 20.5. I
will set my face against that man and against his family. The Lord threatens
not only to cut him off, that wrought such abomination, but his family also;
The Lord threatened Ier. 7.32. that Tophet should no more be called so, but
Aceldama (...), vallis occisorum; because the Idolatrous Kings were killed
there who offered their children to Moloch.

The second thing which Ahaz is blamed for, is this, that he caused to bring
the pattern of the altar of Damascus, and to make the like, and set it up at
Jerusalem.

We must add nothing to the worship of God.
Ahaz is blamed here for adding to Gods worship: In measuring of things the
Lord commands that there be a just measure, and that the thing sold be
sufficient in quantity and quality: a thing may be sufficient in quantity,
but not in quality; As when they mixed their wine with water, and their silver
with dross, Isa. 1. here they sold enough in quantity, but the quality was
badde: So when they sold that which was good, but not enough of it, with a
Lean measure as the Prophet calls it.

The Lord requires the full measure here, and he would have it to run over,
Luke 6.38. But he that had any thing superfluous in his body could not be a
Priest to the Lord, Lev. 21.18. So no beast that had any superfluous part might
be offered to the Lord, Lev. 21.18. That is that which the Lord himself
forbiddes Deuteronomy. 4.2. The worship of God must be kept in puncto mathematico.
Ye shall neither add nor pare from my Law, Prove. 30.16. put nothing to his
words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar: They say that moral
virtues admit Latitudinem quandam, But Gods worship must be observed in puncto
mathematico, there must nothing be added to it, or taken from it.

Ahaz removed the Altar of God, and put the altar of Damascus in place of it.
Ahaz caused the Altar to be removed, he took away the Altar and put the
Altar of Damascus in the place of the altar which was the special place of
Gods worship, and therefore the Lord appropriates it to himself and calls it
his altar, Mal. 1.10. as they are called his Priests, and Prophets, Psalm.
105.15. The Altar was the place that sanctified the sacrifice, and not the
sacrifice the Altar, Mat. 23.19. The Altar was the place where God showed
signs of his mercy, Jsa. 6.6. and there slew one of the Seraphimes unto me,
having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongues from off
the altar and laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this has touched thy
lips, and thy iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged; here the altar
was a type of Jesus Christ, of whom we get all sanctifying graces: This was
done in the days of Ahaz, Isa. 6.10. and yet Ahaz nothing respects the Altar:
The altar was the place of refuge to save poor men, yet Ahaz was not afraid to
meddle with it.

He reserved the Lords altar to his own private uses, 2 King. 16.15. But Mica
reserved the altar of Damascus for all the sacrifices both of the King and of
the people, Ahaz plays the politician, making religion to serve policy only.
this is a just pattern of politickes who make religion but a handmaid to them,
they will use it how and where they list; he will keep the brazen altar still,
but it was of no great request with him, he will not thrust it out of doors,
least he might seem altogether to dsepise the religion of his fathers; yet he
preferres the altar of Damascus to it, as being more glorious in show, and for
friendship with the King of Damascus.

The third thing which Ahaz is blamed for is this, Ahaz offered to the gods of
Damascus who smote him.
that he offered to the gods of Damascus who smote him, 2 Chronicles. 28.23. This
is that Ahaz, verse 22. kimhi writing upon the 119 Psalm. notes, when (This) is
set before some names in Scripture, it signifies some great Apostasy and
defection, as Genesis 36.49. This is Esau the father of the Edomites, So Number.
26.9. This is Dathan, So 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This is Ahaz, The Hebrews compare
Ahaz and Amaziha together.
which points that he was a notable Idolater, and the Hebrews compare Ahaz and
Amaziah together; and they apply that proverb to these two Kings (We have
weeped unto you, and ye have not mourned, we have piped unto you, and ye
have not danced) I was angry with Ahaz, and gave him into the hand of the King
of Damascus, yet he went and worshipped his gods; there was all the mourning
which I got for my weeping: Then I piped to Amaziah, and gave him that was King
of Edom captive into his hands, yet he went and worshipped his gods when he
had taken them captive; and there was all the dancing which I got for my
piping. The decrease.


The decrease of this Idolatry was in the days of Ezekias, 2 King. 18.4. He
removed the high places, and brake the Images, and cut down the groves, etc.

Why God deferres the judgments of wicked men.
Ezekias succeeded Ahaz: Moses Gerundensis commenting upon Deuteronomy. 7. says, that
God deferres to punish wicked men in this life for three causes; First, he
gives them this way leisure to repent them of their sins. Secondly, he
deferres their judgments, because of some act which they have to do, as the
Judge spares the malefactor with child, until she have brought forth her
birth. Agricola non excidit spinam prius quam inde asparagum procerpserit.
And thirdly, because some good men are to come of them: And so he deferred the
punishment of Ahaz, because Ezekias was to come of him; and of Shimei, because
Mordecai was to come of him.

Ezekias did four things in reformation of religion.
There are four things recorded of Ezekias his zeal; First, this (...), he
brake the brazen serpent, because the people worshipped it, although it was a
type of Jesus Christ, who was the serpent lift up in the wilderness, (...)

Nun diminuit in fine.


Ioh. 3.14. and calls it in contempt Nehushtan, that little piece of brass;
for the Hebrews when they form their diminitives, they add Nun to them, as
Ieshurun, Deuteronomy. 33.5. Et fuit Rex apud rectulum. So Ishon pupilla, and Sabbaton
Sabbatulum.

The second thing which Ezekias did was when he took away the book which
Solomon wrote of Herbs and Physic, which was affixed on the gates of the
Temple; Ezekias pulled it down, Vide Suidam in Ezekia.
because the people neglected the Lord to seek their health of him, and did
trust too much in this book.

The third thing which Ezekias did, was that he shut the gates of the temple
that the King of Ashur might not enter into them.

The fourth thing which he did was quod traxerat ossa patris sui super lecto
funium, he caused a bed of cords to be made, and drew his fathers bones up and
down in it; he did this in detestation of his fathers Idolatry, he would not
burn his bones as he did the bones of the Idolatrous Kings, Ier. 8.1. Nor let
them lie unburied, but this much he did to them and then buried them again;
this is set down in the Thalmud of him.

The next increase of Idolatry was under Manasseh, 2 King. 21.2. And he did
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, after the abominations of the
heathen, The increase of Idololatry under Manasseh.
whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel; for he built up again
the high places which Ezekias his father had destroyed, and he reared up Altars
to Baal, and made a grove, as did Ahab King of Israel, and worshipped all the
host of heaven, and served them. And he built Altars in the house of the Lord,
of which the Lord said, in Jerusalem will I put my name: and he built Altars
for all the Host of heaven, in the two courts of the house of the Lord: and he
made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, and used
enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits, and wizzards, he wrought much
evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger, and he set a graven
Image of the grove which he had made, in the house, of which the Lord said to
David, and Solomon his son, In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel will I put my name for ever.

There are three special sins marked in Manasseh, Three sins especially
marked in Manasses.
first that he built altars for all the host of heaven into the two courts of
the house of the Lord: Secondly, that he worshipped the Sun, the Moon, and
the stars: And thirdly, that he worshipped the devilles.

First, he set up Idols both in the court of the people, and the court of the
Priests: The Hebrews observe diverse degrees of holiness, which they kept in
the land of Canaan; first the land it self is called holy, Zach. 2.16. and the
land of Jehovah, Hos. 3. and the land of Immanuel, Isa. 8.8. All other lands
were called a polluted land, Amos 7.17. The second degree of holiness within
the land of Canaan, they observe to be within the walled towns; for they
suffered no leaper to be within them; neither buried they their dead within
them, therefore they counted them more holy then the rest of the land. The
third degree they make to be in Jerusalem; there were some things which they
might eat in Jerusalem, but not in the rest of the Land, they were holy
things, but not holy in the highest kind which they might eat there, as the
Paschall lamb, and the tithes of the third year; These they eat in
Jerusalem, but not in the temple: The fourth degree of holiness that they make
to be in the temple, was, that it was lawful for no stranger to come within
the court of the Israelites; And their were keepers appointed, who suffered
them not to come in there. 1 Cor. 9. (...)
And these were called ^agnale pekudoth, domini prafectura; they suffered no
strangers to come in here, neither in Israelite if he were unclean; this was a
holier place then the court of the Gentiles, and if an Israelite were unclean,
he behoved to wash himself, and he was unclean till the evening, Levi. 15.16.
The fifth degree of holiness was, that no Israelite might come within the court
of the Priests, which was called (...). The sixth degree of holiness was
betwixt the porch and the altar where Zachary was stoned, no Priest might
enter here if he had a blemish in his body, or whose head was uncovered, or if
his clothes were torn. The seventh degree of holiness was the holy place it
self where the golden altar stood, no Priest might enter in here, unless his
feet and hands were washed.

By these degrees we may understand how abominable a thing it was for the
Kings of Israel and Judah to have defiled his land with their Idols, Ier.
16.18. and first I will recompense their sin and their iniquity double; because
they have defiled my land, they have filled mine inheritance with the carcasses
of the detestable and abominable things. And then Manasseh his Idolatry
exceeded, who set up Idols both in the court of the people, and in the court
of the priests.

Manasseh also sacrificed to all the host of heaven. Amongst the rest of Gods
names, he is called in the Scripture Gueliion supreme or high Lord, and the
greek is framed (...) from this; And they worshipped the sun, which they called
the queen of heaven; they called her the queen, because Shemesh the sun, is
in the faeminine gender. The heavens are the Lords, (...)
Psalm. 115.16. but he has given the earth to the sons of men. Man has a
commandment in the earth, and the Lord has put under his feet all the beasts
of the field, and the fishes of the sea, Psalm. 8. These corruptible things the
Lord has made subject to man, and he has power over them, and may use them
as their Lord for his service, and maintenance: but he has not granted such
dominion to man over the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars; He is but here
Vsuarius, he is partaker of the heat and light of the sun, he who hinders
him from that, does him wrong; Thus far the sun serves him, and therefore
the sun is called Shemesh from Shamesh ministrare, but yet man has absolute
dominion over the Sun, and the Moon, therefore Christ Matthew. 5. says, that
God causes his Sun so rise upon the good and the bad, the dominion over the
sun belongs only to God.

These are groser Idolaters who worships beasts, then those who worships the
Sun and the Moon.
Hence it follows, that they are grosser Idolaters, who worship those bodies
over which they have dominion, then those who worships the Sun and the Moon;
They are full Lords of the first, but they are usuarij Tenants, who has the
use only of the second: These Idolaters had Images for the Sun, Isa. 17.8.
which they call Chammanim. And Benjamin in Itinerario describes them after this
manner, there is a people in the land of Cush, which much beholds the stars,
and worships the Sun as their God, having many altars built without the town
of great stones, and early in the morning they go out of the town, to see
the Sun, and they have Images consecrate to the Sun upon every altar made
round like the Sun built by magic, The manner how they worshipped the Sun.
and when the Sun rises, these round circles seem to burn, and they make a
great noise, and every one both man and woman, has a censere in his hand, and
offers some incense to the Sun, they have horses also dedicate to the Sun after
the manner of the Persians; Josias took away these horses dedicate to the Sun,
2 King. 23.11. they used to ride upon these horses, when they went to worship
the Sun: The Lord promises, Ier. 13. that he would break down the image of
Beth Shemesh, which was the house of the sun, and the Egyptians met yearly
to worship the Sun in the temple, which was dedicated to the Sun.

What parts man has from the stars, according to the opinion of some of the
Physicians.
So they worshipped the stars in Manasses time; they worshipped the stars;
first because of their great light and beauty: Secondly, because of their
influxe into the bodies below here; and Thirdly, because they thought them
living creatures; and some Physicians held that man was opus siderum, and that
in his conception and generation he got his spirit from the Sun, and his body
from the Moon, and his concupiscence from Venus, and his wit from Mercury,
and his desire from Jupiter, and his blood from Mars, and his humors from
Saturn.

Worshipers of the stars Gnobh de Kohabhim umasaloth, cultores stellarum and
planetarum, (...)
of old they called all the gentiles, (...) Buxtor de abreviat. page 134.
who had no knowledge of the true God, and now they appropriate this name to
those Christians who worship Idols.

Lastly, Manasses worshipped the infernal spirits, and herein he exceeded all
the rest of the Idolaters.

The decrease of this Idolatry was, when Manasses repented heartily before his
death, The decrease.
when he lay fettered in Babell, 2 Chronicles. 33. and being restored to the
Kingdom, took away the strange Gods, and Altars, and Images, which he had
made, and restored in Judah Gods true religion, except only that the people
sacrificed in the high places.

So the decrease of this Idolatry was in the days of Josias. Josias did sundry
things for the purging of this Idolatry, 1 King. 23. first he put down the
Idolatrous Priests, their Chemarim, who were black with the smoke of their
sacrifices; secondly, he polluted, Tophet, that is, he appointed it for a
place to cast out all their filth, and their dead carcasses; that so the people
should commit no more Idolatry there: He polluted that place, that is, he
appointed it for pollution, What it is to pollute a place.
see Lev. 13. the Priest shall pollute him, that is, he shall judge him to be
polluted; so Deuteronomy. 20.6. He that has planted a vineyard, and has not
profaned it; that is, who has not turned it to a profane use, for the fruit
trees, when they were planted in Israel, the first three years none might eat
of them; for they were holden unclean, and the fourth year they were holy for
the Priest to eat of them, and then the fifth year they were common and
profane, that the people might eat of them, Ier. 31.5. they shall plant vine
trees upon the mountains of Samaria, and shall eat them as profane things.

Josias polluted this Tophet: It was called before Vallis Hinuom, afterward it
was called Gehenna; there was in it Esh tamid, (...)
a continual fire to burn the bones, and the fith which was cast there; and
because of the cruel torments which was used in it: A resemblance betwixt
Tophet and Hell.
therefore Gehenna is called hell, and Christ alludes to this, Mat. 5.22. He is
worthy of the fire of Gehenna, so Isa. 66.24. seems to allude to the
punishment of hell taken from the punishment of those whose bodies were burnt
there: And they shall go forth and look upon the Carcasses of the men that
have transgressed against me, for there worm shall not die, neither shall the
fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. The carcasses
of those that were cast into the valley of Tophet, were full of worms, and the
fire never died out there; so the fire of hell burns continually, and the
worm of one evil conscience shall gnaw them continually.

Jerusalem signifies Heaven and the places without Jerusalem signified Hell.
The valley of Tophet, was called Gehenna; It is usual in the scripture to
compare Jerusalem Anagogice to the Church, Gal. 4.26. So those places that are
without Jerusalem are compared to hell, and to the torments thereof catagogice,
as the lake of Sodom which burnt with fire and brimstone, Rev. 19.20. was a
type of hell, so Gehenna, Mat. 5. So the winepresse of the wrath of God was
without the city, Rev. 14.20. so Mat. 8.12. he shall be cast into utter
darkness: utter darkness is an allusion to the dark prison which Peter was
put in without the city, Act. 12.10. And therefore the wicked are said to be
excluded out of the holy city, new Jerusalem, Le. 20. secondly he polluted
the graves of the Idolatrous Kings, Princes, and Priests, Ier. 8.1. he caused
to take out the bones of the Idolatrous Kings of Judah, and of the Princes, and
of the Priests, and spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the
host of heaven whom they loved they shall not be gathered nor buried, but lie
like dung upon the field.

Thirdly he brake to pieces the images, and cut down the groves, and filled
their places with the bones of men. 2 King. 25.14.

Fourthly, he caused to take the bones of the Priests out of the sepulchers,
and burn them upon the altars, 1. Kin. 23.18. but the sepulcher of the man of
God (who proclaimed these things, which Josias did against the altar of
Bethel,) he touched not; Josias made a reformation here of the whole land; as
well of Jerusalem as of Bethell; Josias did uprightly as his father David had
done, and trembled at Gods laws and Judgments, 2 Chronicles. 34.2. yet the people
would not hear the words of the prophets, Ier. 25.3.4. calling them from their
Idolatry, They sought, not the Lord but worshipped the host of heaven, Zeph.
1.5. remaining frozen in their dregs. ve. 12. and showed themselves to be a
nation not worthy to be beloved, Zeph. 2.1.

The rest of the Kings of Judah until the captivity set forward this Idolatry
more or less, The rest of the Kings of Judah until the captivity set forward
this Idolatry.
and Like a leprosy it overspread them all, Pro. 24.30. I went by the field of
the sloathful, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding and lo it
was all grown over with thorns, and nettles, had covered the face thereof,
and the stone wall thereof was broken down. The Docters of the Jews by way of
Allegory apply this to the Kingdom of Judah, and to the Kings of it; And they
say, Ahaz was the slothful man, and Manasses was the foolish man, Ammon and
Iehoiakim planted the nettles, and the thorns, and last the house it self,
the temple was destroyed in the days of Zedekias, then the stone was broken
down. Now when the Church waxed old in her adulteries, God said now shall she
and her fornications come to an end, Ezechiel 23.43.

Now all these things are written for ensamples and they are written for our
admonitions, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. that we
should not be Jdolaters as they, 1 Cor. 10.6.7.

This Idolatry was buried in the captivity, and never revived again.
At last this Idolatry was buried in the captivity, and never revived again
amongst the Jews: The three children of Israel could not be drawn by any
means to bow before the golden image, which Nabuchadnazor set up, neither
could the Jews in Babylon be any ways moved to do any worship to Belus;
And Mordecai in the captivity refused to give religious honor to Haman; so
after the captivity of Vespatian they detested Idols: Peter in his Epistle
salutes the Jews dispersed through Pontus, Bithynia, Capadocia, which he
would not have done if they had been Idolaters: and they gloried most in this,
that they detested Idols, Romans 2.23. thou who abhorres Idols, (he is speaking
here to the Jews) And as often as they remember of the great judgments that
have befallen them, they burst forth in these words, Non accidit tibi O Israel
ulla ultio, in qua non sit uncia de iniquitate vituli, that is, there is no
judgment which has befallen thee O Israel in which there is not an ounce
weight of the sin of the golden calfe, and they call the temples wherein
Idols are worshipped, (...)
Beth haturphan domum turpitudinis, the house of filthiness, and when they see
the shaven popish priests they call them Kumarim; (...)
these Cemarim were the Priests who sacrificed to the host of heaven all in
black or soiled with the smoke of the sacrifices, The Jews abhorres now all
sorts of Idolles.
and they count them but like the heathen Priests and Camilli. The Jews when
they detest a thing they call it Pesall from Pesall, (...)
which signifies an Idol. When Pilate and Petronius were presidents of Judea,
they tried by all means to set up the images of Caligula and Tiberias in the
temple, but the Jews withstood them; Josephus, lib. 18. cap. 4. and 10. And
the Jews at this day will not suffer in their Kalenders not so much as these
three marks,. As this Idolatry of the Jews was buried in the captivity, so
we hope that the Idolatry which is now, shall be buried and quite abolished
before the second coming of Christ.

OF The fourth degenerate Son, the JEW, who killed his Father.
HE that was the first born in Israel had sundry privileges and dignities
conferred upon him (before the Law) above the rest of his brethren; the first
privilege was this, that he had the princely power and dominion over his
brethren, Genesis 27.29. Be Lord over thy brethren. Secondly, they were Priests in
their fathers family, until the Levites succeeded in their place. Thirdly,
they had the double portion of all their fathers goods, Deuteronomy. 21.17. Fourthly,
the first borne were redeemed with five shekels, which the rest were not, as
especially consecrate to the Lord. Fifthly, they had a peculiar sort of
apparel whereby they were distinguished from the rest of their brethren; Such
was Esau his goodly raiment, which Rebecca put upon Jacob, Genesis 27.15. which
had a goodly smell, as the smell of a field which the Lord had blessed. Sixthly,
they had the dignity to sit first at the Table, Genesis 43.33. Job 1.13. And last,
the first borne were blessed after a singular manner by their father in his
death.

Reuben, Jacobs first borne, by committing of incest and defiling his fathers
bed, he lost all these dignities, Judah got the Princely dignity; Levi got the
Priesthood; Joseph the double portion: and after that his brethren reverenced
him not, and he lost all the rest of his privileges, none of his posterity
came unto any dignity or preferment, and they were more obscure than dull
Issachar. Issachar was asinus ossium had strong bones, to labor and to carry
burdens; But Reuben was like water spilt: Issachar was valiant in battle
against Sisera, Judge. 5.14. but nothing is spoken of Reuben his posterity;
never Judge came of him, neither soldier came of him, all feeble and weak:
Issachar was given to study and knowledge, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. but no learned men
came of Reuben; and all this befell him because he dishonored his father in
defiling his bed. So the Jews the Lords first borne, Exodus 4.22. had all these
dignities conferred upon them, but for murdering the Lord of life, they were
spoiled of them all: first they were a Kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19.6. that
is, they were Kings and Priests to the Lord; but for murdering of the Lord of
life, this dignity was tranferred to the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 2.9. Then they had
the double portion, the Lord was their portion, Psalm. 23. this was a worthy
portion, or a double portion, but now they have lost this portion; he redeemed
them before by a great price, not with five shekels, but now he sels them for
naught, and their price is not increased, Psalm. 44.12. Then he clothed them
with broydered work, shod them with Badgers skins, Ezeck. 16.10. but now the
Lord has stripped them naked and bare, v. 39. They sat first at the Lords
Table, and some Gentiles like whelps eat but the crummes under the Table, but
now they that are first shall be last, and they that are last shall be first,
and shall sit down with Jacob in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13.29. Last the
Lord has cursed these wilful murderers of him in his death; what could the
Lord have done more to his first borne, but this degenerate son (optimi vini
pessimum acetum) has despised him, he counted all the world but dogs in
respect ^f them, Math. 15.27. but they like dogs turned again and rent him,
Psalm. 22. And this his first begotten son is now become bukera sakla, primo
genitus stultus, qui non fert nomen patris sui; he is become that foolish first
borne, that cannot abide the name of his father.

SECT. 1. Of the threefold estate of the Jews, and first when they were gnammi
my people.
THe Jews are to be considered in a threefold estate; first, as they were
gnammi, my people: Secondly, as they were lo gnammi, not my people: and
thirdly, as they are Ruchama, to be pitied.

When they were gnammi his people then he carried them as a girdle about his
loins, Gnammi.
Ier. 13. then he had them graven upon the palms of his hands; The great
dignities of the Israelites when they were his people.
Then he loved them as the aple of his eye, Psalm. 17.8. and he reckoned them as
his peculium, 1 Pet. 2.3. Then they were the head and not the tail, Deuteronomy.
28.37.

In this estate he made choice of them to be his sons, Four sorts of sons.
The Lawyers make four sorts of sons: first natural and Legittimate;
Secondly Legittimate but not natural: Thirdly, natural but not Legitimate:
Fourthly, neither natural nor Legitimate.

Cashirim rectos; (...)
and to those they oppose pesulim who are not begotten in lawful marriage.

asuphim collectos; (...)
Those were called Collecti by the Hebrews, who were cast out by their
parents, but yet others took them up when their father and their mother left
them, Psalm. 27.10. my father and mother have left me, but the Lord has
gathered me up: Those by the Greeks were called (...), cast out by their
mothers, and projecti Psalm. 71.9. Cast me not off.

beni neker, (...)
Psalm. 144. And (...) filii extranei.

Spurius filius, non filius. Ben Syra (...)
who were borne of common harlots; Such a one the Hebrews called mamzer from
mum zer aliena labes and the Latins called them incertos, and filios vulgi,
and varit: Quia ex vario semine, and from (...), quia nihil divinum in illis.

The Lord adopted them.
When God chose them to be his sons, he adopted them: Adoption was found out
for the comfort of those who had not children, 2 Samuel 21.8. Barren Micoll had
five sons; that is, five legal or adopted sons: So the daughter of Pharaoh
adopted Moses Act. 7. But God although he had a natural son of his own, yet
he adopted the Jews for his sons. When men adopt children, it is for want;
but Gods adoption of his children comes of abundance of his grace.

As the Lord adopted them, so he would have them brought up under his law, as
under a tutor Gal. 4. He taught them.
And as a man teaches his son, so the Lord taught them, Deuteronomy. 5.5. And as
Pharaoh his daughter, when she adopted Moses to be her son Act. 7. caused him
to be brought up in all the sciences of Egypt; So the Lord, when he adopted
the Jews for his children, he taught them by his Law.

When they were his people, many were converted from Gentilsme, to Judaisme,
and they were called Proselytes: This they thought to be the greatest honor,
to be made members of the Church: the Queen of the South came from a far
Country to see the wisdom of Solomon, and the order of his house, and of his
servants, 2 Chronicles. 9.4. So the proselytes came from far Countries to hear
the wisdom of God, and to see the order of his house, and the comeliness
thereof: David thought the swallow and the sparrow happy, that built their
nests near the Altar of God, Psalm. 84.3. might not they then think themselves
happy, who came so near to the house of God as to hear his Law expounded
unto them, and to have these mysteries of salvation revealed unto them, which
the Gentiles knew not of? The proselytes were those; The Proselytes that came
to the Jewish Church.
of the Madianites Iethro, of the Huzzites Job, of the Syrians Naaman the
Syrian, of the Iebusites Arauna the Iebusite, of the Hittites Vriah the
Hittite, of the Gittites Ittai. 2 Samuel 18.2. of the Canaanites the woman of
Canaan, of the Ethiopians Ebedmelech the Blacke-moore, and the Eunuch of the
Queen of Candaces an Ethiopian, Act. 8.27. of the Philistines David had the
Cherethites for his guard, 2 Samuel 15. of the Moabites Ruth, of the Samaritanes
the tenth man of the Lepers Luke 17. and the Samaritane woman John 4. of the
Idumeans Herod, and of the Gibeonites the Nethinim who hewed the wood, and drew
the water for the Temple, John 9.21. And at the birth of Christ the three wise
men that came from the East to worship Math. 2.11. And the Grecians from the
West, John 12, 20. of the Romans Cornelius the centurion, and from Antioch
Nicolas a proselyte Act. 6.5. and on Kelos the sisters son of Titus, who
pharaphrased in Chaldee the prophets. Women proselytes.
So the women proselytes, as Hagar the handmaid of Sara, Ashuer, the wife of
Joseph, Zipporah Moses his wife, Siphrah and Puah the two mid-wives of Egypt;
so the daughter of Pharaoh, Rachab, Ruth, Iael, the wife of Heber the Kenite,
Now the whelps began to eat of the crummes which fell from the childrens
table, but it was a miserable case when the children refused the meat which
was set upon the Table, and began only to gnaw the bones; as Jerome speaks of
them.

SECT. 2. The second estate of the Jews when they are lognammi not my people.
Lognammi. What dignities they lost when they were not his people.
WHen they are lognammi, now they are the tail and not the head, Deuteronomy. 28.37.
now the crown is fallen from their head, Lam. 5.16. and now the Lord has made
them a by word amongst the heathen, and a shaking of the head amongst the
people, Psalm. 44.14. when the Jews of old used to imprecate any thing, they
used their imprecations, wishing that such things might befall them, as befell
most miserable men, Ier. 29.22. and of them shall be taken up a curse by all
the captivity of Judah which are in Babylon, saying, The Lord make thee like
unto Zedekiah and like unto Ahab whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire;
because they committed villainy in Israel and adultery with their neighbors
wives: So the Jews now are become a parable and a hissing to all nations, and
when they wish any misery to a man, they wish that he may be like a miserable
Jew, and the name is now in detestation to all the world. When they were his
people, the Lord forbade them to marry with the heathen, but now no man will
marry with them, no not the Turks: Of old they detested the Publicans as most
vile sinners, but now they are the only Publicans who serve under the Turks;
no man will trust them now, they are so perfidious, and their faith is punica
fides, and they carry the marks of gods vengeance.

When men turn from darkness to light, A bappie change when men turn from
darkness to light.
this is a happy change; as when they turned from Paganism to Iudaisme, and
then they were called prosylites: So when they turned from Iudaisme to
Christianity, they were called fratres Iudaei, Act. 15. and believers of the
circumcision, Act 10.45. So when they turned from Gentilisme to Christianity,
they were called (...), 1 Timothy 3.6. But when men fall from light to darkness,
that is, A miserable change when men fall from light to darkness.
a miserable change; as when they fell from the Jewish religion to Paganism,
so when they fell from the Jewish religion to the Samaritans; So when they fell
from the Jewish religion to Saducisme; so when they fell from Christian
religion to Iudaisme; Josephus lib. 13. and tit. cap. 18.

To fall from the Jewish religion to Paganism.


so when they fell from Christianity to Turkisme; and lastly, when they fell
from Christianity to Gentilisme.

Some fell from Jewish religion to Paganism, as Rabsakeh did (whom the Jews
generally holds to have been an apostate Jew, for he could speak the Hebrew
language, 2 Kin. 18.26. and he names the name Jehovah which the heathen knew
not, verse. 25.) and the Jews used not to rent their clothes when they heard
any blaspheme, unless he were an Hebrew; therefore they rent their clothes
when they heard Rabsakeh blaspheme: Josephus de bello Iudaico l. 2. c. 19. and
20.
Such was the apostacy of the Gergasites, who fell from the Jewish profession
to the heathen Greeks.

When the Proselytes entered within the Covenant of God, they were circumcised
(as the rest of the Jews were) and it was the seal of the covenant to them;
but these apostates who fell away caused to uncircumcise themselves, and draw
their prepuce which was a sign of renouncing of the Covenant, and the Greeks
called them (...), and this uncircumcision they called it (...), as they
uncircumcised themselves in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, Celsus. lib. 7.
cap. 25. Epiphanius li. de ponderibus and mensuris.
for fear they should have been known to be Jews, 1 Match. 1.16. and the
Apostle alludes to this form, 1 Cor. 7.17. Art thou circumcised, uncircumcise
not thy self. These apostates the Hebrews called Meshumadim, (...)
and Kophar beguickar, Negantes fundamentum; and they opposed to these Gentiles
fundamentales; that is, the Proselytes converted, who held the grounds of the
Jewish religion.

To fall from the Jewish religion to the Samaritan. Vide Masium in Ioshuam.
5.2. page 82.
So when they fell from the Jewish religion to the Samaritan: Such a one was
Symmachus who translated the old Testament into Greek under the Emperor
Severus, and caused him to uncircumcise himself, and then was circumcised of
new again which was called Parang, denudatio pelliculae, and this stood in
place of a new circumcision to him: These who fell from the Jewish religion to
the Samaritans were most of all apostates hated by the Jews, Quia hi miscebant
non miscenda, because they mixed the true Religion and the false together, and
they hated them more than any other apostates. They would not eat with the
Samaritans Ioh. 4. they reckoned bread as if it had been swines flesh, and
when the Samaritans blessed, they said not Amen to it, Eccles. 50.26, 27. My
soul abhors two nations, and the third is no people; These who dwell in the
mountains of Samaria, those who dwell amongst the Philistines, and the foolish
people who dwell in Sechem, that is, there are two sorts of people whom I
abhor most; the people who mixeth the true religion and the false together,
as the Samaritans, and secondly, those who are only Pagans; the Samaritan, he
abhorred most; for the Jews so held the Samaritans, that they thought them
possessed with a devil, as John says; Say we not truth that thou art a
Samaritan, and have a devil.

So when they fell from Iudaisme to Saducisme; Josephus l. 13. antiquitatum
cap. 18.
such a one was Johannes Hircanus, who through hatred became a Saducee, and
commanded Saducisme to be received through all his bounds.

So when men fall from Christianity to Iudaisme: To fall from Christianity to
Iudaisme.
we have a miserable example of it in one Peffercorie, who was a Jew borne, but
afterward became a Christian and was baptized; He went to the Emperor to
procure that all the books of the Jews should be burnt except only the
bible: This Jew made great sturres in Germany, especially against one Capnio,
who was a restorer of the Hebrew language then (the story is set down at
length by Sleidan) and after that he had troubled the Church a long time, at
length he returned to Iudaisme like a dog to his vomit, and was burnt at
Hall in Saxony: The Jews have a saying amongst them, That Iudaeo baptizato,
and lupo domestico, non est credendum, that is, we are not to trust a baptized
Jew, nor a tame Wolf; for he will slip the collar and run to the hills
again; and so it fares with this miserable Jew. To fall from Christianity to
Turcisme.

(...) from (...)




So when men fall from Christianity to Turcisme, and these were called
Mamluhim, from Malach emptus, vel mancipatus fuit. Such are those who were
begotten of Christian parents, and being bought by the Turks are circumcised.

To fall from Christianity to Paganism.
The last are those who fall from Christianity to Paganism: Such a one was
Julian the apostate.

Those miserable wretches who fell from the Jewish religion to Paganism, as
from light to darkness were in a miserable condition: but the miserable Jews
now are in a worse condition, who calls light darkness, and darkness light:
The fugitive who flees away from the prince to the enemy, is not so badde as
he who keep their strength, and stands out against the prince: Those
miscreants now oppose themselves in all things against Christ.

SECT. 3. Of a threefold error concerning Christ.
Three sorts of error concerning Christ.
THere is triplex error circa Christum: The first is, error temporis: the second
is error personae: and the third is, error conditionis.

The first is error temporis.
The first is, error temporis, when they deny that Christ is yet come; The
Pharisees said to Christ, Tell us plainly if thou be the Christ, Ioh. 10.24.
Jesus answered, I told you and you believed not.

The Lord instructed his people sundry ways; by base and sylly creatures, as
by the Pismire, by the Conie, by the Locust, and by the Spider, Prove. 30.25,
26, 27, 28. By the Pismire, he teaches them industry to teach them industry
to labor, Pro. 6. he teaches them to have a care of their household and
children. By the Conies a feeble flock, they have a care to make their holls
in the rocks for their safety, and the safety of their young ones. Thirdly,
he teaches them to join themselves together for the defense of their
country, as the Locust do, who go out to battle, although they have not a
head: Fourthly, he teaches them to be wise, that they may stand in Princes
courts; By the example of the Spider, which (although it be a silly creature)
yet it takes hold in Kings Palaces: Joseph learned this lesson when he stood
before Pharaoh, and Mordecai before Ashuerus.

So the Lord reproves his people by silly and base creatures, as by the
Turtle, the Crane, and the Iwallow, Jer. 8.7. he objects to them, that these
poor creatures observed the time of their coming, but his people know not the
time of their visitation, Luke 19.44: Man being in honor became like the
beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. yea worse than the beasts: Chrysostom has an
excellent saying, Pejus est comparari jumento quam esse Iumentum, It is worse
to be compared with the beasts, than to be a beast: To be borne a beast is no
fault, but to be matched with them, when we make our selves like beasts, or
worse than beasts, that is our great shame: The unreasonable creatures by
instinct knows their times and seasons, and man will not know the time of
grace by the gracious light of the Gospel: The ^ewes were worse than the
silly Crane, or Swallow, when they knew not the time when Jesus Christ their
Messiah came into the world.

We who are Christians reckon our times from the Lords birth and from his
death; but the Jews abhor this: When Alexander came to besiege Jerusalem in
the days of Iaddus the highpriest, to save Jerusalem not to be sacked, they
were content to reckon their dates from Alexander his coming to besiege
Jerusalem, anno creationis, 4260. And this was called afterward Era Alexandri,
and after that Selucidarum Alexandri: but now they will no ways reckon from
the coming of Christ; for when they count the years of the world, they omit
the thousands, and reckon by the hundrethes by (liphrath caton) as they call
it; (...)
they will not subscribe their bonds and contracts by this date, (the year of
Christ.)

How Cornelius his prayer was accepted, he not knowing that Christ was come.
Quest. How could Cornelius his prayers be accepted before God, seeing Christ
was come and he knew not that?

Answ. Cornelius the centurion before he heard Peter he believed in the
Messiah, and this he had learned from the Jews, but he knew not that Jesus
the Son of Mary was the Messiah, and if he had died in that estate he might
have been saved, but after that he heard Peter preach that Jesus was the
Messiah, if he had not believed in Christ, then his ignorance had been an
affected ignorance, and damnable; such was the ignorance of the Pharisees, Ioh.
10.24.

Three sorts of Jews who differed concerning Christ's coming
There were three sorts of the Jews who differed concerning Christ's coming;
The first were those who say that Christ was come, as Aquiba the Armor-bearer
of Ben Cohebha who said Omnia tempora Messiae preterierunt, he held that Been
kohebha was the Messiah, and that he was come already: there were others of
them who said, Thalmud in Sanedrim, Cap. 11. fol. 98.
that he was come, although not yet revealed, but that he is amongst the ^epers
of Rome; And there are some of them who expect yet their Gnolam haba, saeculum
futurum; this time they call the time of their Messiah, and seeing themselves
so often deceived, waiting for their Messiah, they do say that times are not
to be reckoned, Thalmud in Sanedrim Cap. 11. fol. 97. So Rembam sub finem
Misnaioth.
and they lay a curse upon him, who presumes to reckon the times of his
coming, Displodetur spiritus eorum, qui sunt scrupulosi in momentis temporum,
sed praestoletur and credat universitati verborum; that is, let him perish
miserably who is scrupulous in the searching the moments of time, and content
thy self with this, that he has promised that he will come, and he that
believes will not make haste, Hab. 2.3. There was a general fast indicted to
all the Jews in Europe, because their Messiah delayed his coming so long, as
Helvicus testifies, lib. 2.

SECT. 4 Reasons proving against the Jews that Christ is come.
TO stop the mouths of these miscreants, Reasons proving that Christ is come.
we will bring some reasons out of the old testament, and their own writers
against them: when we dispute against an adversary, we must bring the
principalles, and grounds, which they acknowledge themselves, or else they will
not serve to confute them; Christ disputing against the Saduces who denied the
resurrection, Mat. 22.32. he brought his proofs out of the five books of
Moses, because they admitted no other scripture but those five books of Moses;
but when he disputed against the Pharisees, Mat. 12.3. he brought his
testimony out of the Psalms because they admitted all the old testament: so
John writing against Ebion and Cerinthus a Jew, calls Christ still (...)
sermo, because that is the phrase of the Caldees when they speak of Christ,
and this he did to convince the Jew the more. A Christian disputing once with a
Jew, he alleged the testimony of Paul, but what replied the Jew? Quid mihi
cum tuo Paulo, lex canonica emendavit Paulum, what have I to do with your Paul,
the cano^ law corrected him.

What testimonies we must use when we dispute with the Jews.
In disputing against them, we must use their own testimonies, that their own
children may be their judges; Paul used the heathens testimony against the
people who were heathenish in manners, as of Aratus, Epimides, and Menander: so
must we use their writings against themselves; But here we must take heed when
we bring in their testimonies against them, that they agree all in those
testimonies, for if they do not agree, they make not faith against them, but
only they show this much, that they agree not amongst themselves. But when
they agree among themselves, then their testimonies are (...), Mar. 14.59.

The first reason to prove that Christ is come, is taken Genesis 49. The scepter
shall not be taken from Judah till Shilo come, When the scepter was taken from
Judah, then Christ came.
That is the power of judging shall not be taken from the great Synedrion,
therefore a scepter hang over their head in the great Synedrion, as Petrus
Euneus witnesses) But when the Romans subdued the Jews, great Synedrion was
removed from Jerusalem, Zam. David. page 36. b.
to Iabneth, this which was in the confines of Dan, near to the sea cost, and
there it stayed for a while after the destruction of the temple, and after that
they had changed their station nine times, at last they went to Tiberius the
tenth station, and their the Syhedrion took an end, and they hope that the
Synedrion shall be restored again, first at Tiberias, and then shall go back
again by degrees to Jerusalem; the scepter here was taken from Judah by the
Romans, when Shilo came; and they say the son of David the Messiah shall not
come, done cregnum illud malignum extendetur super Israel; they call the Roman
Empire regnum malignum, but this fell out in the time of Christ, when all the
world went to be taxed under Augustus, Luke 2.1. And the stories tell us,
after that Aristobolus, and Hircanus with their continual wars, had almost
destroyed all the posterity of the Machabees, Vide Iosephum lib. 1. debello
Iudai^^. cap. 5. and 15. and lib. 15. cap. 9, 10.
the Romans having subdued the Jews they set Antipater an Idumean, and a
stranger over them to be their King, and he, that he might the more easily
come by the Kingdom marries the daughter of Hircanus, who was then a fugitive
amongst the Partheans; at last when he understood that Hircanus only was left
alive of the posterity of the Machabees, when he returned from his banishment
(fearing least the Jews should make choice of him to be their king, as being
only left of the posterity of the Maccabees) killed him and his children and
his own wife also the daughter of Hircanus, whom he had married lately
before, and not content with that, he killed the most of the nobles of the
tribe of Judah, he destroys their ancient records, he takes away their
genealogies, and killes the 70. who sat in the great Synedrion; he appointed
priests at his own pleasure, and some flatterers then in this great confusion
took upon them to call him the Messiah, Hence came that sect which we read of
in the Gospel called Herodiani, who worshipped Herod as the Messiah (as some
hold) Now Shilo is come and the scepter is taken away.

The second reason is, The stone which the builders refused But Jesus Christ
was that stone of offense to the Jews whom they stumbled at; whom they were
offended in, and whom they crucified; therefore he is the only true Messiah,
Moses gerundensis in libro qui inscribitur Titulus Messiae.
and come already: All the Jews at this day approved the fact of their fathers
in killing the Lord of life: Moses Gerundensis says, about the subversion of
the second temple, there was a certain Nazaret, who professed himself to be
the Messiah, and our Rabbines according to his merits adjudged him to the death
of the cross: The Jews in the days of Christ said, if we had been in the
days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood
of the Prophe^s, Mal. 23.30. But these wretches now do approve all which there
fathers did to Christ, which shows, that Jesus Christ is the only true
Messiah and is come already.

Zachary, 11.1. Open thy gates O Libanus, This prophecy that the gates of
Libanus should be opened, (that is the gates of the temple which were built of
the wood of Libanus) was fulfilled, when the veil of the temple rent; In the
Syriacke it is facies templi scissa est; and in the Thalmud it is recorded,
that the gates of the temple did open themselves, and that the evening lamp
did not burn about the subversion of the second temple.

Eliah; The world shall stand 6000. years, and shall be destroyed in the
7000. In the first two thousand years there was Inanitas, emptiness, in the
second two thousand years was the Law; and in the third two thousand years,
were the promises of the Messiah; and then in the seventh thousand year the
world should cease; And as in every seventh year the land rested, Lev. 25.4.
So the world shall cease in the seventh thousand year, because it is said,
Psalm. 94. A thousand years in thy sight are like a day: the two thousand
years of the Messiah (they know) are almost run out; but for our iniquities
they add, Transierunt multi ex illis quicunque transierunt, that is some of
those years are past, which we must not exactly reckon; but to take away this
shift from them, they have so particularly determined the time that they can
make no shift to elide this time; Moses Gerundensis writing upon the Pentetench
says, that the Messiah will come in the five thousand year after the
creation, and most of them agree to this reckoning, that he shall come in the
five

The last reason to prove that the Messsias is come, is this, No Jew at this
day can tell what genealogy he is of; They have lost all their genealogies,
which they kept all the time of their first captivity, and after they returned
home again as we may see in Esdras 2. they that could not show their
genealogies were debarred from any charge; These genealogies they kept, that
they might know of what tribe the Lord was to come, and so they kept their
marriages of the heretrixes only to marie within their own tribe, to know of
what tribe Jesus Christ was to come; and so they kept still their fathers
possessions, that the tribes might not be confounded, but all those are
confounded amongst them now, therefore the Messiah is come already.

A Christian may demand of a Jew why the Magitians came from the east at this
time to worship Christ, and why Herod was so desirous to know the place of the
birth of Christ, and caused the infants to be killed, and spared not his own
son (as Macrobius, witnesses who was a gentile Philosopher) was it not the
fear that Christ the King was borne, which moved him to do that?

Secondly, a christian may demand what was the reason (about that time
especially) that so many gave themselves out for Christ's, as that Egyptian who
raised sedition, and led out into the wilderness four thousand men that were
murderers, Acts 21.38. So Theudas boasting himsefe, to whom resorted a number
of men, Acts 5. And so Judas of Galilee drew many after him, Acts 5.37. so
Simon Magus and Bar cosbi; was not this because Jesus Christ was come already,
that they counterfeited themselves to be Christ's?

Thirdly they may demand why the Jews fell away from the Romans at that time;
there was no other reason indeed, but because generally it was received
amongst them, that the Messiah should come and deliver them a Regno maligno.

Fourthly, he may demand, what is the reason that ye Jews hate us Christians
more then ye did the Romans who took you captives, who scattered you, and
subdued you, and although they were Idolaters, yet ye loved them better then
the Christians, ye pray thrice in the day against the Christians,
notwithstanding that the Christians pray for you? the reason of all this ye
may see is the hatred ye have against Christ, whom ye have crucified, ye hate
us for his cause, and as your predecessors consulted to put Christ to death,
and Lazarus also whom he had raised from the grave; so ye hate Christ still,
and us Christians called after his name.

The second error concerning Christ is error persona.
The second error concerning Christ, is error personae; and it was twofold:
First, when they chused a false Christ in place of a true Christ: The second,
when they blasphemed the true Christ, and denied all the benefits which we get
by him.

The error concerning Christ's person is the most dangerous error.
This error concerning his person was the most dangerous error, for error
personae (as the Lawyers speak) irritat contractum, as when Laban put in Leah
to Jacob, in stead of Rachel for his wife; here the marriage was to no purpose,
because of the error of the person, and if Jacob had not gone in afterward to
Leah, and taken her for his wife, he might have safely dismissed her, because
it was error personae: So when the Jews took a false Christ for the true
Christ, here the covenant was of no force, and they could never get salvation
by such a Christ.

The second error concerning Christ's person was, when they denied the true
Christ, and all the benefits which the Church gets by him.

The disciples never fell into this error, either to take a false Christ for
the true Christ, or to deny the benefits which the Church gets by the true
Christ.

Now I will set down how those Jews do err concerning Christ, and hate him
most deadly, and all the benefits which the Church gets by him.

First, they err concerning Christ's forerunner Elias, They err concerning
Christ's forerunner John the Baptist.
and they take not Elias in gifts, that is, John the Baptist to be Christ's
forerunner (although Elias be already come, and they have done to him
whatsoever they listed, Vide abreviaturas Bux page 122.
Matthew. 17.12.) but they expect Elias Tishbites in proper person, and when they
cannot answer any hard question propounded to them by their scholars, they
say, Tishbi solvet nodos, when Elias shall come he shall resolve all hard
doubts.

Secondly, They despise Marie the mother of our Lord. (...)
they despise Marie the mother of our Lord, and they call her Marah,
bitterness; and herba Mariae, they call herba suspensi; they deny that Jesus
Christ was borne of a Virgin; and they say that gnalma signifies any other
woman, as well as a Virgin; but this word gnalma is always taken for a Virgin
in the Scripture, except, Prove. 30.19. There the naughty woman is called
gnalma a Virgin, when she wipes her mouth, and denies her adultery, yet she
would seem still to be gnalma a Virgin, verse 19. and if gnalma were not a
Virgin which should bear a son, what sign were it to confirm trembling
Ahaz against his doubting and fear; would this sign confirm him to say that
a woman should bare a son, when he refused a sign offered to him, either
from above or beneath, (...)
Esaias 7.11. and this word hagnalma being written still with Mem clausum, the
Jews themselves observe that this signifies Marie to be a Virgin, both before
her birth and after.

The Jews deny that a Virgin could bear a son; They deny that a Virgin
could bear a son.
they believe this, that God made the woman out of the side of the man, and why
may they not believe this also, that the holy Ghost did overshadow the Virgin
Marie, and created Jesus Christ in the womb of the Virgin Marie? The Jews
believe this, that Aaron his rod did budde although it had not a root; why may
they not believe this then, that a Virgin did conceive and bear a son
although she knew not a man?

They acknowledge not the two natures in Christ.
Thirdly, they acknowledge not the two natures in Christ, that he is God and
man, Immanuel, God with us, Esaias 7.14. and David's son, and David's Lord,
Psalm. 110.1. and Ithiel, God with us, Prove. 37.1. which the ancient Jews
acknowledged [ I will dwell amongst them, Levi. 26.] The Chaldee paraphrast
paraphraseth it thus, I will place my divinity amongst the midst of the sons
of Israel, according to that of John, Ioh. 1.14. The word was made flesh, and
dwelt amongst us.

They mock Christ's offices.
Fourthly, they mock Christ's offices, and first his Kingly office, Matthew.
27.29. Hail King of the Jews, and his Priestly office, Math. 27.42. He saved
others he cannot save himself: and his prophetical office, Prophecy who
smote thee, Matthew. 26.28. They despise his Kingly office, We have no King but
Caesar, Ioh. 19.15. So they despise his Priestly office, cleaving to the
ceremonies of the law, when they stand to the ceremonial Law, they cannot be
partakers of Christ crucified; for that sacrifice which was burnt without the
gate, the people cannot be partakers of (according to the Leviticall Law) but
Christ suffered without the gate; therefore the Jews who cleave to the
ceremonial law cannot be partakers of it, Heb. 13:12, 13.

Then they despise Christ's prophetical office, Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God
will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like
unto me; unto him shall ye hearken: He shall raise up a Prophet like unto me.
This note (ficut as) is taken three manner of ways in the Scripture; First,
for a note of paritie, as Math. 10.15. It is enough for the disciple that he be
as his master. So Mat. 19.19. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, See 1
King. 22.4. and Genesis 44.18. Secondly, it is taken for a note of Identitie, as
Matthew. 20.14. I will give unto this last, even as unto thee, sicut tibi, that
is, (...)
Caph similitudinis.
(...)
Caphparitatis.
(...)
Caph Identitatis.

eundem specie denarium. So Luke 15.19. Make me as one of thy hired servants,
that is, make me thy hired servant. So Ioh. 1.14. We beheld his glory, as the
glory of the only begotten Son of God, that is, we beheld him the true son of
God. Thirdly, it is taken for a note of similitude, as Matthew. 6.12. Forgive us
our debts as we forgive our debtors: and Math. 18.33. Should thou not also
have had compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? So
Ioh. 17.22. that they may be one, even as we are one. When it is said there,
the Lord will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, sicut ego sum, sicut,
is not a note of paritie there, neither of Identitie, but it is a note of
similitude, as if ye would say, he will raise up a very true man as I am, and
a Prophet as I am.

This Prophet they were bound to hear, but when there came another in his own
name, him they heard, but this great Prophet they would not hear, Ioh. 5.43.

Fifthly, they abhor and detest the name of Jesus Ieshuang, and when he is
called Ieshugnoth, They hate his proper name Jesus. (...) Huiusmodi enim auctio
vocis aucta significationis indicium est.
Robur Salutum, Genesis 49.25. This word they divide into two, and make it Ieshu
gnavoth, ac si Christus perversus esset, where as Jesus is our Ieshugnatha
omnimoda salus, both in this life and in the life to come, Psalm. 3.3. They will
not so much as name the name of Jesus, and blasphemously they say Nomen illius
prutrescat; Some of them say, that the name of their Messiah (when he shall
come) shall be Shilo from Genesis 49.10. others of them say, that his name shall
be Chanina, (...) Talmud in Sanedrim cap. 11.
which signifies grace, from Ier. 16 3. Others of them say that his name shall
be Menachim a comforter from Lament. 5.16. But the name of Jesus they hold in
execration, (...) They mock his surname Christ, (...)
so they hate the name of Christ, they will not call their Messiah Christus,
but (...) dilibutus.

Sixtlie they mock the cross of Christ and they call it Tramen and stamen,
because those two resemble the cross, and when they dare not directly speak
against Christ crucified, yet they will closely under those terms mock him.

Seventhly, they despise the imputed righteousness of Christ, and they jest at
this, that one should be punished for another fault; then they say, Tobias
deliquit and Sigog plectitur, and yet the Lord says, Isa. 53.5. By his stripes
we were healed; And they say, It is good reason that every fox pay his own
skin to the fleaer.

They deny our Lords resurrection.
Eighthly, they deny our Lords resurrection; and they say he was stolen away by
night, and this saying is commonly reported amongst the Jews unto this day.

Nynthly, they hate the Sacrament of our Lords Supper, (...) The Jews drink
not now the wine of the Christians.
and they reckon the wine in the supper inter libamina gentium, which they may
not drink of, and because that wine seals up to us the memory of our Lords
blood shed upon the^ cross, therefore they most of all detest it.

Lastly, they detest us Christians who are called after the name of Christ, and
they call us minnim haereticos, and Nazarets, (...)
and Idumeans, and goi mamzer, a bastardly people; and they curse those who are
converted from Iudaisme to Christianity thrice in the day: they curse us
Christians after this manner, Anathema sit externis in serpente, that is, they
wish to us (who are not of their Religion) the curse of the serpent; and they
say that there are four unclean beasts named in the Law, Rabbi Bechai
parteshamini.
Lev. 11.4, 5, 6, 7. The Camel, the Conie, the Hare, and the Sow; These they
say signify the four captivities which they were under; The Camel signifies
the Babylonian Empire; The Hare signifies the Medes, and the Persians; The
Conie signifies the Greek Empire, and so the Romans; And all us Christians
they detest as the unclean sow; They think not themselves bound to keep an
oath to a Christian, and they are absolved by their Rabbines of all guilt in
the day of expiation, if they perjure themselves to a Christian; so they hold
it not lawful for a Jew to take Physic of a christian, no not in the
greatest danger of death: Schechardus in p^oemio regum Persie.
On Bendema a Jew being stung with a serpent, a Christian named Iacobus
Stephanites came to heal him, but he refusing his help, he died, and his
uncle said unto him when he was dying, Blessed art thou my son, for thou have
a pure soul this day going out of a pure body, for now thou show that thou
have not transgressed the traditions of thy fathers, who says Eccles. 10.8. he
that breaks down the hedge, the serpent shall sting him: Thus they call their
traditions, the hedge, yea they go further against us Christians, judging of
us as reprobats, because we eat things Forbidden in the law, and they show
this by a parable. Rabbi bechai in part Shemini.
They say that a Physician having two patients under his hand at once, knew
certainly that one of them would die, and that the other would shortly
recover his health, he permitted to him that was to die to eat what he
pleased, but he enjoined to him that was to live a more strict diet, as having
a regard to his health. So (say they) the Lord the great Physician had two
patients committed to his charge, the Jew, and the Gentile, he permitted the
Gentile to eat what he pleased, because there was no hope of his salvation,
but the Jew who was to live, he restraines and puts to a diet, and commands him
to eat no unclean thing; but the Lord taught Peter otherwise Acts: 10. call
not that unclean which the Lord has sanctified and made clean.

Why Christ forbad to tell any that he was the Christ.
Quest. The knowledge of Christ being so necessary to the salvation of man,
what was the reason that Jesus forbad his disciples to tell any man, that he
was Jesus the Christ, Mat. 16.20?

Answ. He forbade them not to tell of the Messiah, but that he was the Messiah,
for it was enough for the people to know as yet that they should be saved by
the Messiah, although they knew not in particular Jesus the son of Marie to
be the Messiah: when Christ sent forth his Disciples, John 10.6, 7. to preach,
this was not to preach the Gospel properly so called, for that Christ reserved
for himself to do; and while Christ was alive his Disciples were not to teach
in their masters presence, he sent them forth only in their first commission,
to prepare the hearts of the people against his coming, therefore Mat. 10.23.
Christ says, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel till the son
of man come, that is, till he come and teach that he was the Messiah.

Error conditionis.
The last error concerning Christ, is, error conditionis, when they took Christ
to be a worldly King, or a Prince; the Apostles themselves were overtaken with
this error for a time, and this made them to strive amongst themselves, who
should be the greatest: and this made the mother of the sons of Zebedee, to
desire of Christ that one of her sons might sit at his right hand, and
another at his left hand; and the Apostles continued in this error till after
Christ's resurrection, When will thou restore the Kingdom to Israel. Acts 1.6.

This error conditionis is the lightest of the three: A man marries a woman,
hoping that she is rich, or that she is a free woman, when in the mean time
she is a bond woman and a poor woman; this dissolves not the marriage, as the
errors of the person does, although the Apostles believed for a time that
Christ should be a temporary king; yet that brake not off the covenant betwixt
him and them.

The Jews to this day hope that their Messiah shall restore the Kingdom of
David to the wonted dignity, and that he shall build the sanctuary again,
What the Jews hope for in their Messiah to come.
and restore their genealogies, and reduce every one to their own tribes, and
that he shall expel the strangers from amongst them, (as Esdras did) and that
he shall be most skillful in the Law, Mei. Hal Melach. cap. 22 post medium.
and the gift of prophecy shall be restored to them when he comes, which they
have not now in their captivity, and that he shall be a mighty warrior; but
yet they say, that he shall not have power to work miracles, neither to cause
the sun to stand still in the firmament, as Joshua did: This error
conditionis joined with the two former errors is deadly; They deny that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, and then they hate the Lord Jesus Christ deadly,
and they expect still a worldly King, therefore miserable are they.

Cursed is he that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, says Paul. 1. Cor. 16.22.
Let him be Anathema maranatha; The Apostle curses them here in two languages,
to show that this is a peremptory curse to be divulgat through the world; And
as the Lord would have Christ's death known through the world, therefore the
inscription over his head (when he hang upon the cross) was written in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, to signify, that the Lord would have his death known
through the world; so the Lord would have this curse written in Hebrew, and
Greek, to signify that he would have this curse known through the world.

To be accursed as to be separate, and set apart, or appointed to evil, so
that these Jews who love not the Lord Jesus Christ, are separate and set apart
that no man should meddle with them: and as the Saints are set apart, that no
man might hurt them; so are they set apart that no man may do them good; Isaac
said of Jacob, Genesis 28.35. Jacob have I blessed, and he shall be blessed; so
the Lord says of the Jews, the Jews have I cursed, and they shall be cursed.

SECT. 5. Of the horrible cruelty of the Jews in killing the Lord of Life.
THe Prophet Amos, cap. 1. before he comes to denounce the Judgments of God
against Israel for their sins, he sets down first four horrible sins of
the countries about, for the which the Lord denies that he will pardon them,
and he says, for three sins, and for four, I will not pardon, which is like
unto that of Solomon, Praescriptum numerum corigit and auget scriptura.
Pro. 30.18. There be three things hid from me, yea four things which I knew
not, so v. 21. for three things the earth is moved, yea for four it cannot
sustain it self, so Pro. 6.16. Six things does the Lord hate, yea his soul
abhors seven; that is, he most detests the seventh, so Psalm. 18.1. The Lord
delivered him out of the hands of Saul, and the hard of all his enemies, that
is especialie out of the hands of Saul. So search the land and Jericho, Ios.
2.1. that is especially Jericho, so tell the Disciples and Peter, Mar. 16.10.
that is especially Peter, because he had fallen from the Lord, this is called
(...). So for three transgressions and for four, that is especially for the
fourth when many transgressions concur together, and the last is the
greatest; then he will not spare.

The sin of Damascus was this, The cruelty of Damascus against Gilead.
That they threshed Gilead with instruments of Iron, Amos 1.3. and this they
did when Hazael smote the land of Gilead; 2 King. 10.33. and they threshed them
with instruments of Iron, as they had been beating out the corn, and cutting
the straw with their wheels made with teeth of Iron. This was the cruelty of
Damascus to Gilead their neighbors; Then he comes to the sin of Gaza, The
cruelty of Gaza.
which was one of the five Cantones of the Philistines, v. 6. Their sin was
that they carried away the whole captivity; that is, they left none
uncaptivated; whether this be understood of Israel or of Judah, it is not
expressed, but they sold them to their barbarous enemies the Edomites: It was a
cruel thing to carry away people captive; and to carry them all captive; but
most of all to sell them to their enemies the Edomites. The third was the sin
of Tyrus, verse. 9. because they delivered the whole captivity to Edom, The
sin of Tyrus.
and remembered not the brotherly covenant; There was no brotherly covenant
betwixt them of the captivity and Gaza, when they led them captive, but there
was a covenant betwixt them and Tyrus, for Solomon and Hiram made a covenant
together, 1 Kings 9.13: So the sin of Tyrus exceeded the sin of Gaza. The
fourth is the sin of Edom, The sin of Edom surpassed the sin of Tyrus.
his sin surpassed the sin of Tyrus; for he pursued his brother with the
sword, and cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and he did
keep his wrath for ever. v. 11. Edom was Israel his brother, because their
predecessors were one, yet he cast off all natural affection, as Esau hated
Jacob, so did Edom his posterity hate the Israelites, Esau hated Jacob and
thought to have killed him, returning out of Mesopotamia. So when he desired
liberty to go through Edom his Country; he withstood him. So 2 Chronicles. 28.27.
And his anger did tear perpetually: Then he comes to the cruelty of the sins
of Ammon verse 13. Who did rippe up the women with child of Gilead, The cruelty
of Ammon exceeded the cruelty of Edom.
that they might enlarge their borders, that they might possess a land void
of people, that they might revenge that cruelty: This cruelty of the children
of Ammon exceeded the cruelty of Edom, for they killed the women, and they
killed their posterity; The Lord forbiddes to kill the dame sitting upon the
eggs, to take both the young and the old.

It was a cruelty in Rechab who killed Ishbosheth in his own house, lying upon
his bed, 2 Samuel 4.6. To kill a man in his own house, which should be a place
of refuge to him, is a great sin, but to kill him in his bed, that is a
greater cruelty; but to kill the children in their Mothers belly, being in
their first Mansion and at rest there, that is the greatest cruelty of all;
and then to kill them that they might possess and enlarge their inheritance,
then occiderunt and possiderunt: So that their sin was greater than the sin
of Edom: Then he comes to the sin of Moah chap. 2. verse 1. because he burnt
the bones of the King of Edomes son into lime; The sin of Moab exceeded the
sin of Ammon.
this was a greater cruelty than the cruelty of the sons of Ammon: first he
burnt the bones, then the bones of a Kings son, and then burnt them into
Lime, while they were turned into ashes, and as the Hebrews say they sparged
the walls with them: Then he comes to the sin of Judah, The sin of Judah is
greater than the sin of Moab.
ver. 4. Because they kept not the Commandments of the Lord, and their lies
caused them to err, after the which their fathers have walked. They kept not
the Commandment, he seems to say less here than he spoke before, but it is
not so; for the Hebrews use by denying a thing, to affirm the contrary the
more strongly, as they say Exodus 20. He will not hold him guilt less that
takes his name in vain, that is, he will punish them severely. So riches not
well gotten profit not, that is, they hurt very much. So Prove. 28.21. It is not
good to accept persons in Judgment, that is, it is very bad. So here they kept
not his laws, that is, they despised them, and contemned them. The sin of
Israel greater than the sin of Judah.
The last is the sin of Israel, verse 6. They sold the just for silver, and
the poor for old shoes, here he points at the Judges who corrupted Judgment
for money, and sold the poor at a low price; But if we shall compare their
cruelty with that which they used against Christ, All their cruelty was nothing
being compared with the murdering of our Lorst Jesus Christ.
all their cruelty will seem nothing in respect of this, they sold the just,
our righteousness the Lord Jesus Christ, for thirty pieces of silver; They
sold not only a brother who was in the covenant with them, as Tyrus and
Israel, but also a brother in blood to them, as Edom was to Israel; And their
wrath was an inveterate wrath as Edomes was, and they cast off all natural
affection: and not only do they as Edom did, who was only a brother in
blood, but do as Moab did, kill the Kings son, his only son, and put him
to a most execrable death: they do not thresh him with Instruments of Iron as
Damascus did, neither ripped him up as Ammon did, neither did they burn him as
Moab did, but they nailed him to the cross, and put him to a most execrable
death.

They adjudged him to the death of the cross, The death of the cross is a
painful, shameful, and execrable death.
to a death that was a painful death, a shameful death, and a cursed death:
and first to a painful death. The cross by the heathen was termed cruciabile
lignum, a tree of torture; Therefore ye shall see in the scripture that in
respect of the intolerable pain, it is called sanguis crucis the blood of the
cross, Col. 1.20. and dolores crucis Act. 22. Secondly, it was a shameful
death, therefore it was called scandalum crucis; Gal. 5.11. and by the heathen
the cross was called arbor infoelix, stipes infamis, and lignum geminum.
Lucian mocked us christians, because we rejected the gods of the Grecians and
worshipped Christ crucified, and he said (...), quod cruci suffixum sophistam
adoramus, that is, that we worship a sophister who was nailed unto the cross.
And lastly for the curse of it, it is called Gal. 3.13. (...), maledictum
crucis, the curse of the cross. This death of the cross is a paenall death,
not as that which is stipendium peccati, the wages of sin, but as that which
is vindicta sceleris, inflicted for some capital crime. The death of the
cross is an untimely death, a violent death, a paenall death, and that in the
highest degree. Pain, shame, and the curse, are the three Iaylers that attend
sin, and sinners continually; and every one of those is worse then another;
for shame is worse than pain, and therefore many have made choice to suffer
rather the pain than the shame, 1 Samuel 31.4. Saul desired his armor bearer
rather to thrust him through, than the Philistimes should come and mock him,
and then kill him, which would have been a double death to him: So Abimelech
willed his armor bearer to kill him, that men might not say that a woman had
killed him, Judge. 9.54. But the curse is most detestable of all; If a man be
free of the curse, and have the favor of God in the midst of all his
sufferings, he cares neither for pain nor shame; this made the Martyrs to
rejoice, in the midst of their pain and shame, that they were free of the
curse of God, what a fearful punishment was this to Christ under this cross.

The death of the cross a painful shameful and a cursed death in Iudae.
He that was hanged upon a tree, out of Iudaea, his death was painful and
shameful unto him, but it was not a cursed death, for they knew not out of
Indea that he who was hanged upon a tree was accursed; Haman when he was hanged
upon a tree, it was a painful and a shameful death, but it was not a cursed
death to him, as it was in Israel, therefore they suffered not the dead man to
hang upon the tree till night, Nemo suspenditur in arboreus solo innatam sed
avulsam. Maimone Hall. Sanhe, dr. cap. 15. medio. The crucifying was a more
painful death than the hanging upon a tree.
Deuteronomy. 21.23. and Josh. 9.29. and they buried him before night, and the tree
which he was hanged upon; therefore it was that they would not hang a man upon
a fruitful tree in Israel. The Romans changed this hanging into crucifying,
and made it a more lingering and painful death, Psa. 22.14. All my bones are
out of joint. They were rackt, and their bones put out of joint, who were
hanged upon the cross. The cross added nothing to the curse; for they were
accursed who were hanged upon any tree, but it added to the pain in respect of
the indurance and shame of it; it was but a typical death to all other
malefactors, but to Christ it was a real curse, who has taken away that curse
now; So that the form of death makes not a man accursed now, but when he dies
in his sins without repentance.

Quest. How could a malefactor be a type of Jesus Christ when he hung upon a
tree?

Answ. Not as they were malefactors, but only in their punishments, they were
types of Christ, Who was made an exercration for us, Gal. 3.13. and they
foreshedowed his death who was hung upon a tree for us, 1 Pet. 2.24. even as
the Paschal Lamb, whose bones were not broken was a type of Christ, whose
bones should not be broken: and if the holy Ghosts compare Christ's coming to
judgment to a thief coming in the night; and compares the Lord (when he
arises to be avenged upon his enemies) to a Giant awake from his wine, Esa.
34.8. (the comparison is only in the strength, as the former only in the
secrecy of his coming to judgment) why may not the malefactor be a type of
Christ in his punishment, but not in his sin? And as we are delighted when
we hear a man gruntling like a hog, yet cannot endure the gruntling of the
hog it self, but it is the imitation which we are delighted with here: So in
these comparisons the secrecy of the thief only, the strength of the Giant,
and the punishment of the malefactor is only to be marked: That rule of the
Schoolmen is true, In illis quae metaphorice dicuntur, non oportet accipere
similitudinem secundum omnia.

SECT. 6. Of the fearful curses that befell the Jews since they killed the
Lord of life.
THe Jews prayed that Christ's blood might be upon them and their posterity:
The people of God were afraid of this guilt of blood, that it might neither
fall on them, nor their posterity, nor upon their very houses, and therefore
they built battlements about their houses, that they might not bring blood upon
them, Deuteronomy. 22.8. David prayed, Psalm. 51. To free him from bloods; The guilt
of blood is not easily washed out
The guilt of blood is not easily washed out; when David shed Vriah his
innocent blood, the Lord said, that the sword should never depart from his
house; that blood continued still to the ending of the Kings of Judah: If the
guilt of Vriah his blood did cleave to so many, what marvel then that the
guilt of our Lords blood lie so long upon these wretches? And if all the blood
that was shed from Abel to Zachary, seized upon them who killed Zachary, much
more may the guilt of Christ's blood seize upon their sinful posterity: It was
a miserable leagacy which David pronounced, that Ioab should leave to his
posterity, 2 Samuel 3.28. that some of them should have an issue, and that some
of them should be a leper, that some of them should lean on a staff, and some
of them should die by the sword, and some should beg their bread, but this
was a more fearful legacy which the Jews left to their posterity, when
they left the guilt of Christ's blood upon them.

First, this curse was upon their souls; secondly, The killing of Christ. left
a curse upon their souls, bodies person^, goods, and lands.
upon their bodies; thirdly, upon their persons; and fourthly, upon their land.

First, upon their souls, The curse entered into show bowels like water, and
like oil into their bones, The curse upon their souls.
Psalm. 109.18. And as the bitter water made the guilty woman's belly to rotte
and confume, so does this curse of God seize upon them; so that their hearts
are fat and gross, and past feeling: There is no judgment greater than this,
to have a fat heart and not sensible: Esaias pronounced this judgment upon them
when their hearts began to grow fat, Esa. 6.10. and Christ applies this
prophecy of Esaias to them when their hearts were grown fatter, Matthew. 13.15.
and last it was fulfilled in S. Paul's time altogether upon them, Act. 28.17.

Now since they killed the Lord of glory and shed his innocent blood, Since
they killed Christ they are given up to a reprobate sense and become savage
Wolves. Calius Redoginus, page 173. ex Dione.
they are given up unto a reprobate sense, and now they are become of all men
most savage and cruel; I will set down but one example of their savagenesse
and cruelty; Dion writes, that in the last days of Traian the Emperor, the
Jews who dwelt in Cyrene (Andreas being their Captain) did indifferently so
barbarously kill both the Romans and the Greeks, and would set down their
flesh prepared on the tables to be eaten; neither would this content them, but
they pulled out their bloody intralles, and girded themselves about with them,
as though they had been girdles; and they used their skins for clothes, and
many of them they cut in pieces, and some of them they threw to the beasts,
and others they compelled to fight and kill one another; and this way they
killed more than 200000. This their barbaritie they exercised also in Egypt and
Cyprus, (Arteinon being their Captain) and they killed above 400000. and
therefore afterward it was established by a law, that if a Jew upon any
occasion came into the I Will of Cyprus, that he should be presently executed: The
Lord gave them over to this reprobate sense that they became like Wolves, and
not men, because they shed the blood of our Lord, and for this cruel murder
of Christ see how the Lord pays them home again in the destruction of
Jerusalem, by Titus and Vaspasian, the sword, the famine, and the pestilence:
These three great soldiers of the Lord entered into Jerusalem, and they strove
which of them three should most severely revenge their cruelty: Read but the
history of Josephus of the destruction of Jerusalem, and thine eyes will fail
with tears, and thy bowels will be troubled within thee for the destruction of
poor Jerusalem.

The judgment upon their bodies.
The second judgment was the judgment upon their bodies; as the Lord set a
mark upon Cain, Genesis 4.15. and smote his enemies the Philistines in the hinder
part, Psalm. 78.56. and the posterity of Gehezi with a leprosy: So it is
holden by many that the Jews have a loathsome and stinking smell, and (...), a
stinking breath. When Marcus the Prince was going to Egypt, as he past through
Canaan, he was much troubled with a loathsome smell and stink of the Jews (as
Marcellinus calls it) and being much wearied amongst them, Caelius lib. 5. cap
9.
he cried out, O Marcomannt, O guad, O Sarmati, tandem alios vobis inertiores
comperi, O ye Marcomanni, O ye Guadi, O ye Sarmatians, at last, I have found
out a more loathsome people than any of you.

The judgment upon their persons.
The third judgment is the judgment upon their persons, that they are
miserable cati^es, and slaves now through the world; compare but this
captivity now, and their former captivities, and this shall be evident.

First, A difference betwixt this captivity and their former captivitives.
in all their other captivities the Lord has set down a time for their
deliverance, That in Egypt they should be 400. years; in Babylon. 70. years:
under Antiochus three years and ten days, Dan. 7.25. but the Lord has set
down no time now when this their captivity shall end.

Secondly, in their other captivities there were always Joseph with Pharaob in
Egypt, Daniel in Babylon, and Mordecai in Susan: but now they have none to
speak favorably for them at the hands of Princes.

Thirdly, in their other captivities there were Prophets sent from the Lord to
comfort them; as Moses Aaron were sent to Egypt, Ezekiel and Daniel, were sent
to Babylon; And Saint Peter writes to the dispersed Jews in Pontus and
Bithynia, but now the Sun is gone down over their prophets, and the day is
dark over them, Mica 3.6.

Fourthly, in their other captivities they had (...), Rosh hagalloth, (...)
the prince of the captivity who ruled and guided them, and they had one of
them in Babylon which was the chief city of the East, 1 Pet. 5.15. And
another who dwelt at Alexandria in Egypt; but now they have none to rule them.

Fifthly, although they were under the dominion of Damascus, and others else
where, Act. 18.15. in matters of religion they were subject to the high priest,
and they had power to apprehend and to whip, Act. 5 4. Hence is that saying of
Pilat, Go ye and judge according to your Law, but now they have no such
privilege.

Babylon, and some of them to the Medee and Persians, but now they are (...),
scattered throught the whole corners of the earth, through Asia, India, Persia,
and Babylon.

Babylon they had learned Universities and famous Schools, as Nehardigna, Sora
and Pambeditha, and those were in the place of the great Synedrion to them at
that time, and then the dispersed Jews consulted with them; Rab. Abraham, In
I^chasin, Fol. 38. page 1.
but now they have no such Universities, nor schools of learning.

Eighthly when they were in the other captivities, the expectation of the true
Messiah comforted them: And this they illustrate by this parable; A certain
man while he was carrying a lamp in his hand in the night, the wind blows it
out, R. Moses Hadarsan in genesis cap. 1 Psalm. 36. ver. 9.
but he blows it in again and kindles the light again, and this he does
four or five times, then he says to himself, How long shall I strive this
ways, ever while the morning star Lucifer appears. So they say, they were
captives in Egypt, there the light was put out, but by the ministry of Moses
and Aaron it was lighted again: so they were oppressed by the Philistines, by
Iabin and by Sysera, then the light was put out, but by the help of the judges
they were delivered, and the light was kindled again: so they were carried to
Babylon, there the light was put out, and they were delivered by Cyrus, there
the light was lightened again, Jacob says Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy
salvation: The Caldee paraphrast paraphraseth it thus, Non expecto Salutare
Gedeon filij Ioaz, qua salus transitoria est, Sed expecto redemptionem filij
David, qui venturus est accersendam sibi filios Israel, cujus redemptione^
desiderat anima men; I wait not for the ^eliverance of Gideon the son of
Ioah, whose deliverance is but transitory; but I wait for the redemption of
the son of David, who is to come, and to gather the sons of Israel to him,
and for this redemption my soul longs: the expectation of the Messiah only
comforted them in all their captivities; therefore he was called the
consolation of Israel, Esaias 49.3. then they waited for the morning star
Christ, 2 Pet. 1.19. who should free them altogether, Isa. 11. I shall take
away the yoke of your captivity for my anointed sake; But now they dispite
the true Christ, therefore what comfort can they have in their captivity?

If any man should ask a Jew now, why this their captivity lasts longer then
any of their former captivities, they answer that this is the sin of the
golden calfe which our fathers worshipped, that has procured this captivity
upon us, and they have this saying commonly in their mouths, Non accidit tibi
O Israel ulla ultio, in qua non sit uncia de iniquitate vituli, That is, there
is no punishment which befalles thee O Israel, In which there is not one ounce
weight of the sin of the golden calfe; But God visits not the sins of the
fathers upon the children, unless they follow their fathers footsteps, and
approve their sin; But the Jews at this day abhor all Idolatry, Romans
2.22. wherefore this cannot be the cause of their long captivity; But all the
Jews to this day approve their predecessors fact in killing the Lord of glory,
therefore it is for this bloody fact that they are so long in captivity, and
servitude now.

The fourth Judgment is the Judgment upon their land Canaan, which was before
like the garden of Eden, The fourth Judgment upon their land.
Ezech. 36.35. and a land which the Lord God cared for, and his eyes were upon
it from the beginning of the year to the end, Duet. 11.12. and so fertile that
it brought forth thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold, Mat. 13.8. But the Lord
turned it to a barren wilderness, for the wickedness of them that dwelt in it,
Psalm. 107.34. If the mountains of Gilboa were accursed, because Saul and
Jonathan were killed their, that neither dew nor rain should fall upon them
for the field of offering, 2 Samuel 1.21. much more was this land cursed for the
killing of Christ: Before they killed the Lord, the plow man overtooke the
reaper, and the treader of grapes him that sowed seed, Amos 9.3. that is, the
old reached to the new; but now small is the increase of that land, when they
sow an Homer, It was first terra intactasive virgo before they manured it.
Secondly, terra maritata, and thirdly, terra vidua.
they get an ephah, Esaias 5.10. that is, but the tenth grain now where they had
great increase before, See Hag. 2.16. Before terra erat maritata, Esa 62.4.
their land was married when it was manured and labored, but now it is terra
vidua, and rests her Sabbothes; now no Jew possesses a foot broad in Canaan,
nor in any part of the earth have they any possession; they are not only
cursed from the heaven, but also from the earth, that is, there is a curse upon
their very earthly things.

Lastly, there was a curse upon their goods; because of the diverse taxations
and tributes which was laid upon them; for first, they were taxed, Luke 2.21.
under the president Cyrenus in Syria, then more particularly by Quirinus, but
after the destruction of Jerusalem, they were hardly tasked where ever they
lived, as under Hadrian the Emperor, Suetonius in Domitiano cap. 12.
insomuch that they searched a Jew who was 99. years of age, whether he was
circumcised or not, to make him pay his tribute. Nerva the Emperor being
ashamed of this, prohibited that they should be searched after this manner, as
is evident by the inscription upon his coin; Calumnia fisci Iudaici sublata,
yet he released them not of their tribute: So they were heavily taxed in
Mesopotamia under Trajan, and in Beteir under Hadrian.

Object. But we see many of the Jews very rich, and abounding in earthly
things?

Answ. The rich which the Jews possess now have Gods curse mingled with them.
These earthly things which they possess in the midst of their plenty there
is a curse upon them; as Abimelech had a kingdom, yet there was a curse upon
it, that never ceased until he was rooted out of the kingdom; So upon the
quails which the Israelites had there was a curse: So Ahabs vineyard had a
curse with it; so Gehezi his money; and thus the Lord joins a curse with those
temporal things which he bestows upon the Jews, that they are not
comfortable to them.

When the Lord was to reject the Jews, he wrote the bill of divorce, but he
gave it not presently after to them; for there intervened a time betwixt the
writing of the bill, and the giving of the bill to the party divorced; he gave
not this bill of divorce to them, until this last, (...), or Racematio was
gathered in, they had fallen away from the Lord a long time before he gave them
this bill of divorce, and upon their part they were not his people, but yet
upon Gods part they were still his people, until he gave them the bill of
divorce he did not as yet, (...), or (...), but suffered them a while, he said
not to them as yet (Esto expulsa ame, and licita cuivis viro) which were the
words of the bill of divorce. The Lord gave the Jews sundry warnings before
their rejection.


He gave them sundry warnings of their rejection, before he rejected them. The
first was, Matthew. 12.16. And he charged them not to make him known, that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Isaias, Behold my servant
whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased; I will put my
spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the Gentiles. The Lord forbade
the clouds to drop any more upon his Vineyard, Esa. 5. because he was to
turn himself to the Gentiles, this was the first warning of their rejection.

The second warning, Math. 21.41. Mark 12.9. They say unto him, he will
miserably destroy those wicked servants: When they understood that this parable
was spoken of them, then they would not answer, least they should seem to
condemn themselves; but Christ pronounced this sentence, that he would
destroy those wicked men; which, when the Pharisees heard, they said (...), God
forbid, understanding that this was spoken against them, Mat. 21.25.
Wherefore when Matthew says, the Pharisees answered to Christ (malos male
perdat) he respects the Pharisees mind, and what they thought, but they
repressed themselves; and there is a trajection here; for after the 41. verse.
the 43. should be subjoyned, and then the 42. and then the 44. and so Christ's
speech is made plain, which otherwise seems to be obscure.

Matthew. 23.38. Behold your house is left unto you desolate, for I say unto you,
ye shall not see me henceforth until ye say, Blessed is he who comes in
the name of the Lord.

Act. 13.46. Seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life; Lo we turn to the Gentiles. Then the Apostles shook off
the dust of their feet against them, v. 51. which was a military sign of old,
whereby they knew that the enemy was approaching for their destruction, when they
saw the horses approaching near unto them, and raising the dust with their
feet against them, then they might know that their destruction was at hand. So
the Jews might know by the Apostles shaking off the dust of their feet, that
there was no peace for them any more, but their destruction was at hand, when
they had fallen away now (...), and (...).

SECT. 6. Whether the Jews are to be suffered in a Christian common wealth or
not?
THe Jews are to be tolerated amongst Christians now, when they are out of
the Covenant, as they did tolerate us Gentiles when we were out of the
covenant.

When the gentiles were out of the covenant there were three sorts of them, We
should use the Jews now as they used us gentiles when we were out of the
covenant.
first the strangers that were strangers by birth, by affection, and religion:
secondly those who were strangers by birth and religion, but not in affection,
that is, those strangers who dwelt peaceable amongst them, although they were
not Proselytes and converted to their religion, yet they permitted them to
dwell amongst them: the third sort were Proselytes and gentiles converted, and
they enjoyed all the privileges which the Jews themselves enjoyed.

These that were Jews by birth they called Hebraeos ex haebreis, Phil. 3.5.
That is, whose parents were both hebrews; so he whose father was an Hebrew,
and his mother a stranger, he needed not to be made a proselyte, he was (...)
indigena, a natural Israelite, but if his father was a stranger and his mother
an Israelite, he was but alienigena, and behooved to be made a Proselyte before
he was to be admitted to the society of Israel; but most of all those, whose
Parents both father and mother were strangers were not to be admitted to their
society, until they were made proselytes, and those they called bagbag by a
contraction, for ben gar filius gentilis viri, the son of a man who was a
Gentile and ben giorith, that is, the son of a woman who was a Gentile.

The Jews who are Jews both by birth religion and affection should not be
tolerate amongst Christians.
So the Jews, now who are Jews by birth, religion, and affection, that is, who
hate Christ and Christian religion, who rail against him, and blaspheme him,
these should not be tolerated in a Christian Commonwealth; who say they are
Jews, but they are of the Synagogue of Satan Revel. 2.9. These should be put
to death, as the blasphemer who blasphemed the name of the Lord was put to
death Levit. 24. So should they now, and if a Christian who incalls upon
Christ, and blasphemes God the father should dye the death; So should a Jew who
incalls upon God and blasphemes Christ, dye the death. Nehemiah when he heard
the children speak half the language of Ashdod; he contended with the men,
and plucked off their hair, Nehem. 13.25. Much more should the Christian
Magistrate cut off the heads of these blasphemers who blaspheme the name of
Christ.

Those that were strangers by birth and religion but not in affection were
tolerated amongst them.
The second sort of strangers who dwelt among the Jews, and were tolerated by
them, were Gentiles by birth and religion, but not in affection, and they were
called advenae portae, the strangers within thy gate, Exo. 20. Those strangers
were bound to cease from their labors upon the Sabbath, Maimo. Hall cap. 8.12.
and 13.
and to learn the seven precepts of Noah, that they might be drawn piece and
piece to aliking of the Jewish religion: so the Jews who live amongst the
Christians now, who are Jews both by birth and religion, but not in affection,
they may be advenae portae to us, strangers permitted to dwell within our
gates, If they dwell peaceably amongst us, and abstain from offenses, and some
short principles of Christian religion should be taught unto them, as the
gentiles who were advenae portae learned the seven precepts of Noah.

Obj. He that worships not the true God should not be permitted in a christian
common weal; those Jews worship not the true God; therefore they are not to
be suffered in a christian common wealth.

Answ. Those who through ignorance worship not the true God, and of whose
conversion there is hope, those may be suffered in a christian common wealth.

Quest. How did the Jews tolerate Herod to be their King being an Edomite?

Answ. The Edomites were their brethren, Deuteronomy. 23.7. thou shall not abhor an
Edomite, for he is thy brother, the Edomits might enter into the congregation
unto the 3. generation Deu. 23.8. that is, they might marry with them, and they
might have a charge among them; but the Moabites might not enter into the
congregation unto the tenth generation, Deuteronomy. 23.3. that is, they might neither
marry with them, neither might they have any charge in Israel.

Now let us consider what benefits the Jews may enjoy among us christians, and
what not. What benefits the Jews may enjoy amongst us Christians Tertullian ad
Scapulam.


First the Jews are not to be compelled to christian religion, Tertullian, Non
(est inquit) religionis cogere religionem, quae sponte suscipi debet, non vi,
It is not the part of religion to compel a man to religion, which should be
willingly professed, and not by compulsion. So Bernard fides (inquit) suadenda
est, and non cogenda, so they should not be compelled to be baptized, Cransius,
lib. 5. cap. 14.
for many of them who have been compelled to be baptized, have fallen back
again to their vomit of Iudaisme.

Quest. Whether may they be tolerated to circumcise their children now or not,
How the Jews may be tolerated to circumcise their children now
for Paul says Gal. 5.4. If ye be circumcised Christ is become of no effect
to you, and ye are fallen from grace?

Answ. Those who have received the Gospel, and have been baptized, if they be
circumcised, they are fallen from grace; but these Jews who stand still in
Iudaisme; their circumcision to them is not a falling from grace, but a
confirming of them in their former Iudaisme; One who uses always to eat
poison from his infancy, If he eat a poysonable thing it will do him no
harm, But if one who is bred with wholesome meats should eat poison, it
would presently poison him; So circumcision to those Jews who are bred in
judaisme is not deadly, but to these who are baptized and profess christianity
it is deadly.

When christians do tolerate the Jews who dwell amongst them to circumcise
their children, this makes not their circumcision lawful, but only tolerable:
there are two sorts of relaxation of a law; the first is, when that is
permitted lawfully to be done, Two sorts of relaxation of a law.
which was unlawful before; Example. 1 King. 5.6. Hiram commands wood to be
cut for the building of the temple of Ierusasalem, that is he permitts it to
be done; here his permission makes it lawful, which was not lawful before:
There is another sort of relaxation of a law, when that is permitted or
tolerated to be done which is not lawful to be done; (although it be
permitted) no more then it was before the^ permission; as when a magistrate
tollerates a thing which he cannot hinder, this thing becomes not lawful by
his tolleration, but he tollerates it, because he cannot hinder it; As Moses
did tolerate the bill of divorce for the hardness of the Jews hearts: So when
the christians tolerate the Jews to circumcise their children: this is for
the hardness of the Jews hearts; for the Jews would not live amongst
christians unless they were tolerated to circumcise their children: things
commanded are bona, things forbidden are mala, and things permitted are non
bona, as circumcision is to them when they use it.

Their Synagogues may be permitted to them.
Their Synagogues should also be permitted to them, and their (...) or
oratories, for when there is a permissio^ to them granted to worship there must
be a place granted also to worship in; this is not the tolleration of a false
religion to permit them to read the law as if they should tolerate the
Alkaron to be read in their synagogues, for the word of God is still the word
of God, although they abuse it to a wrong end: Justinian in constitutione clxvi.
The Jews had a privilege granted by the Emperor Justinian to read in their
synagogues, either the Hebrew or the 70. translation; and howsoever the Jews
abuse this word to a wrong end in reading of it, yet it is the word of God
still, and they should be tolerate to read it, providing that they bring not
in their blasphemous interpretations upon it. Christians may not tolerate
forcerie amongst them, because it is evil in it self, yet they may tolerate
an Idolater to swear by his Idol in making a covenant with them, because that
is but vitium personae, for to make a covenant is not unlawful, and to swear
is not unlawful: It is but a thing unlawful to them, and if they pleased they
might swear by the true God; so the reading of the word of God is unlawful to
the Jew, but per accidens.

It was forbidden to the christians to marry with them; Canon (cave Christian)
15. and cap. 17. siquis Iudaice, Eze. 28. quest. 1. ex concilio Tolitano. cap.
4.62.
but if it fell out that they were both Jews who married, and one of them were
converted to the christian faith, then the Church ordaines Transibunt filij
minores in infidelitate nati in favorem fidei, and a parente infideli
separabuntur ne ejus involvantur erroribus; that is, if one of the parents
become a christian, then he or she who are christians shall have the charge in
bringing up the young ones, that they be not nuzled up in the infidelity of
the parent who remains an infidel.

As for their servants; Concilio Tolitano, Tom. 4. cap. 59. and cap. 11.
it was forbidden that a christian should serve a Jew Prohibitum christianis
cujus cunque sexus famulitio domestico inservire Iudeis.

Amongst the Jews an Hebrew might serve an Hebrew; secondly, an heathen might
serve an Hebrew; thirdly, an Hebrew might serve a converted gentile, but he
might not serve a Gentile not converted?

A Christian might not serve a Jew, yet they tolerate that a Jew may serve a
christian.

Quest. What if a Christian had three serving him, a Jew, a Turk, and a
Christian, the Turk observes the friday, the Jew the Saturday, and the
Christian the Sunday, might the master compel his Christian servant to work
upon the Sunday as he might compel the Turk to work upon the Friday, and
the Jew upon the Saturday?

Answ. There is not the like reason in these, for the observing of the Sunday
is Gods ordinance and the Church determinate so. The observing the Saturday was
one of Gods ordinances, but not now, and the observing of the Friday was never
Gods ordinance. On that day the servant is the Lords freeman. The Hebrews call
slaves (...), Sen. lib. 3. de. beneficiis.
Rev. 18.13. because their bodies are only subject to their masters but not
their souls, Seneca, servitus in totum hominem non descendit and pars melior
ejus est excepta, In fine de controversia infidelium lib. 31. tit. 34.
corpora obnoxia sunt, and ad scripta dominis, sed men's quidem, sui juris est.
They have forbidden the Christians to dwell with the Jews, to eat with them,
to wash with them in the same bath, to nourish their children, or to take
physic from them, or to bury with them.

In the third estate those who are Jews neither in affection nor in religion,
although they be Jews by birth, yet when they join themselves to the
christian Church and become advenae Iustitiae they should enjoy all the
privileges which the Christians enjoy. Many benefits have the Christian Church
gotten from the Jews.


Many are the benefits which the Christian Church has gotten from the
converted Jews; Hierom learned first the Hebrew tongue of a Jew who became a
christian, Epist. 4. ad Rufinum. So in his preface upon Daniel, and 24. years
afterward when he returned out of Egypt to Jerusalem, and was taught by one
Barabanus of whom he makes mention, Epist. 65. qui timebat Iudaeos, and mihi
alterum exhibebat Nicodemum, because he came to him in the night, for fear of
the Jews (as Nicodemus did to Christ) and after that he had a third master of
a Jew from Tiberias, of whom he makes mention in his preface of the book of
the Chronicles, and last he had a master a Jew who taught him the Chaldee
tongue, of whom he makes mention in his preface upon Daniel: Hierom therefore
that famous translater of the bible was first beholding to the Jews, and we to
them for his pains. In time of the Goths Iulianus a converted Jew was a
Bishop in Spain, Paulus Burgensis a bishop afterward of a Jew became a
Christian. So Nicolaus Lyra of a Jew became a Christian. So was Antonius
Margarita a baptized Jew, and professed the Hebrew language at Lipsia in
Germany; Dictum Elia de Paulo Phagio.
so was Immanuel Tremelius a baptized Jew; The Jews say of Rabbi Moses Bar
Maimon; that from Moses to Moses there arose not such a Moses; so they say of
Paulus Phagius because he was very skilful in their tongue) to us christians; A
Paulo Tarsensi ad Paulum Phagium non fuit talit Paulus, from Paul the Apostle
who was bred at Tarshis to Paulus Phagius there was not such a Paul; so we may
say from Immanuel Jesus Christ to Immanuel Tremelius there arose not such an
Immanuel.

SECT. 8. Of the lets and hindrances of the conversion of the Jews.
THe lets and hindrances that hinder the Jews conversion are of two sorts;
first, the impediments which come from themselves, and secondly, that come from
others.

The first let of the conversion of the Jews.
The first maine let of the conversion of the Jews, is because the veil lies
upon their hearts unto this day, 2 Cor. 3.14. The veil put upon Moses his face
signifies that they could not look unto the end of the Law, Jesus Christ.
Moses his face so shined, that the Israelites could not behold the brightness
of it, therefore he was compelled to put a veil upon his face, but when his
face was veiled this ways, they could not behold his face, therefore he
behoved to unvaile it again; and the signification of it was this, that the
Law first, and of it self threatens us and curses us: these threatenings and
curses of the Law the earnall Jews could not abide; therefore the Law was
veiled to them, until the Spirit came and took away the veil, and then they
began to look unto the end of the Law, Jesus Christ.

Quest. Whether did Moses cover his face that the Israelites might not see it
or not?

Answ. Moses did not put a veil upon his face, that the Israelites might not
see his face, but because they could not behold his face, therefore he covered
his face, and (...), here is put for (...), as Matthew. 19.8. Moses himself knew
not that his face did shine, when he came down from the mountain, until he
perceived it by the people, who desired him to put a veil upon his face when
he spoke with the people; but when he went before the Lord to speak with
him, he took the veil off his face, Exodus 34.34. And the signification of it
was this, that Moses his ministry in giving of the law, as it respected Gods
purpose, was glorious and shining; for Christ is the end of the Law to all
believers, Romans 10.4. but when he turned to the people then he was veiled, to
signify that the law which was given to them a carnal people, was a veiled
law still; Moses knew not that his face did shine, and the signification of it
was this, that it belongs not to Moses which is the minister only of the
letter of the Law, to know these mysteries of the Gospel, but it belongs only
to the spirit, who takes away this veil that those mysteries may be
manifested, and to show that the end of the Law is Jesus Christ.

He will take away the veil: An allusion to the veil which was put on women's
heads.
The Apostle alludes here to the use of the veil, which was amongst the Jews;
for the women, when they were married to their husbands, they put a veil upon
their head, in token of subjection to their husbands. So the Jews were married
to the Law first, as to a husband, and were in subjection to it; but now being
dead to the Law, they are married to Christ, Romans 7.4. When this veil which
was a sign of their subjection and blindness shall be taken away, then they
shall behold Jesus Christ the end of the Law, as in a most clear glass, and
their eyes shall not be dazzled, as they were when they beheld Moses; but it
shall be a most pleasant and comfortable sight unto them.

Moses understood not this, that his face did shine, The Patriaches and
Prophets understood not many things whereof they were types.
or what it meant: Hence we may learn that the fathers understood not many
types, yea, not those things whereof they were types themselves: Example, Noah
and his household saved in the Arc, and the world drowned, was a type of our
baptism, the regenerate and new man in baptism is saved, and the old man
drowned; as Noah and his household were saved, and the world drowned; yet Noah
understood not this. So when the Israelites passed through the red sea, and
Pharaoh, and his army drowned; this was a type of our baptism, 1 Cor. 10. and
yet Moses understood not this: So when Jonas was three days in the Whales
belly he was a type of Jesus Christ, who was three days in the heart of the
earth, yet Jonas understood not this; So Moses understood not what this veil
put upon his face meant. This should teach us to be thankful to the Lord who
has revealed unto us now both the things signified, and the types.

The second let of the conversion of the Jews.
The second reason which hinders their conversion is, that they look only upon
Christ's infirmities; they were offended at the baseness of his country;
Nathaneel himself took exception against him for this; Can any good thing
come out of Nazaret* so for his parentage, We know whence this man is, Ier.
7.27. and Matthew. 13.55. Is not this the Carpenters son, and are not his
brethren with us. And at his wisdom, verse. 54. But most of all they stumbled
at his infirmities, and base estate upon the cross; (...)
Christ became Ben Adam for us; so he became Ben Enosh for us: As he became a
man for us; so he became an infirm and weak man for us clothed with our
infirmities; Read the 53. of Isaias, and ye shall see what baseness he was
subject to, separate and set a part like a Leper, that men should turn away
their faces from him, and not look upon him, and that he should be a worm
and no man. Psalm. 22. Rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
griefs.

The ancient Jews themselves confessed this that the Messiah should be laden
castigationibus, quasi molaribus lapid bus. R. Jacob being asked what the name
of their Messiah should be, Haec in Thalmud. hece tractatu de Sanedrim.
Answered, that he should be called Leprosus, a Leper, alluding to that of the
53. of Isaias: These infirmities should not make them to reject him, if they
look with a spiritual eye upon him; but because they look with a carnal eye
only upon him, they wait for a glorious Messiah, but the Lord foretold them by
Daniel, that Christ's kingdom should not be a flourishing kingdom, by that
vision which was shown to Nebuchadnezar of the four Monarchies, represented
by the four metals, by gold, silver, brass, and iron; yet a little stone
hewed without the hand of man should break them all to pieces: It was but a
little stone, baser than any of the metals, to show us, that although Christ's
kingdom in outward show should be a base kingdom, wanting all worldly help,
yet it should overthrow those great monarchies.

The third let of their conversion, The third let of the conversion of the
Jews.
is the misapplication of the Scriptures: When the Ethiopian did read the
Prophecy of Isaiah, Act. 8.34. he doubted whether the Prophet Esaias spoke of
himself or of another there; and that he might not apply the, Scripture
falsely, therefore Philip was sent to him to teach him, but those unstable
souls wrest the Scripture (...) a speech borrowed from those who put a man
upon a rack, which causes the man to speak that which he never meant: So
these make the Scriptures to speak that which they never meant: He that
churnes milk, shortly brings forth butter, and he that wrings the nose brings
forth blood Pro. 30.33. So those who strain the Scriptures, bring forth a
wrong sense. Take but this one example of wrong application, Esa. 53.8. a
praevaricatione populi mei percussio ei infligitur, for the transgression of my
people was he stricken: but the Jews perversely read the words after this
manner, for the transgression of my people they were stricken; and Abenezra
gives the reason; because Lamo signifies many, and not one: So A. Brabaniel
commenting upon, Esa. 53.^5. says, that La^^^ is spoken still of more, and not
of one; but we have proofs every where that (more) is spoken of one, (...)
and not of many, Ps. 11.7. Esaias 44.15. Job 27.23. and Job 20.23. The Jews
since they gave Jesus Christ vinegar and gall to drink, the Scripture to them
is never sweet as the honey, and the honey comb.

The fourth let of the conversation of the Jews.
The fourth reason that lets their conversion is, because they read only the
five books of Moses now, neglecting the Prophets; they are wonderful ignorant
in them, where their testimonies are clearest concerning Christ; and
notwithstanding the Prophets are called mickra from kara, legere, yet they
read them not; and therefore they are justly compared Le almonoth haiioth,
(...)
vivis viduis, to living widows, whose husbands love strange women, but
neglect their own wives at home; so the Jews delight to read their Talmud,
and Mishna, and Cabala, and such trash, and neglect the holy Prophets.

The fifth let of the conversion of the Jews. (...)
The fifth reason which hinders their conversion is, because they follow not the
literal sense of the Scripture, but run into Allegories, and they call these
allegories dabhor gadol, rem maximam. And the literal sense of the Scripture
they call dabhor caton, rem minor^s momenti, (...)
a thing of little worth; and they compare the literal sense of the Scripture
to an half penny candle, but the mystical sense of the Scripture they
compare to a precious pearl, which when it is lying hid in some dark corner
of the house, yet by the literal sense the half penny candle they find out
their precious allegories, and that every Scripture has in it keliphoth and
labhoth, (...)
corda and crustas, the shell and the kernel, the shell they make the literal
sense, and the allegorical the kernel.

The sixth let of the conversion of the Jews.
The sixth reason which hinders their conversion, is, because they prefer the
Talmud to the Scriptures; and they say that the text of the Scriptures is like
water, and Mishua like wine, and the Talmud like spiced wine, Talmud in
Masighta cap. 15. halicha 7 and sequente 8.
and that it is not possible that a man may want water, wine, or spiced wine;
but he that is a rich man or a learned scribe, should have all the three in
readiness; (...)
So they compare the Law to salt, Mishna to pepper, and the Talmud to spices:
when a child is five years old, they admit him to read the bible, when he is
ten years old, he is to read Mishna, Mishna they call those traditions which
Moses delivered to them by word.
and when he is thirteen year old, he is filius praecepti, and eats the
passover, and observes their purifications; but when he is fifteen year
old, then they will have him to read the Talmud: but the high mystery of
Ezekiels chariot, (...)
Ezech. 1. which they call opus Merkabha, they will not have him to read,
before he be sixty years old. Therefore when Iohannan offered to teach
Eleazar his Scholar opus de Merkabha, he answered very modestly Lo kashei non
incanui, as Aristotle says, Invenis non est Idoneus auditor moralis
Philosophiae, (...)
A young man is not fit to be a scholar in moral Philosophy; so they say
that young men were not fit to hear that great mystery of Merkabha before
they were sixty years of age.

Although there be some good sayings in the Talmud, which may serve us to
clear some places of Scripture, yet they should not dote up on it, and neglect
the holy Scriptures: R. Eleazer said well, Calefacias te ad ignem sapientum,
sed cave a prunis earum ne forte ad^raris, warm thy self at the fire of wise
men, but take heed that thou be not burnt with the coals; so malegranatum
invenisti meditullio, ejus vescere at putame^ secerne, thou have found a
pomgranate, eat the kernel, but take heed of the shell.

The seventh impediment is this, The seventh let of the conversion of the Jews.
they will not suffer their children to be brought up in humane learning, and
humane sciences; but they accursed him, qui ^luerit su^m aut didicerit
sapientiam Graecorum, Vide secundam prefationem Eli^ in Mazoreth.
that is, who feeds a Sow, and learnes the arts and sciences which the
Greeks profess, and therefore Omnis exotica lingua est illis Barbara, all
other tongues are barbarous to them, and they accurse him as Anathema, and
descendit ad infer^s, qui docet discipulum quem non deberet, that is, who
teaches a scholar who is a Gentile. Elias Levita was greatly hated amongst his
country men, because he taught the Cardinal of Viterbia, and some other
Italians the Hebrew tongue.

Reasons proceeding from others which let the Jews conversion.
There are other lets hindering the conversion of the Jews which proceed not
from themselves but from others: As first, the profane conversation of the
Christians is a great let to their conversion: The Lord objected to the Jews
that his name was evil spoken of amongst the Gentiles for their cause; so the
Lord may justly now object to the Christians, that they make his name to be
evil spoken of amongst the Jews.

The second reason of hindering their conversion is the Idolatry of the
Christians, when they see Images set up and worshipped in their temples,; they
call their temples Beth turphan, (...)
domum turpitudinis; and when they see the Popish priests, they call them
heathenish priests, or Camilli. The heathen brought in the abomination of
desolation in the temple, Cassiodorus in chronico suo.
of purpose to offend the Jews: So Elias Hadrianus the Emperor, when he built
Jerusalem again, and called it Elium, that he might offend the Jews the more,
he set in the frontispice of the temple a sow graven out in marbell stone.

Lastly, the Papists offend the Jews, when they paint Moses, with horns, as
we see him painted so in some of their Popish churches: the reason why they
paint him so, was the mistaking of the word Keren, which signifies both a
horn, and splendour, or brightness.

SECT. 8. Of the third estate of the Jews when they shall be Ruchama, and
first of their calling again.
THings that are impossible with men are possible with God, Ruchama,
Matthew. 19.26. When the children of Israel were in captivity in Babylon, who
would have thought that ever they should have returned out of it again. It
seemed like a dream unto themselves, and yet by that we may be led to consider
the estate of the captivity of the Jews now. Types showing to the Jews their
restitution from the captivity of Babylon.


When the Jews were to go to the captivity of Babylon, there was little hope
of their return out of the captivity, and far less when they lay so long
in the captivity; yet the Lord did show them their restitution by sundry types.

First, by Jeremy, The type shown to Jeremy.
when they were to go to the captivity; Jeremy bought a field in Anathoth
from his Uncles son Hananeel, Ier. 32. because the right of the inheritance
was his, and the redemption of the land, he subscribed the evidences, he sealed
them and took witnesses, and weighed to him the money in balances, he took
also the evidences of the purchase, both that which was sealed according to the
Law and custom, and that which was open; first, he took that which was sealed
according to the Law, that is, the letters in the which the commandment of God
given to the Prophet, was set down, and a particular description of all the
cautions which concerned the right: then there was an open contract which was
confirmed by the Magistrate: Then he gave the evidents of the purchases to
Baruch the son of Merajah in the sight of Hananeel his Uncles son, and in the
presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of purchase, and before all
the Jews that sat in the court of the prison, after that he charged Baruch
before them all, in the name of the Lord of Hosts; and put them in an earthen
vessel, that they might continue for many days; Now when they had remained
long in the captivity, and Jeremy and Hananeel his Uncles son were dead, and
the Jews who sat in the court of the prison, who would ever have thought that
any should have come home to have possessed the land of Anathoth again, but
yet the contract was extant, which was kept in an earthen vessel all this
time, and some of Ieremies posterity came home and inherited that piece of
ground in Anathoth: So although the Jews now have lien long under the
captivity, and Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob with many thousands of men are all
gone, yet because the covenant stands, and the contract of purchase; therefore
they shall be restored to be spiritual heirs of the covenant; for Gods mercy
extends it self to a thousand generations.

The second type showed to Jeremiah.
The second type whereby the Lord showed to the Jews that they were to be
called back again from the captivity of Babylon was Ier. 24. the two baskets
of figs, which the Lord showed unto him, the good figs, and the badde
figs; the good figs signified the Jews that were to be called home again
from Babylon, and the evil figs that could not be eaten signified Zedekiah
king of Judah and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem which remained in
the land, and these that dwelt in Egypt, whom the Lord was to deliver to be
removed from all the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach,
and a proverb, a taunt, and a curse in all places, as the Lord had badde
figs then, that were to be destroyed; so the Lord has of this captivity,
now many whom he has destroyed, and made of them a proverb, a taunt, and a
curse amongst the nations; But as all the figs of the first captivity were
not badde, but some were very good figs, like the figs that are first ripe;
so in this captivity now, the Lord has reserved himself whom he minds to
build, and not to pull down again, and to plant, and not to pull up.

The third type of the calling of the Jews from the captivity of Babylon was
shown to Ezekiel, The third type showed to Ezekiel.
chap. 37. a field full of dead bones; when the Lord brought the Prophet, and
showed to him those bones, and asked him, Son of man can these bones live?
and the Prophet answered him, Lord thou know, then the Lord caused these
bones to take sinews and flesh, and skin, and at last there came a wind and
put breath into them, and they did live; there was but small hope that these
bones should live again, yet when the Lord did breath upon them, then they did
live. If a man should look now with a natural eye upon the dead and dry bones
of the captivity of Judah, and were asked (as the Lord demanded the prophet)
whether they should live again or not? all his answer would be this, Lord thou
know; but yet when the wind of Gods grace shall blow again upon them, they
shall revive from death to life, and they shall return from the captivity.

The fourth type of Gods mercy in delivering of the Jews from the captivity of
Babylon was sh^wne to Zachary, The fourth type showed to Zachary.
cap. 5.9. when he saw two women carrying an Ephah betwixt the heaven and the
earth; when they were carrying the wicked Jews to Babylon, yet in the midst of
his anger he remembers mercy, and carries them not on the wings of an Eagle, or
a Kyte, but on the wings of a storke, which signifies mercy, Chasida
misericordia; and why may not the Lord who is gracious and merciful, remember
those poor captives in their long desolation.

Ob. But their sins have been heinous, and great, and many in number?

Answ. But we must remember that where sin abounds there grace abounds
much more, Romans 5.15. and that his mercy is above all his works; The farther
that these poor wretches have fallen from the Lord, his mercy is the more
magnified in recalling of them: Gods mercy and man's misery have not been
unfitlie compared to the sun and the moon, when the moon is farthest from
the sun, then the sun gives his light most brightly to the moon; So when
miserable sinners are farthest from God, then the sun of Righteousness the
Lord Jesus Christ shall be pleased sometimes to shine upon them; And although
their sin were as red as the skarlet, Isa. 1.18. yet he can make them as
white as the wool; The number of their sins cannot hinder the pardon of
them; David says Psalm. 35.7. ini quitates transierunt caput meu^, that is,
they were more in number then the hairs of my head, and yet they hindered not
the pardon of his sins; the Lord would not have Peter to pardon only seven
times, or seven times seven times, but seventie times seventimes, Now if the
Lord will have Peter to do this, how much more will he be ready to pardon, who
is the Ocean of mercy, he that made the eye shall he not see, and he that puts
mercy in others, shall he not be merciful; And if Jonah had pity on his
gourd, that grew up in one night, and withered in another, Jonah 1.10. shall
not the Lord then have pity on his people, who were once a royal generation
and kingly Priesthood. 1. Pet. 2.9.

Ob. But they have been bloody murderers of the Lord of life, blasphemers of
his holy name, and haters of the Gospel, and of all those who in call upon the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ; how can they then be saved? God showing mercy to
Paul a bloody persecutor, shows that God may be merciful to the Jews.


Answ. Consider but the example of Saint Paul, and apply his example to them,
and then ye may see how God shall show mercy upon them; Saint Paul who was a
Pharisee of Pharisees, that is a most precise Pharisee, Act. 26.5. (...), which
signifies a most accurate separation from others; for zeal he persecuted the
church, Phil. 3. and he procured letters to apprehned and bind the poor
Christians, and caused many of them to blaspheme, Act. 26.11. and what if Paul
had been there when Christ was crucified would he not have cried with the rest
of the Jews, away with him, away with him, would he not have said with the
rest, we have no King but Caesar, and let Barrabas live, Whatsoever Christ was
convicted for, of that he absolves his children.
and Christ die; yet for all his sins the Lord has pardoned him, and why may
he not show the like pardon upon these poor sinners; And for there fearful
blasphemies, and many insurrections let us observe but this one comfortable
ground, whatsoever the Lord Jesus Christ was condemned for, that he absolves
his children of; But Jesus Christ was condemned of blasphemy, and affecting of
Caesar's crown; therefore the Lords death shall acquit the repenting Jews of
their blasphemies against him, and of their mutunies and seditions against
Caesar.

Now let us consider more particularly the calling of these Jews: secondly,
the manner how they shall be called: and thirdly; the end of their calling.

The first reason of their calling is taken from the promise Of the calling of
the Jews.
Romans 11.27. The Lord remembers the covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, both ascending and descending, descending he remembers Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, then ascending, Levit. 26.43. I will remember my covenant with Jacob
and my covenant with Abraham; I will remember my covenant made with Jacob in
Bethel, and I will remember my covenant made with Isaac in Mount M^riah, and I
will remember my covenant with Abraham, when he cut the calfe in twain, and
past betwixt the parts thereof, Ier. 34.18. God being mindful of the covenant
loves the Jews, because he loved their fathers, he loves the children also?

Quest. But what hope is there of the salvation of the Jews, seeing they are
enemies to the Gospel?

Answ. They are now (says the Apostle) enemies, but yet this people are
beloved of God, because of the election once made, for his election is not
frustrate for the infidelity of those who hate the Gospel, seeing Gods calling
and election are without change.

There shall come a deliverer from Sion, Romans 11.26. but it is better
translated, Of the calling of the Jews.
there shall come a deliverer to Sion, Est dativus commodi, so Zach. 9.9. a
King shall come to thee, that is, for thy profit, and there shall come a
deliverer to thee; (...)
in the Hebrew it is Goel; Goel was the next of the kindred who had power to
redeem the morgaged lands which their friends had morgaged, and had power to
deliver them when they were captives, and they were the revenger of their
blood; Christ being the Jews Goel he will deliver them from their captivity.

Father forgive them for they know not what they do; Of the calling of the
Jews.
The efficacy of Christ's intercession does not only extend it self to the
Jews who were living then, but also to the posterity to be converted, John
17.20.

Of their calling.
yet the people of the Jews in all those changes and alterations, remained a
people distinguished from all other people by their profession, a people
dwelling by themselves, Number. 23. and having no meddling with other people whom
the Lord would not have slain but scattered, Psalm. 59.11. This shows the
wonderful providence of God over them, and that they are reserved for their
time of calling again.

In the last days there shall be a full conversion of Jews, Of their calling.
Apocal. 7. when the four Angels were forbidden to hurt the earth, and the sea
till those 144000. be sealed in their foreheads, of all the tribes of Israel;
of the tribe of Judah were sealed 12000. and of the rest of the tribes as many,
which prophecy according to the letter is to be understood of the calling of
the Jews, because the Israelites there marked in the forehead, are expreslie
distinguished from the Gentiles, who are marked, and from other languages,
verse 9.

The sixth reason, Hos. 3.4. The children of Israel shall Of their calling.
and without a Teraphim, afterward shall the children of Israel return, and
seek the Lord their God, and David their King; Here are four estates and
conditions of the Jews set down, first when they had their Ephod, and
religiously worshipped the Lord; secondly, when they had their Teraphim, and
were Idolaters; thirdly, in their estate now, when they want both their Ephod
and their Teraphim, that is, they are neither true worshipers of God now,
neither are they Idolaters now (for they hate Idols;) fourthly, when they
shall return to seek the Lord, and David their King, then they shall be
Ruchama.

Saint Paul wishes to be accursed for his brethren the Jews; this desire came
from the holy spirit, therefore Of their calling.
for God and nature does nothing in vain.

Ob. But ye will say, can a man wish his own damnation for the glory of God,
and safety of his Church?

Answ. We have a natural life, and we have a spiritual life; we should
prefer our natural life to another man's natural life: A man is rather bound
to preserve his own life then another man's of equal condition.
A man is bound to preserve his own life, rather then another man's of that
same degree, when only he considers his life as his life; but when there
comes in another respect as for honesty, virtue; or fidelity, one man might
give his life for another, John 15.13. greater love then this has no man, when
one bestows his life for his friend: The two Pythagoreans are much commended
for their mutual friendship one to another, the one of them gave himself a
pledge for the other, that if he should not return at such a day to the
Emperor, then he should die for him; the day coming, and he not appearing,
his friend who lay in pledge for him was adjudged to die for him, and when they
were leading him out to execution, his friend came and redeemed him, and entered
in his place to be executed for him; the tyrant seeing these two such constant
friends he quite them both, and wished earnestly that they would take him in to
be the hird friend to them: Lactantius lib. 5. de institia. cap. 18.
Lactantius infer, upon this, that if it be a glorious thing to die for a
friend, how much more glorious is it to die for Christ.

A man is bound to lay down his natural life for the safety of his superiors.
Secondly, a man is bound to lay down his natural life for the safety of those
who are his superiors; And they put this case, If the King and the subject
were in one ship, or the father and the son, the ship breaks, and there is
but one planke which cannot serve two to swim out upon; In this case the
subject is bound to quite the planke for the safety of his prince, and so is
the son to quite the plancke for the safety of his father, Indignus est vita
qui vitae suae authorem negligit, he is not worthy of life, A man is bound to
lay down his temporary life for the spiritual life of his brother.
who contemnes him who has been the author of his life.

Thirdly, a man is bound to quite his temporary life for the spiritual life
of his brother, as Christ did, 1 Ioh. 3.16. Hereby we may perceive the great
love of God, who was pleased to lay down his life for us, ought not we then
to lay down our lives for our brethren? and verse. 23. This is his Commandment
that we love one another, as he gave commandment. This was his commandment,
Ioh. 15. That ye love one another as I have loved you: And the reason of this
is, because we are members of one body, Ephesians. 4. and 1 These. 2.8. so being
affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not
only the Gospel of God, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto
us. In the natural body one member hazards it self for another, as the hand
for the head; so should the members in the mystical body do.

Fourthly, in the defense of the Church a man may lay down his natural life,
as Sampson did; and we have an example of this, 1 Match. 6.43. of one Eleazar
surnamed Savaran, who perceiving an Elephant greater than all the rest, and
supposing that the King was upon him, verse. 46. he crept under the Elephant,
and thrust him in the belly and slew him, whereupon the Elephant fell down
upon him, and killed him; The fathers do not condemn this act of Eleazar,
Ambros. li. 1. de of ficiis.
but they commend him much for it, in that he lays down his natural life for
the safety of the Church.

Lastly, we are to lay down our temporary life above all for Christ's sake,
as the martyrs did, We are to lay down our temporal life for Christ.
this far we see how we may lay down our natural life for others, but to
lay down our spiritual life for others, that we cannot do; a man may desire
at some times the deferring of the enjoying of the spiritual life for a while
for the good of the Church, Phil. 1.24. but he cannot absolutely wish himself
to be Anathema for the good of the Church: Paul in a supposition wishes rather
that he may be cursed, In a speech jointly taken both the parts may be true
which being separate, the one is true, and the other is false.
then the Jews condemned; but he wishes not this absolutely; In a speech
jointly taken both the parts may be true, which being separate, the one is
true, and the other false: as Elias says to Ahab, The Lord has not spoken by
me if thou return in peace from the battle; this supposition jointly taken is
true, but sever the parts, then the one is true, and the other false, (The Lord
has not spoken by me) that is false, ( Thou shall not return in peace, that
is true. Example 2. Ioh. 21.25. If all that Christ had spoken and done had
been written, then the world could not contain those books (All that Christ
has spoken and done is written) that is false (The world is able to contain
those books which he wrote) that is true. Example 3.1 Cor. 13.1. If I should
speak with the tongue of men and Angels and have not charity, then I am
nothing: Paul to be some thing, that is true, but Paul to be some thing and
want charity, that is false. Example 4. Gal. 1.8. If an Angel from heaven
should preach another Gospel he should not be believed; An Angel to be
believed, that is true, but an Angel to preach another Gospel from heaven,
that is false.

When we desire a thing in complexo, the parts may be true, and yet sever them
they are false.
So when we desire a thing comparatively in complexo, the parts may be true,
but severally we wish them not, Example, 1 King. 3.26. When the mother of the
child wished the child rather to be given to her who was not the true mother
than the child should be cut in sunder, yet she neither wishes the child to be
cut in sunder, nor the child to be given to another: So Saint Paul wishes here
rather than the Jews should be cast away, that he should be Anathema; but he
wishes not absolutely that he should be Anathema, and that the Jews should be
cast away: Consider Paul as only looking to his brethrens salvation, and then
he casts all things behind his back in respect of it: Paul cannot wish this
absolutely to be accursed for his brethren.
but when Paul turns himself to the view of eternal glory, and to the
salvation of his own soul he cannot wish this, to be damned for his brethrens
saftie; for a man's salvation should be dearer to him than all the world, yea,
than the Church it self: This wish then was not an absolute wish which Saint
Paul wishes here, but only it signified his earnest desire to have his
brethren saved; If he had considered this vestitum omnibus circumstantiis, he
could not have wished it; Example, a man is condemned to die for some great
offense, it is lawful for his wife to wish her husband to live, because he is
her husband, and the father of her children; but if she should wish him to
live; and the wish were vestitum omnibus circumstantiis, that is, she wishes
him to live, Paul could not wish this vestitum omnibus circumstantiis.
notwithstanding he has been a notable malefactor and transgressor of the
Law, that way to wish him to live were altogether unlawful: so if Paul wished
the safety of the Jews only respecting their safety, than this was a
lawful wish; but to wish absolutely his own damnation secluding himself from
the Kingdom of God, this had been a sin and altogether unlawful; If ye
consider Paul's wish materially only, Paul may wish this materially, but not
formally.
setting aside other circumstances he might be accursed for his brethren; but
if ye consider his wish formally, with all the circumstances, he cannot be
accursed for them; If ye consider Christ's desire [Let this cup pass.]
materially only, according to Christ's infirmity as he was man, then he
wishes this cup to pass; but when he considers this cup formally with all the
circumstances, then he must drink this cup for to expiate the sins of men,
and satisfy the wrath of God, then he cannot let this cup pass: Paul then
wishing the salvation of the Jews with such an intensive and earnest desire
moved by the Spirit of God to it, his desire must be fulfilled, and shall be
fulfilled in the own time, Every plant which the heavenly father has planted
shall not be rooted up, Math. 15. 13. The Jews are a plant which the heavenly
Father has planted, therefore they shall not be rooted out.

Now we are to remove those objections which seem to deny the conversion of
the Jews.

Object. 1. Let their eyes be dark that they may not see but bow down their
back always, Romans 11.10. Here it might seem that the Apostle foretells the
final rejection of the Jews.

Answ. The Apostle does not foretell here their final rejection, but their
rejection for a time.

Object. 2. Hos. 1.6. I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel, but
I will utterly take them away.

Answ. The Lord shows here that he will not call the ten tribes back
again to Israel, but as for the house of Judah he promises to call them
back, but he promises not utterly to destroy Israel now, but in his own time
to call them back again.

Object. 3. Math. 21. Mark 11. Christ cursed the Figgetree saying, hence forth
thou shall never bare more fruit; and on the morning when the disciples passed
by they saw the Figtree withered up. This tree signified the people of the
Jews, and it may seem that they are so withered that they shall never bare
fruit again.

Answ. Saint Jerome writing upon the second of Habbakkuke says, In seculum
signifies a long time, but in saeculum saeculorum, signifies eternity (...),
here signifies saeculum but not saeculum saeculorum.

Object. 4. 1 These. 2.16. The wrath is come upon them to the uttermost; this
might seem to speak of their final rejection.

Answ. The Apostle only is speaking of the rejection of the Jews for a time,
who lived in his time, and who withstood the Gospel, and that he means not of
a final rejection, it is clear, Romans 11.8. God has given them the spirit of
slumber unto this day; which shows that they shall not be always in this
sleep of slumber.

Object. 5. Luke 18.7. The son of man when he shall come shall scarce find
faith on the earth: then it might seem that there shall not be such a
plentiful harvest in the Jews conversion?

Answ. Although there be a great number of the Jews who shall be called in
the latter times, that if they be compared with the Gentiles who are infidells,
and with those who have heard the Gospel and fallen from it, they shall be
but few compared with them; and where there is greatest hope that faith should
be found, there will be greatest apostasy found, and faith will scarce be
found amongst them.

SECT. 9. Of the manner of the calling of the Jews
AS a wise Physician in curing of a disease remoues the cause first, before he
comes to cure the disease; He will take the veil of the ceremonies from off
their hearts.
the cause why they reject Christ was because the veil lay upon their hearts,
he removes the veil first, and then he cures them, he removes the veil
first, the veil of the ceremonies, Ier. 3.16. In those days says the Lord,
they shall say no more, the arc of the covenant of the Lord, neither shall it
come to mind, neither shall they remember it, neither shall they visit it,
for that shall be no more done; The arc must be removed, the propitiatotie it
self, and the place where the Lord rested, his strength and glory, that which
the Angels delighted with stretched out necks to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. what
should become then of the rest of the beggarly elements, all were to be cast
out: Secondly, he removes those ceremonies which were the sign of the Jews
subjection to the law; He will take away the ceremonies which was a seal of
their subjection to the law. Number. 5.18.
for as a woman when she was married to her husband, put a veil upon her head
in token of subjection to her husband (hence it was that the woman suspected of
adultery stood bareheaded before the priest, and until the time that she was
cleared of that suspicion she was not under her husbands subjection) even so
the Jews so long as they were married to the law, they were covered with this
veil, but being dead to the law they were freed from this husband, and the
Lord took this veil of their hearts.

He will take a stony heart from them and give them a heart of flesh.
Thirdly, because these two vailes had lain so long upon their hearts, they
brought on this great hardness upon them that their hearts became like an
Adamant, Zach. 7.12. The Adamant is so hard a stone that ye can ingrave no
letters upon it until it be steeped in goats blood (as Pliny testifies) so
their hearts were so hard that the law of the Lord could not be written on them
until they were steeped in the blood of Christ, then he writes his law on
them, Ier. 31. This is the first part of the great Physicians cure, then he
will prick and wound their hearts, He will prick and wound their hearts.
he will keep the same order in curing of them which he did at the conversion
of the three thousand who were converted at Peter's sermon; Their hearts were
pricked, Act. 2.37. So shall the hearts of the Jews be pricked and wounded in
their conversion; it will not be a little gash or wound that will open that
impostume; but a great and a deep lancing: then will follow exceeding great
sorrow, and they shall look upon him whom they have crucified; it will not be
the sorrow of the publicane that will do the turn, to knock upon their
breasts, or to cast down their eyes, or to wash their bed with tears as David
did, There mourning will be an exceeding great mourning when they repent.
Psalm 6.6. or to chatter as a swallow or a crane, or mourn as a dove as
Ezekias did, Isa. 38.14. But this must be a great and exceeding great
lamentation, as that which the Jews took up at Hadadrimmon for the death of
Josias, Zach. 12.11. Their eyes did fail with tears, their bowels were
troubled, and their livers were poured out upon the earth, when the breath of
their nostrills the anointed of the Lord was taken, Lamen. 4.20. When Josias
was killed their common wealth decayed, and their Church got a sore blow, Ier.
22.18. They lamented for him as one laments for their brother or sister; Ah my
brother, ah my sister, ah our Lord, ah our glory: They lamented for him as one
mourned for the death of his first begotten son, or his only son, Zach.
12.10. When Josias was killed, there was but a man killed; but when they killed
our Lord, they killed the Lord of glory; when Josias was killed, his death was
honorable to him, he died in the war, 2 Chronicles. 35.24. But when the Jews
killed our Josias, he died an ignominious and shameful death: When Josias was
killed, it was the enemy that killed him, and not they: But the Jews
themselves killed the Lord of glory: when Josias the breath of their nostrils
was killed, be could not breathe life into them again, but our Josias can
breath spiritus vitarum into them, Genesis 2. Therefore here is a greater then
Josias, and his death deserves a greater lamentation.

When they shall behold him, sundry look upon men's miseries diversely; When they
shall behold Christ whom they crucified, then they shall lament bitterly.
some go by with a negligent eye as those who passed by the man that lay
wounded in the high way, Luke 7.11. they scarce took notice of him, neither
were they touched with any compassion. Secondly others behold men's misery with
a gazing eye only, as Jobs friends sat gazing upon him seven days, but with
no compassion; thirdly, some behold their misery, and are touched with some
compassion, as when Ioab had killed Amasa, and lay wallowing in his blood in
the high way, 2 Samuel 22.12. no doubt those who did see him were moved at the
spectacle; fourthly some behold with delight, Ra cum beth, signifies to
behold, with Delight, Micha 4.11. let our eye look upon Sion that is with
delight to behold that which we would have seen.
Psalm. 22.17. they look upon me, see Psalm. 54.9. But the Jews here they
shall behold the Lord with a pitiful eye, as the other was a merciless eye,
Christus patitur jam, and Iudaeus compatitur.

They shall behold him whom they have crucified: Momus complained of nature,
that she made not man with a window in his breast, that man might pry into his
heart, and see what was within the heart; but here the Jews might see when
they pierced the Lords side, what love was in his heart toward them, when he
shed his heart blood for them: when they saw Christ weeping for Lazarus, Ioh.
11. they said, O how he loves him, but they had greater reason to say, O how
he love us, when they saw him shedding his blood for them.

They shall behold him whom they have crucified. When they consider that it was
their sins which crucified him, and that they were the proper cause of his
death: they were not the occasion of his death, The sins were the proper
cause of his death.
as David was of the death of the priests, when they gave him the show bread to
eat, although he takes it upon him, and says that he was the cause of their
death; so they were not causa per accidens of his death, as when Simon of
Syrene carried Christ's cross, he was but accidentally a cause here; they were
not causae adiuvantes, helping causes; neither were they concausae as Pilat was
in the death of Christ, but the proper cause were their great sins: when a
malefactor is executed, we blame not the executioner, we blame not the Judge
by whose sentence he is executed, nor the law, nor the Jury, but only the
miserable malefactor himself; his destruction is of himself: Solum pecatum
homicida est.

They will not deny their sin now as the whore did who wipd her mouth, and
said, she did it not, Prove. 30.20. They will not transfer their sin, as Eva
did upon Adam, and the Jews upon Judas, neither extenuate their sin as Aaron
did, but they will exaggerate and lay out their sin to the full then.

The Monks and Friars use to talk much of the nails, the spear, the crown,
and the scourges which were the instruments of Christ's death; but they insist
not upon the proper cause, the sins which crucified the Lord of glory; but
the Jews then shall behold their sins which crucified their Lord: This
beholding of the Lord crucified for them, and by them, will be a happy
beholding to them; as they who looked upon the brazen serpent in the
wilderness, were cured when they were stung by Serpents; So shall they be
cured, when they shall behold Christ crucified this ways.

As for their sorrow it shall be a sorrow not to be repented of, and although
they sow in tears, yet they shall reap in joy; Rachel when her children were
not, she would not be comforted; but they shall be comforted: But by what
means? Even by the Gospel which they mocked and scorned; The Gospel shall be
the means to comfort the Jews. (...)
(...) before they called avengelina, Nuncium vanum; but then the Gospel shall
be the glad tidings of salvation to them; Then how beautiful shall the feet
of those be, who bring the glad tidings of salvation to them: there shall then
be an happy union betwixt the Jew and the Gentile: The Jews of old thought to
have intailed the covenant only to themselves, and would have had the Gentiles
secluded from salvation and the means of it; therefore they say, that when the
Law was translated into Greek by the 70. that there was three days darkness,
and they say, fuit dies ille durus Israeli, sicut dies quo factus est vitulus,
that was as grievous a day to them, as that day on which the golden calfe was
made; and they kept a yearly fast or humilation for that; This was in
detestation of the Gentiles, because they willed not their salvation: What
hatred wsa betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles of old.
But now they will be glad of this union; They called the Gentiles before
unclean, common, and dogs; they would no more eat with them, than if they
had been dogs: Job when he speaks of base men, Job. 30.1. he says, he
would not have given their fathers liberty to eat with the dogs of his
flock; The Jews thought not the Gentiles worthy to eat with their dogs;
but now they will be glad to sit down and eat with them that come from the
East, and from the West, then the multitude of believers shall be of one heart
breaking bread together in singleness of heart; And as the Jews hated the
Gentiles before, so the Gentiles detested the Jews calling them Verpi,
Recutiti Appellae, and Curti; then shall all these differences be taken away,
and they shall take the Jew by the skirt, and say, Ezach. 8.22. We will go
with you, for we have heard that God is with you.

This happy union shall make a way to the converting of other Heathens and
Heretics, and then there shall be great light for the understanding of the
Scriptures, and hid places in the Prophets, yet not understood, and then
knowledge shall abound as the water of the sea, and this shall be heaven upon
earth, and one of the great days of the Lord; and the earth shall rent when
the Jew and Gentile shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord, the shout shall be so great.

When the Samaritans were excommunicated, it was a terrible day, When the
Samaritans were cast out of the Church, it was a feorefull excommunication.
they brought 300. priests, and 300. trumpets, and 300. books of the Law, and
300. boys, and they blew with the trumpets, and the Levites singnig cursed the
Cutteans in the name of (...) or, or Jehovah; and they cursed them with the
curse both of the inferior and superior house of judgment; and they said,
Cursed is he who eats the bread of the Cutteans, Drusius ex Sepher Tanna qui
Tilmidemi dicicur.
And let not a Cuttean be a Proselyte in Israel, neither have any part of the
resurrection of the just: Morinus in Pentatenchu^ Samaritanum exercit. 1.
These curses they wrote upon tables, and sealed them, and sent them through
all Israel, who multiplied also this great Anathema, or curse upon them: This
was a fearful rejection of the Samaritans, when they were cast out of the
Church; but when the Jews shall be called again, what a great joy shall there
be in the Church? When the Jews shall be called to the Church, this will be a
day of great joy.
Christ says at the conversion of a sinner there is great joy in heaven
amongst the Angels; what joy then shall there be in heaven amongst the Angels?
when so many thousands shall be gathered to the Church again: At Saint Peter's
preaching there were three thousand added to the Church; but now there shall be
thousand of thousands added to the Church, and then the net shall be like to
break for the multitude of believers that shall be caught in it: A little
before Immanuel Tremelius died, some that stood by desired to hear his
novissima, Inter apothegmata morientium habetur hoc.
or his last words, He cried out, Vivat Christus and pereat harabas: This was
a joyful speech to show that he disclaimed Iudaisme, and was not like the
Jews who cried, let Barrabas live, and Christ die; will it not be a
comfortable day then, when the Church of the Jews shall all cry, Vivat
Christus, and pereat Barabbas; this will be canticum ex canticis, a most
excellent song.

Now for the joining themselves to the visible Church, there can be no
salvation without the Church, The Jews shall be joined to a visible Church.
Act. 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved; And
where there is a visible Church, to contemn it, and to separate themselves
from it, that is a great sin, and for such there is no salvation to be
expected.

When they shall be gath^red to the Church they shall be gathered sincerely not
hypocritically.
When they shall be gathered to the visible Church; the number of them which
shall be gathered to it shall be many, before this time there came to the
Church but one of a city, and two of a family, Ier. 3.14. but now houses,
families, and tribes shall be gathered to it; But this must be understood in
toto co^muni, but not in toto universally, that is, there shall be many of them
gathered to the Church, although not all When they shall be gathered to the
Church they shall be gathered sincerely and truly, they shall be there not as
the chafe amongst the corn, but as good corn indeed: when the Jewish Church
was in the integrity of it, many came to it for by respects, and not for the
truths sake, some for fear became Jews, and were circumcised in Mordecai his
time, Est. 8.17. So some for hope of gain, as the Sechemites were circumcised,
Genesis 34.23. and some for credit, as Herod the Idumean caused himself to be
circumcised that he might be the King of the Jews: David when he was King of
Israel says, that many strangers came to him, and fainedly submitted
themselves to him, Psalm. 18.44. but the Jews when they shall come to the
Church, shall in truth submit themselves to Christ, and lick the dust under
his feet.

Thirdly, the Jews and the Gentiles shall make up one Church then; The Jews
and the Gentiles make up one Church.
The Jews were before Populus per se habitans, Number. 23.13. and had no meddling
with the Gentiles, but now they shall dwell together, and the name of Jew and
Gentile shall no more be heard: The two sticks which represented Ephraim and
Judah, were not so closely joined in the Prophets hand, when they became one
Ezech. 27.13. as the Jews and Gentiles shall be, when they shall be joined in
one, and as the waters that run into the sea, lose their names, so shall this
name of Jew and Gentile be lost in this full union.

Fourthly when they are once joined to the visible Church, they shall not
return to the puddle of Iudaisme again, as some of the Jews do now.

The Jews who dream of no other conversion, The Jews do believe that they
shall be brought back to Canaan again.
but of a bettering of their temporal estate, they imagine now, first that
they shall be brought back to Canaan again: Secondly, that the temple shall
be built again, And thirdly that they shall live there under a flourishing
King, one of their own nation.

First they dream that they shall be restored to Canaan again; Maimon. H.
Mel. 8. The hold still that Canaan is a holier ground then other land.
they hold this ground of Canaan to be as holy ever it was, and they hold it a
curse that they cannot inhabit it now, and they count them most happy who
happens to be buried there, and if they cannot have that benefit, they think
them happy who have but a handful of the dust of that ground to besprinkle
them after they are dead; and the wise men amongst them use when they come
near Canaan to kiss the borders and limits of it, and they use to roll
themselves in the dust of that land, misapplying the words of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 102.14. Thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust
thereof. They hold also that all their sins are pardoned who dwell in this
holy land according to that, Isa. 33.24. the people that dwell therein shall be
forgiven their iniquities; and they say further, that he who walks but the
space of four yards of ground in Canaan is worthy of eternal life, and
whosoever goes out of that holy land, they hold him an Idolater according to
that, 1 Samuel 26.19. for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the
inheritance of the Lord; saying, Go serve other Gods. Mannonides H. mel. 5.7.
and paragraphe sequente They hold those who die without Canaan, must be
tumbled through the caverns of the earth.


Moreover they hold that those who die out of this land of Canaan must be
tumbled through the secret passages of the earth, while they come to the land
of Canaan, and then they shall be raised again, this the Rabbines call Gilgull
mechilloth, (...)
volutationem cavernarum, a tumbling through the hollow parts of the earth.

They hope also that they shall be restored to the promised land again, and
they trust that promise which was made to the people in the time of the first
temple Levit. 26.42. missapplying it to their estate now, the words are Aph ki
utique recordabor faederis mei; (...)
aph in the Germane tongue signifies an Ape, and they so rejoice in this
promise of their restitution to Canaan, that they keep a yearly feast in
remembrance of this, and they call this feast the feast of the golden Ape: and
they say that those words are worthy to be written in golden letters, and
they draw down this in Aph as ye may see in the text, thus we may see how
those Apes play with the holy scriptures.

They hope that the temple shall be built again.
Secondly, they hope that the temple shall be built again, and stand to the
end of the world; the disciples themselves were overtaken with this error that
the temple should endure to end of the world Mat. 24.3. And the reason was the
mistaking of the phrase Psalm 24.7. for the temple there is called domus
saeculi, Saculum Templi.
Lift up your heads ye everlasting doors, Saeculum Levite, 1 Samuel 1.28.
but saeculum with the Hebrews signifies any long time; there is saeculum
Levitarum, that is 50. years, 1 Samuel 1.18. He shall abide before the Lord for
ever: so saeculum servi, he shall serve his master for ever, Saeculum servi
haebrel. Saeculum servi proselyti ad mortem, Lev. 25.45.
Exodus 21.8. That is till the year of Iubile, and there is saeculum servi
proselyti. The temple was called Domus saeculi, to distinguish it from the
grave which is called Domus saeculi sui, Domus saeculi, that is the Temple.
Domus saeculi sui, that is the grave. Anian Marcellnus lib. 23.
Eccles. 12.5. Man goes to his long home: It was not called Domus saeculi,
because it should last for ever, but for a long time; this second temple was
never built again, for when Julian was about to buld it there came a fire out
of the bowels of the earth, and scattered them all; and yet they hope now that
this their temple shall be built again, and whenever they pray; they turn
their faces toward the place where the temple stood; and they do so reverence
that place, that if they stand in need (Laxare meatus suos) (by this phrase of
speech they signify in modest terms the making of water) then they turn
their backs from the temple, but when they cover their feet or majores meatus
solvunt, that is, when they ease nature, then they turn their faces toward
the place or the temple, and their backs from it; so they hope that the temple
shall be built again; hence is that form of their prayer Gloria nostra super
te, that is, the glory and comeliness which shall befall us in the third
temple, we wish that ye may be partakers of it: but this temple shall never
be built again; Joshua cursed the man before the Lord that rises up and
builds Jericho again, he shall laythe foundations thereof in his first borne,
and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it. Whosoever went about
to build this temple again, the heavy curse of God has always followed
them, for this conceit hinders them to look upon him who is greater then the
temples, and whereof the temple was but a type; when the Lord cast Adam out of
Paradise, he set up cherubims, and a flaming sword to keep Adam back, that
he should not eat of the tree of life any more; as the Lord took away all
occasion from Adam, that h should not trust to get life any more by the tree of
life; so least the Jews should trust any more in the temple; the Lord has
taken away this occasion from them; that it shall never be built again; that
they may look to him who is greater then the temple, Mat. 12.

Thirdly, They hope that they shall be united under one head who shall be a
natural Jew.
they hope that they shall be united under one head, in their own land of
Canaan, and that their dominion shall reach to those parts of the world: But
they are wonderful blind in application of the prophecies sometimes they take
the prophecies not to be fulfilled yet, which are already fulfilled; such is that
place, Lev. 26.44. Secondly, such places which are to be understood
mystically, they expound literally as Obad. 20. the captivity of this host of
the children of Israel, shall possess that of the Cananites even unto
Zarephath, and the captivity of Jerusalem which is in Sepharad, shall possess
the cities of the south: This prophecy was fulfilled in part, when Judah and
Benjamin were restored by Cyrus again; But this prophecy is most to be
understood mystically, and not according to the letter, for the ten tribes were
never brought back again as Judah was; but the Jews understand this
prophecy of the captivity which were taken away by Titus and Vespasian, and
they literally apply this to themselves, but falsely; By Zarephath they
understand France, They hope that these parts of Europe shall be subject to
them.
and by Sepharad they understand Spain, and so the Chaldee paraphrast
paraphrases it Sephania, and they persuade themselves, that they shall be Lords
and commanders of all those countries, that those Jews who live abroad out of
Canaan shall send yearly tribute to them into Canaan in token of their
subjection to them, as when Nehardagna in Babylon sent a yearly tribute to
Jerusalem in token of their obedience to them; So shall the Jews who live
abroad out of Canaan, send their yearly collection to Canaan, in token of
their subjection to their King: but since the Jews said that they would have
no other King but Caesar, and refused Christ to be their King, they shall never
have a King of their own again; they lived so long under the subjection of
the Romans, and now they live under the Turks for the most part; but when the
Jews shall be called again, although they have not a King of their own nation,
yet the Lord then shall incline the hearts of those under whom they live, to
further them in the service of God, as he moved the heart of Cyrus a heathen,
to send home the captives from Babylon, and to further the worship of God.

Some of our Writers more subtilely than solidly, commenting upon the
conversion of the Jews follow them too near in this conceit of their
conversion, Some of our Writers applies some places of Scripture more literally
than mystically to the Jews.
and they apply those places of the Prophets more literally than mystically;
and they hold that the Jews shall be restored again to the land of Canaan,
and that they shall live under a visible monarchy there, they discribe as it
were a new (...) to us, and they hold that the forty fifth year after their
conversion, they shall overthrow the great Sultan at the lake Gennesareth, and
this they go about to prove out of Ier. 31.42. A woman shall compass a man,
that is, the weak nation of the Jews, shall conquer the great Empire of the
Turks (whereof the meaning of the place is, A woman shall compass a man, that
is, she shall seek whom she may marry, contrary to the common custom, for
the man seeks the woman, and not the woman the man) these they call Gog, and
Magog; and this battle shall be (say they) in Canaan, Ezech. 39. and after
this battle, they shall dwell in Canaan, and the kingdom shall be settled at
Jerusalem, and they shall be all united together under one head their King;
then the Jews from all places shall come to Jerusalem, and they shall be
preachers of the glad tidings of salvation; Then the fullness of the Gentiles
shall come in; and as Cyrus, when he besieged Babylon he diverted the course of
the river Euphrates; so shall they divert the errors of the Antichrist, and
they being converted, shall convert their brethren, not only those who adhere
to Antichrist, but also those who adhere to the Mahumet: The conceit of
fabulous Esdras, of the bringing back of the ten tribes to the land of Canaan
again.
This conceit that they shall be gathered under a visible Monarch to Canaan
again, is not unlikely to that dream of fabulous Esdras, who tells us, 2 Esr.
13.40. when the ten tribes were carried away, and came to Euphrates, then the
Lord caused the river to part it self, as Jordan was divided of old, then they
went into a far country a year and a halfes journey, where never man dwelt
before, and so when they shall return again to their own country, then the
Lord shall cause the river Euphrates to give way to their passage home again,
as it did before in their going; but these dreams are quite contrary to the
Scripture, for the Lord threatens that within sixty five years after the
captivity of Ephraim, Ephraim shall be so broken, that he shall be no more a
people, Esa. 7.8. But this fabulous Esdras dreams, that these ten tribes are
now a mighty nation, A vagabond Jew who called himself the head of those ten
tribes, was ^urnt at Mantua.
and shall come home again and possess their own land: A certain vagabond
Jew who called himself Solomon, and gave himself out for the King of these
Jews who dwell beyond the Caspian hills, promised that he would bring back
that mighty nation again, This man was apprehended by Charles the fifth, ^and
was burnt at Mantua in Italy for his cousonage and falsehood: The Jews in
their Cronicle which they call Semach David, call this Solomon Mulcho, and they
adore him as a martyr: Are these the Jews who will overcome the Turk? This
gathering of the Jews again to Canaan, to live under a visible Monarch seem
to be almost as fabulous as the other.

And this may satisfy us, that they shall be gathered to some visible Church,
both amongst themselves, and with the Christian Churches dispersed abroad; but
that they shall be called to dwell in their own country again, that place,
Ier. 23.8. will not make this good, to misapply a pl^ce from the estate of the
Jews, after the first captivity, to their restitution after their second
captivity, so that they shall return to their ancient seats, and possess
every tribe his own part, that they shall conquest their foes, that their
soil shall be as fruitful as before, that they shall erect in the land of
Judah, a glorious Church, and that they shall be rulers far and near. These
and such like promises are set out by way of allegory in terrene similitudes,
figuring our deliverance through Christ; but we must take heed that we do not
expound them really and literally as some men do.

SECT. 10. Of the end of the calling of the Jews.
THe Lord chose not the Gentiles that he might cast off the Jews, The end of
the conversion of the Jews.
but that the Jews and the Gentiles together might grow up in one body: The
Lord cuts off some superfluous branches and loppes them, that others might be
ingrafted in their place; He cut of those superfluous branches for a while to
be ingrafted again; And as when Peter cut off Malchus ear, Christ joined it
to his head again; so the Lord shall ingraft those Jews again, who are now
cut off, and after that the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, all Israel
shall be saved: By Israel he means not that the Gentiles shall be saved, when
some Jews shall be joined to them; for then he had revealed no mystery here,
for we see of the Gentiles converted daily, and of some of the Jews also, but
he is speaking here of Israel according to the flesh, and not of Israel
spiritually, He is speaking of their conversion.

The Lord casts off the Jews for a while, The Lord cast off the Jews, is for
a while to stir them up to a holy emulation with the Gentiles.
that he might stir them up to a holy emulation; and the Apostle compares
them here to two running in a race, God is (...), here, the master of the race,
(...), or the reward is eternal life; (...), those who runs in the race; are
the Jews and the Gentiles, (...), or the spectators are the Angels; what were
all the Olympic games, if they were compared with this running? But in this
race they that are first, shall be last, and the last first, but in the end
they shall be equal when the conversion of the Jews, and the fullness of the
Gentiles shall kiss one another.

SECT. 10. The reasons why the Christians should be so earnest for the
conversion of the Jews.
The first reason why the Gentiles should love the Jews.
FIrst, we should love the Jews for their good fathers sake, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob: David loved Mephibosheth, although he was but a dead dog, 2 Samuel
9.8. for his good father Ionathans sake. So we should love the Jews, although
they be but as dead dogs, for their fathers cause.



Peter planted the first Church of the Jews at Jerusalem, Act. 7. but when
there arose a persecution at Jerusalem, the Church of the Jews was scattered
amongst the Gentiles; then they were like a little leaven which leavened the
Church of the Gentiles.

How read you in your Law? John 8.17. that is, in the Law which was concredite
to your custody, they were capsarij ecclesia as Augustine terms them, codicem
portat Iudaeus ut credat christianus. They were like unto a lantern that gives
light unto others, but sees nothing it self; they are monitores veritatis,
although they were in darkness themselves as Baalam was.

Cant. 8.1. We have a little sister what shall we do for her, so should we
say, we have an elder brother, what shall we do for him; Noah prayed of old,
that Iaphet might be persuaded that he might dwell in the tents of Shem, and so
did Shem himself, Genesis 9.27. The purpose of the Lord there is to show that
cursed Cham should be deprived of all dignity in his fathers family, and be
but like a slave: there was a threefold dignity of old in the family, first of
the Priesthood; secondly, of the double portion; and thirdly, of the private
government. Now Noah by a curse takes away all these from Cham, and he
bestows all upon Shem, and Iaphet; he bestows upon Shem the privilege of
the Priesthood, and therefore he says Blessed be the God of Shem, and he
gives to Iaphet a large portion of the earth, which we see afterward
accomplished by experience, for who enjoyed the largest possessions of the
earth? were they not the Assyrians, Caldeans, Persians, Greeks, Romans,
Turks, Sarasenes, and Mascovites? Shem as the Priest of God, prayed for the
conversion of these nations Iaphets posterity so Iaphets posterity now pray;
that Shem may dwell in their tents and be converted again: the primitive
Church prayed much for the establishing of the Roman Empire, because the
Antichrist should not come while he who withheld, was taken out of the way,
This is while the Roman Empire was removed, who kept down the Antichrist: The
prayer of the Church is now, come Lord Jesus come quickly, Rev. 22.21. Then
we must pray earnestly that the signs preceding might be fulfilled; and this
calling of the Jews is one of the most notable signs.

The conversion of the Jews serve much to the completing of the mystical
body.
Lastly, the conversion of the Jews serves much for the completing of the
mystical body of Christ, there is an (...), or emptines in that mystical
body, Romans 11. until the Jews be brought in; When Naomi returned home to
Bethlehem wanting her husband, and her sons, she said, Plena egressa sum,
sed revertor vacua, I went out full, but the Lord has caused me to return
empty, Ruth. 1.21. when the Church wants the Jews, it is empty as it were,
and they with us make up one perfect body.

SECT. 11. How thankful the Jews should be to God for their conversion
again.
THe Casuistes propound a cause, Lessius de gratitudine. How thankful the
Jews should be when they are called again.
whether they are more bound to God, who stand and have not fallen, then those
who have fallen and are restored again by grace; and they show, that they are
more bound to God who have fallen and are stored again by grace, then those
who have not fallen at all; and the reason is, although the gift of
perseverance in innocence of it self be greater, and more to be desired
then that gift which is bestowed upon the penitent; yet that gift which is
bestowed upon him, is greater then the gift of continency in goodness, and
therefore in this respect, Whether they are more bound to be thankful to God,
who have not fallen, or those who have fallen, and are restored again.
the penitent is more bound to thanksgiving; The penitent before he fell he had
the same gift of grace bestowed upon him, which he had who stands, and when
the penitent fell, it was not for defect or want of grace, but only because he
abused this liberty and freedom, and did not use that grace which was offered
to him, and so in the time of his fall he was equally obliged to God with him
who stood; for it was a greater benefit to him that the Lord suffered him all
the time, and gave him leisure to repent, stirring him up again to repentance,
then pardoning him of his sin, and restoring him to righteousness: all these
being considered he was more bound to thankfulness, then he that continued
still and fell not, for the remission of one sin to a sinner should be
highlier thought of, then the hope of life eternal, and the righteousness
that others stand in, for as the malefactor when he is delivered from the fire
to the which he was adjudged, will no less esteem of that benefit, then a
good man would do if a kingdom were bestowed upon him, for the freeing of a
man from the greatest evil is even as he should bestow the greatest good upon
him: this is the case betwixt the Angels who have not fallen, and man.

Whether the Jews or Gentiles be more bound to God for offering pardon to
them.
Now the second case is betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles, which of them are
most obliged to God in offering pardon of sin to them: Christ cleares this by
the parable of the two debtors, he to whom most was forgiven, was bound to
love most: now if we shall consider the great sins of the Jews, and the
pardon offered to them, and calling of them to repentance, they are more bound
to thanksgiving then the gentiles: Neither can that parable of the forlorn
son, and of his eldest brother who stayed at home be applied to the Jews
and the Christians, although the Jews were the elder brother who stayed at
home always with their father, and the gentiles the younger brother who went
away as the forlorn son.

The prayer of THEODORUS BEZA, for the conversion of the Jews.
LOrd Jesus, thou justly revengest the contempt of thy truth, and that
ungrateful people of the Jews, deserves most severely to be punished, but
Lord remember thou thy ancient covenant, and look upon those poor wretches
for thy Names sake; and grant (Lord) unto us, upon whom thou have bestowed such
great mercies, that we may daily grow in grace, and that we be not instruments
of thy wrath against them, but rather by the knowledge of thy word, and by our
holy conversation, they may be drawn to the right way again, and so at last
that thou may be acknowledged of all nations and people, and may be glorified
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
(...)
(...)
Benedictus, qui dat lasso robur,
Et cui non sunt vires, ei rubur multiplicat.
Perlegi hunc librum cui titulus est tractatus de quadrageminis filijs
degeneribus, Atheo, Mago Jdololatra and Judeo, in quo nihil reperio sanae fidei
aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

Tho. Weeks R. P. Episcop. Land. Capell. domest.

Errata.
Page 3. line 11. for Acharon read Acharai. p. 113. l. 24. for farthest r.
farther. ibid. l. 23. for both r. but. p. 135. in the mar. dele (all lunaticks
are not daemoniacks. p. 150. l. 6. add (...). p. 207. add in mar. (le pi
Iehova.) in mar. p. 113 l. 22. for (...) r. (...). p. 259. l. 14. add (to
worship Baal, or to halt betwixt God and Baal) p. 279. l. 20. for or. r. and.
p. 319. l. 5. for so, r. Sow. p. 336. l. 13. for (the world is able to contain
those books which he wrote, r. (the world could not contain the books that
should be written of him) p. 9. l. 21. for John, r. Joshua. p. 300. l. 3. for
might revenge. r. might not revenge. p. 32. l. 34. for greater, r. great. p.
146. l 1. dele therefore. ibid. l. 13. for circularum. r. circularem.


