The Olive Leaf: OR, Universal Abce. Wherein is set forth the Creation,
Descent, and Authority of Letters: together with th'Estimation, Profit,
Affinity or Declination of them: for the familiar use of all Students,
Teachers, and Learners; of what Chirography soever, most necessary. By two
Tables, newly and briefly composed Charactericall and Syllabicall. Of Alexander
Top Gent.

Imprinted at London by W. White for George Vincent, dwelling in great
Wood^^^^, at the sign of the Hand in hand, where they are to be sold. 1603.

The Author to his Book.
FAre well my little Book, and tell thy friends,
The Deluge of the deep Confusion ebs;
Then show thy Leaf to all, but hail the best
And safely leave it in their holy hands,
That will upright thy language, clear thy sense,
As matter but of mere preminence:
Yet as the Star, that onward bringes the Sun,
Thou have perfection where thy light begun*
This tell thy friends, and little Book farewell.
A. Top.

Unto the Author.
Divine Conceit, I wish thy self had drawn
This Grammatique before it past to press:
It came to me as ^ were by interception:
And (as I think) not two lines puncted right;
Which (in so strange a subject) would have plundgd
Ou^ English Press, and maz'de the Reader much.
Something my hand has done, but God knows small:
Good Will did it, and that was best of all.
Over this it restes (for here is Alpha sole,
O mega (wants) thy self do adhibet
The Light it self, whose rays we yet possess:
For we unable far to walk by this.
Who knows the things of Man, but sprite in Man?
We well may guess, but unsure what thou means.
This Ohue-leafe bringes tydinges of some Good:
Set Noah out, for ceased is the Flood.
Who reuerenceth all Students of Holy-tongue HENOCH CLAPHAM.

To the wise hearted Reader, Grace, Understanding, and Comfort, from him that
rules all unto all, Amen.
GEntle Reader, seeing meanest Subjects (by authority) are advanced, I
presumed so much the rather to offer this (the lowest of all) to thy grauer
judgment; not only for the extraordinary power I find in them (although
verily it be great in deed) but for the mighty authority that has supported
and sustained them hitherto, even since the beginning of the world, I mean of
this universal Abce, which at first (peradventure) for the name sake, thou will despise as frivolous, idle, and childish, it being nothing less; for the
authority thereof is very needful to be known: the waightiest business of
the earth is built thereon, children understanding it not: and it affoordeth
much matter for the wisest. But as they are counted childish because of their
doctrine and education, so I heartily desire that even children may, either by
this, or some other greater pains, obtain the right understanding of these
Principles, with the full use and authority of them.

First therefore, If I be demanded whether through the world there were not
many sundry Abces invented of diverse men? I answer, there was but one: and
that one, of God himself, the true Hagiography or Hieroglyps of our first
Fathers: to wit, the two and twenty several uncorrupted Forms or Letters of
the Hebrew tongue: Which being granted the eldest, consequently must be
thought the Mother and very Matrix of all other; so that the authority of all
Abces ryseth from hence, as this from God. And as nothing can prevail without
authority, which indeed is God; which our elders well foresaw by comparing
their own endeavors therewith: so must we conclude, that nothing ever by man
could be made so constant and so durable as to outlast the very Heavens for
glory, and the Earth, that can not be moved.

Therefore when you seem to behold in this mirror at the first aspect, diverse
Abces, as if diverse men had feigned or created new forms and figures at their
pleasure, think not so; for they be all one and the same generation, going
forth as the days of the year which the Sun brings unto all Countries of
a diverse complexion: or as graund Nephews to the thousandth degree that have
their continuance of both their Parents (that is) of their first author and
peregrination, or confusion.

But that I may the better explane my purpose, I will handle their Creation,
their Authority, their Dignity, their Peregrination, and their use, in their
proper places: and of their universal Kindred and posterity, in the last
place generally.

CREATION.
BEcause all Antiquity is to be given to the Hebrew Learning, and their
Letters, mine only endeavor shall be to calculate their birth day, for the use of
diverse other Rewes their progeny: that as they are truly the Mothers of all,
and have the pre-eminence; so all their offspring (how diverse soever) may
rejoice alike of their first begetting, and continuance: wherefore of any other
Antiquity (saving this) I mean not to dispute: But hereof, because the Holy
Scripture has some Argument, it shall not be amiss, first to consider
somewhat of that.

Gen 5.
First, that Cain had his Forehead marked: which mark should likely be Tau,
the last of the Hebrew letters; or at the least Tau, that in that tongue did
signify a Sign or Mark: Whethersoeuer, because the Mark was notably known,
and easy to be read, it may most properly be applied to my purpose. For the
Lord marked Cain to this end, that such as met him should not kill him. Here
had the Lords writing been vain, if men could not read the Mark. Hence
peradventure we used to entitle the Foreheads of our forsworn Men and Thieves
with F. for Forgerie, or Furtum; like as this Letter (what a one soever it was)
might import on Cain, Brother, or, Manslaughter; who was guilty of both: or
his endless punishment of a roguish life, or eternal banishment from the
Saints of God, to live a forraigner both in Country and Religion.

Other marking in the Forehead, has been used to the like and contrary
purposes, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Apoc. 13. etc. In the same Chapter is mention made of
Tubal-Cain the cunning Caruer both in Brass and Iron. And also ^ubal the
Organist; who doubtless were cunning not only in the forms and proportion of
these, but also of their effect in working, whether in Arithmeticke or
Proportion, in Music or Portraying, in Notes or Lines, both by ear and eye:
for they are the Abce and principal Rudiment of all workmanship, as well as of
Learning. And what Instrument of commendation or profit was ever made? What
Music? What workmanship was ever invented, how witty or rare so ever, that by
effect in these received not his only praise? Wherefore it is manifest, that
this ancient Literature flourished in the time of these men, which reaped such
praise and profit by the skill therein. And most like it is, that the
commendable cunning which Tubal-Cain showed, was in some Geographicall,
Hieroglyphicall, or Astrolabicall engine, exactly prepared to design the
Heavens, and describe the Earth, and the bodies thereof, by even parts and
proportion.

And to prove that nothing at that time, could be devised more necessary or
to greater use, I may recite the Chapter of Creation, where the Lord created a
use for them: to wit, the two unequal Lights; and the Stars for signs, for
seasons, for days, and for years: which to our sense may be thus; For
Minutes, Hours, Days, and Years: That is, Othoth, (as if a man should
faigne) for proportional Figures, or legible Letters, for the full scope of
Gods Creation especially was that: Such things as erst lay hid in Confusion,
Rude and Vain, Tohow vabohow, of no manner of shape or facion, might then by
his Word of life, most clearly appear and be distinguished: Not that their
sundry qualities should be admirable to the outward sense only, but that the
very heart and mind of man should be moved to consider the deapth of so strange
a separation; when every thing was so rightly weighed by his own poyse: and as
the upper face of any thing contented the sense, so the inward propriety with
due cogitation, should content the heart: that as well in kinds as in facions,
both sense and understanding, might (by comparing the substance with the
pourtrayture) be lightened. Seeing that all things which the Lord wrought or
commanded in the first week, exceeded not the number of two and twenty. And
(as I gather by the text) he delighted to rest in the most complet and
correspondent sum of the letters of this Abce. From hence may much glorious
matter arise: but I note only this, that the Lord hereby described all his
work for the most capacious use and profit of man, whom he placed in honor.
Wherefore I may conclude, that every of these several Hebrew letters, should
signify or import some special workmanshyp of the Lords Creation. And the
rather, because the Lord concluded every one of his actions or creatures, with
this proper demonstration Eth, which is taken for a Sign, Figure, Letter,
Form, or Mark; being the extremities of the two farthest letters of the Rue.
As, if all things were to be comprehended by this limitation or circumscription
Bara Elohim (Eth) hashamaim, God created the figure, sign, or letter, of the
Heavens, etc. Or the very hieroglypsis of them, this word being the singular
of Othoth, which signifies Figures, Letters, Causes, Signs, or Tokens, of all
sorts. Where note, that God by his divine insight, has diligently observed
the shapes, the figures, and the lines of every of his works; because he used
to commend the perfection of them: so with his very finger has he drawn
them, and with his spirit stamped them secretly in all creatures for us.

This word Eth, makes the Pronowne demonstratiue Zoth. i. this, which is thus
to be derived and expounded, Zou or Ze, oath, which properly signifies, This
Token, this Figure, this Letter, this Cause.

Here could I more at large dilate upon this word Eth, but this for my present
purpose may suffice.

Hitherto of the Creation of these little Figures, whereby men may conjecture,
that in the time of Cain, they were plain to be read and understood: and that
Tubal-Cain ingraued them in his costly Instruments. And lastly, that the
Almighty God him self in the separation of his Elements, vouchsafed to
remember them, and delighted most often to design the constancy of them by
Eth the particle.

AVTHORITIE.
WHereas many (perchance of my sort) will wait for the approbation of diverse
and sundry Abce-like authorities, they shall surely unawares deceive
themselves; for I mind nothing less: neither dare I willingly so much to
diminish the glory of the Holy writing, because I well know that in these
several Rewes (howsoever disguised) is no new thing: and that their inventions
which at this day are so famously feigned, are merely nothing else, but
counterfeiting of the Hebrew Rue; in changing their bodies or their power,
their places or their order: as in my Table of Abces thou may well discern.
For what cause, upon what deliberation, or to what end (except that Nations
were wont craftily to conceal the knowledge of their Tongue from strangers) I
know not: but a great cause of their metamorphosis, may be the changing of the
culture and race of Writing; which was, from the left hand to the right, being
before contrary. The alteration of their power may seem to rise from Warfare
or policy of Court: where, because silence will not serve, secrecy of
Language should be needful and this (yea in the same Country and Dialect)
where Ciuill-warres have grown, men have been forced to study and practice,
least that the Watchword either in Court or Camp be too easily apprehended of
the enemy, and by an unlucky Alarm, both Policy and Army confounded. Iud.
12. 6.
The example of the Gileadites is plain, whom the Ephraimites, pursued to the
foord of Jordan, requiring passage with them; which upon good advice, denying
the Gileadites, bad them pronounce their Watchword Shibboleth (a Foord or
Chanel) which they well knew was a propriety of their own tongue: whereby it
came to pass, that by defect in pronuntiation; as in Sibboleth (an Ear of
Corn) for Shibboleth, the Ephraimites received a wonderful defeat, and the
Gileadites escaped safe. For which cause, peradventure Kings and Princes have
not only endured and suffered in their litterature and language, but at their
pleasure and will, have ruinated and overthrown the natural stamp and course
thereof; and by preposterous order, changed the sound also. Concerning the
Hebrew writing, it was impossible for man to invent the like: for of man there
remains no monument so memorable, that ever I could find or imagine. Wherefore
I may well conclude, That Almighty God, who would scarcely be thought at
leisure to attend so little things, is both the Author and Father of the Hebrew
writing, whether of substance or of form: Because in the Table of Ten Words,
or Commandments, the Lord himself vouchsafed to write or carue these forms
most seriously with his own finger: which grace, he would not add unto the
vile work of man, nor crown his corrupt invention with so Holy memory.

DIGNITY.
IT is most manifest, that these principles have in ancient time had no small
estimation among Princes, seeing so many of them have (as it were) studied to
invent new forms, or alter their course: which by no means they could so well
bring to pass, but that the body of the Hebrew Figure would always remain and
appear. This espying, they were ever constrained to allow the pre-eminence
thereof. Yea, the holy people of God has often (in the Hebrew text of the old
Testament) prouerbially used the affinity and iteration of these Letters, as
delighting in the very Echo of them; as, Nabal shemo Neblah gnimo, Abigal of
her husband.

1. Sam. 25. 25.


A Fool is his name, and folly is with him. And it also seems, that the Lord
sometimes took great pleasure in shi^ting of them, and that in texts of great
matter and importance: as in that of Abram and Sarai; Genesis 17. 5, 15
where God taking away (Jod) the last letter from Sarai, which is in the Hebrew
count the tenth, and so signifies, and rewards her with (He) the first, and
in count five, and bestows likewise (He) the other five on Abram: so their
names afterward remained Sarah and Abraham. Now whether it were darkly to
include Jah, the name of GOD, in both their names; or whether the Jews had
hitherto mist in writing or pronouncing of these names according to propriety
of the Lords intention, and were here corrected: or whether it was upon the
foundation of the Promise, indifferently upon them both, Divines must conclude.
Many other as secret things as these to the like purpose, the Reader by a more
diligent observation of the Hebrew text may apprehend. Such was their
estimation with Christ in the new Testament, that he boasted of their ineffable
and everlasting constancy, Math. 5. 18
showing that until Heaven and Earth should pass, and the Law by his Kingdom
be fulfilled, the least of these lytle-ones should not pass; no not one
tittle, which is less then the least of them. Neither is it like, unless the
whole frame of these Hebrew Figures had been divinely extant from God, and more
then humane from the beginning; that Christ would in this place have prophesied
so long continuance, and so necessary lasting of them.

Moreover, the Lord God, the Creator himself, remembers Apo. 1. 8, 11
them in the ears of John, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end: He that was, is, and shall be. Where he not only authorizeth their
beginning, but aloweth that they shall continue as instruments of his praise
unto the worlds end. Though in this place (for the Gospels sake) he applied
him to the capacity of the Grecians, rather then of the Hebrews. Also, the
Hebrew order of Alphabet is very renowned among the Prophets; as in the 119.
Psalm of David, which is divided according to the number of the letters, into
two and twenty even sections: to wit, eight Verses in every Staff, beginning
orderly with some one of the Rue* Likewise the Lamentations of Jeremiah in the
same sort distinguished. Many other proper instances, if so be this Abce did
want honor or pre-eminence, might be brought out of the book of Ezra,
Nehemiah, Canticles, and Daniel: which I altogether omit. Notwithstanding, I
will something regard the number of fifteen (Tu) why the Hebrews here
interrupted their order of account, in refusing Jah (ten and five,) and
challenging Tu, (nine and six) whereof some opinion has been, that is, was to
spare the divine weighty name of God from so vain and idle a use, that would
so often frequent both eye and ear in all the profane reckoning of man.
Neither will I neglect the care of the Massorits, which so affected them for
their singular operation and divine employment, that they studiously observed
for the preservation of them, how many they were, and how often every of them was
repeated through the old Testament: so that in the Prophets they found the
whole sum of them Eight hundred and fifteen thousand 280. And in all the old
Testament the number of Aless to be two and forty thousand three hundred
seventy and seven; and so of the rest of the Letters: which numbers, they both
diligently and saythfully recorded to their posterity, besides many other
agreeable conclusions, resolutions, and parallels, may be drawn for the praise
of the Hebrew Abce Rue. As the two and twenty Fathers before and after the
Flood: as the two and twenty Pillars of all Commonwealths, seeing they being
the recorded foundations of all Chronicles; both the age of Times, and order of
the whole World, grew and waxed old together with them. Neither altogether
disagreeable hereunto are the Books of the New Testament, as Cornishes to the
former Pillars, counted absolutely twenty two. Hitherto of their estimation.

PEREGRINATION.
PRopounding always that this Literature, (of whose beginning, authority, and
dignity, we have already spoken) is the auncientest and Mother of all other
kinds; there remains something to be proved of their Demigration or
Transportation: which at a glaunce, makes them seem rather like Nouices of
some new invention, then the same, such as they are in deed; so much the
clymat, apparel and entertainment; heir gate, their facion and their face,
has changed. Before the Flood, of what account soever they were, or in what
Lands soever they lived and flourished, as I have declared in this place, is
little material to recite; because all Monuments of praise, (except such as
Noah and his Sons could for the later ages by hand and heart preserve) the
Inundation wipt clean away: But in them and their Nephews, both Nature it
self, skill of substances and causes, and hatty wisdom of Arts and skill,
have been continued and reserved for us. It is most clear, that in the Arc,
and presently after the Flood, there could be but one Literature, one Abce or
Tongue; which they would still be mindful of, and kindly commend it to their
children, as a glorious work and famous remembrance of the other World. But
after the Sons of Noah began to possess and inhabit all parts of the Earth,
their tongue, their voice, and handwriting, forthwith by little and little, by
ignorance or negligence, most easily declined. For, Of these were Gen 10. 5*
11. Every man after his tongue.

Genesis 11. 6.


the Isles of the Nations divided and replenished: Who perceiving the eminent
diversity and variation of their tongue and writing; and (as it seems) not
willing the glory thereof should fall or decay, they assembled themselves ready
to build a Tower of rare height, whereby every* Nation or Family might get
renown: For before the work, they feared much the dispersion of their
Families, and ruin of their Learning; when, as they say, Least we be
scattered, foreseeing the event that happened. But because the Lord did not
allow their unnecessary providence in this enterprise, being not contented
with that success which the Lord had in his infinite wisdom appointed, even
in this their warines, least any should so much lean and trust unto the handy
work of man, and boast in a Name of their own getting, as Nebukadnezar by his
Image did wax proud; in the Lords authority as did Moses at the Rock, the
Lord of his mere will and divine consultation descends to hinder the same,
saying: Let us confound their Lips and Tongues, that they understand not one
an other, and let that which they feared, come upon them. So were their Tongues
confounded, and their Families necessarily scattered over the face of the whole
earth: Neither was there any other confusion of Dialectes in and after the
work, then that which otherwise would have happened. And this was to show the
power of the Lords providence, in respect of the frail means and purpose of
man: For in the beginning of the Genesis 10. 5.
work, it seemed they all, understood not one another. And not altogether
improperly do we take their dispersion to be into that Universe (which we call
the World) and has been divided into three parts, Asia, Africa, and Europa:
America then unknown, or here included. Sem, Ham and Iapheth, obtained every
one his part: to wit, Sem, Asia: Ham, the hot Country of Africa: and Iapheth,
Europ. Of their Gentility, and more frequent and particular dwellinges, read
Genesis 10. From hence by Provinces, were Letters and Learning promoted, and of
our Ancestors so well cherished and spoken of. But the first use of an
Interpreter (that I read of) was in Canaan long after: Therefore of the quality
of the Confusion, I have no more to say.

THE USE.
SEeing whatsoever I have said of their Creation, Authority, Dignity, or
Alienation, was for the unspeakable use and profit which I found in them: I
will here declare (as far forth as I my self am brought up in them) the full
comfort, that the Reader shall expect in this my Table: which not unfitly I
term the Olive Leaf. First therefore, what part of their original use
remains, or whatsoever may seem probable of their Hieroglyficall effect in
the first week, I omit: except that, that the Reader may suppose they were
then used to express the sundry kinds of Creatures: The like whereof is yet
in some place of the world in practice. But when the species and personages of
things grew so abundant and so diverse, it is like they were first composed by
Adam: and by him brought to words and syllables of two or thee Letters, when
he was to give to every special thing a proper Name: Genesis 2. 20.
for as he called them, so were the names of all things. And this is a current
Rule for the Hebrician, that no one word in that tongue, ever fails of some
proper or distinct meaning; as well to instruct the diligent Scholar in some
natural reason of things, which is the truth of all Language in deed: as to
speak all days of his life like a child, that is taught to signify by voice,
and not to conceive by heart* which by any other mean motion may be done
as well, and to as great purpose and effect. For we account of Letters as of
Strangers, whose faces we only know; and not as friends, whose heart,
conscience, and true meaning, we understand: so, we speak abundantly, but not
from the abundance of the heart: and hear diligently, but conceive no thing.

Now, because there must be an entrance into this deapth of understanding, I
thought good to show to what uses these simple ones may serve. First (as I
said) to Compose matter of understanding, in two letters or three. Secondly, to
Count, Multiply, and Divide, and perform all other Rules of numbering, which
the Siphers do. To the same may all other Rewes or Numerals (if their Nations
please) be brought to pass as well, rejecting these foreign Figures; but
more of pleasure then of despite: which point, will clearer appear in my
Table of Numerals ensuing. Thirdly, we learn hereby the Admirable rule of
Proportion; and by good Tutors, to understand each other far and near: to
which purpose, many have devised superficial secrecy; a thing least needful
amongst us, while our plain things have such depth of mystery in them. This
Rue may also without any farther use of Prick-song, perform the Gam-vt, or
Sol-fa, in all Clee^es of Music. The full compass of which, reaches not
above one or two and twenty Notes, by any man's power: so that any musical Song
composed with consideration of the letters, in each syllable, may readily be
sung in his plain line: Which the Jews always used, as by a new art of
Parallels and Notes (after the custom of Europ) at this day, there being in it
self a most proper and proportional scale. Other manners of Singing are used
also, which I have seen, something strange, but nothing so pithy or pleasant:
as by wauing of the Line or the whole Staff to the will of the voice. Also, by
this means they can perform all offices of Accents howsoever. At the last it
pleased the Jews to make use of diverse proper forms to this purpose. Which
Figures being well considered, are nothing but mere Letters or Vowels also:
for it has since continued a plain and usual practice, to make the Letter of
one language, and the Accent of another: and the contrary likewise by example
of the Chaldean Accents, and the Greek Vowels which come from them. But for a
more modern proof, mark the high- Dutch and Swedan tongues, that Accent
their Vowels, with contrary Vowels of the same language: that where the sound
does vary from deriuation, there both sound and deriuation hereby might be
cleared, and the language delivered from further confusion. And sometime also
such accented syllables be Musical, for Time in reeding, as double sounding
Vowels in other Languages are wont to be.

Now what benefit I have declared of the Hebrew Rue, may be understood as well
of all other, if Scholars of diverse literatures upon this occasion will take
the pains. To which purpose, much may be considered in this syllabicall Table
of English Consonantes: whether for the composing of all Syllables and
monosyllable words, Numbering, Proportion, Music, or Accenting; if the Reader
please to grace my pains with some small industry and mean curiosity.

A Table Syllabicall.
b c d r g h k l m n p q r s t x z c f h l n q s x b d g k m p r t z d h m p t
b f k n r x c g l p s z f l q x d k p t c h n s b g m r z g n t d l r b h p x f
m s c k q z h q b k r c l s d m t f n x g p z k s f p b l t g q c m x h r d n z
l x k t h s g r f q d p c n b m z m b n c p d q f r g s h t k x l z n d r h x m
c q g t l b p f s k z p g x n f t m d s l c r k b q h z q k c s m f x p h b r k
d t n g z r m g b s n h c t p k d x q l f z s p l g c x r n k f b t q m h d z t
r p m k g d b x s q n l h f c z x t s r q p n m l k h g f d c b z z z z z z z z
z z z z z z z z z z

I Thought good by the way, to show this my Calculation of Syllables, that it
may be the more familiar when my time and experience shall better serve, to
declare the full use and benefit thereof: In the mean while, the Reader shall
ruminate thereon. And now for the understanding of this my charactericall Table
following: First, it is thus divided into Rewes and Columns; that is, every
particular Abce lying collaterally correspondent each under other, is expounded
each by other, according to their proper soundes throughout every Column.
Wherein, because Languages for the most part (as I have said) differ one from
other in number of Letters, or order of Abce Rue, I (not unjustly) do
constrain all Abces to be conformable to the Hebrew: enlarging it by Dages and
Composition, from the proper two and twenty Soundes or Letters, into so many
as may well interpret the largest (that is thirty) although some Alphabets by
ruder collection, have been vnneedfully extended to thirty or forty. But
where thou see sometimes both Rue and Pilla^ unorderly broken off, there
note, that such a Language lacks that lisping found, which (thou shall
perceive) other tongues abounded withal.

As for the several names of the Letters of every Abce, let each Country
term the whole Pillar, as she calls her own (being all Letters of the like
force) because I hold it little material to be taught: Only it may give
insight of correction unto some Countries, that have borrowed the sound, and
not the Letter. And to other that have used the Letter and not the sound, which
(of all other) in our English Abce is most absurd: to the great hindrance and
vexation of the little ones: that (as it were) enter Purgatory before their
time, being often punished, but not for them selves. But for the fault of the
Literature, and for the rudnes of Teaching which does so ofen amaze and
astonish them; as in the double sound or efference of C. of G. of I. of P. of
th. and of chapter Where the sound of their Name should properly begin every word,
they make to enure the Tongue to readiness in spelling and reading; it being for
the most part otherwise, and also in the most improper names of H. and Y. one
being called Atch, and the other Wy, as if they should begin tcheer, or we,
according to their Names: but the children must learn to spell ch, ee, r,
here: wy, ee, ye: in stead of he, eer, and ye, ee, ye, (to them most
horrible) and for this they endure much, that Parents of mean affection,
should scarce approve. By which it comes otherwise to pass then in other
Languages, that we cannot spell our Abce until we understand the whole
Tongue. In some other Abces, the like imperfections are found. But of our own,
in this will I have to do, aduising my Contrymen, that seeing new Letters
or Figures will not easily be received, (considering the travail of some other
yer now, to that purpose) they will duly distinguish with some difference of
writing, as it has been aunciently used, (neither is it at this time
altogether unused, but neglected, with strokes or pricks: aptly offering it
self in this my Table) these Letters of two soundes, and name them accordingly
by their right name, such as are wrong christened: and give effectual names to
such as are namelesse. Which matter is so native, so easy, so pregnant, so
commendable; and lastly so void of all new-fangelnesse, that nothing else is
here wanting, but that which may with praise be prayed the allowance of the
best.

Now for further instruction concerning my Table, every Abce bears his
Countries name, or the name that other Countries call it, at the end of the
Rue to the left hand. And whether the several Countries did write toward the
left hand, or toward the right, in the margent at the right hand, you have a
Hand or Fist to direct you.

AFFINITY.
OF their Affinity and declination of form, the explaning of the first
Column may suffice to teach the Reader how to mark the course of all the
other Columns, and the true variation of strokes and lines, by dismembring or
new framing the Letters accordingly. Therefore I must speak of the first
Hebrew letter in the first Column, how he carries himself through all
learned Tongues: that is, of Variety, of Facion, and Behavior. And also of
his general entertainment and acquaintance with all other of the same Column,
whereas it consists of three diverse strokes or limbs; to wit, the stroke
Constant, which is the slope line, that for the most part continues
inuariable: The stroke Diverse, which is the hanging line that is ever now and
then here and there: And the stroke Defective, which is the master or
commanding stroke, that in proper person is seldom present.

Therefore in this Metamorphosis, the Reader may not always look for this
articular trinity, because in some Abces it will portend but two of the
limbs, and in some but one; and that with a strange motion: In some place
halting, in other utterly maimed.

Notwithstanding, of the first sort, the Complet body are these by
transformation; The sixteenth, seventeenth, two and three and twenteth, and
seven and twenteth Abce; that is, the Illyric, Croatic, Aethiopick, Armenian,
Egyptian or Phrygian Rue. The first is discerned by exalting the line Constant
and transparence of the leaf. The second, by raising of the line Constant, and
counterpoyse of the stroke Diverse and Master line. The third, by exalting the
stroke Diverse to the head of the line Constant, the Constant and the Master
lines desubtending it. In the Capital of the fourth, by depressing the former
elevation of the line Constant, and exalting the horns of the Diverse and
master Line, all three members of the curent Letter being in degree equal,
and naturally flourishing. All which conclusions (if you turn the Leaf byas,
or vpside down at your pleasure) you will the easier confirm.

Of the second sort, are all the other of the first Pillar, except Arabique,
Siriac, Persian, Turkish, and Tartarian; which are included in Arabique and
Siriac: only the twenteth and the one and twenteth Rue, which are but one
stroke, the Constant line erected: yet in the very head of this line, is some
small sensible trace of a second stroke to be observed.

But where you find the second sort full of variety of buylding, be not amazed
at the Architecture thereof: for the frame and proportion is ever clear, and
that merely nothing else but shadow-florishing or train: as of the heel of a
man's Foot in the Sand or Snow, in respect of the step it self.

The sound of this Pillar or Letter is not usurped by any other Column, nor is
commutable with any other Letter: therefore his deriuation is the more clear.

The like is to be marked of the second Column, and all the rest: saving that
between many of them (that is to say, Letters of the same Instrument, whether
of the lips, the teeth, pallat, or hissing Letters) there is usual
community, selfehood, and commutation, as the second and third* with the
three and four and five and twenteth, the fourth and fifth with the
seventeenth two and seven and twenteth: and sometime with the nine and
twenteth: the sixth and seventh with the fourteenth and the thirty eighth with
the thirteenth: the eleventh with the six and twenteth: the one and twenteth
with the nine and twenteth: the ninth with the tenth: the eleventh with the
twelfth: the fifteenth with the sixteenth and the fourth: and so with a
continual and mutual reference of the Letters of each Abce by it self, and
comparison with the same of other Rewes, thou shall find their proper and
ancient Culture most clear. For all the rest, each Pillar will clear it
self to him that has any insight or delight therein, as Figures or Letters of
a diverse condition: but one substance and the same effect.

Herein also note, that of the two-and-twentie Hebrew Letters, I have provided
five Vowels, Alef, He, Vau, Jod, Hnaim; the eighth, the ninth, the fourteenth,
one-and-twenteth, and sixe-and-twenteth Pillar, to answer either directly or
in trauers, as I have showed to the Vowels of all other Languages both in place
and voice; propounding this for my warrant: That all Letters, that are not
Consonants, be Vowels.

That they are no Consonants, the translation or traduction of these words
Adam, Abel, Ruth, Ezekiel, Eber: and also of a great part of the Latin tongue
will effectually prove: as, Hnad, Hnuf, Hnur, Ad, auis, orior: VAV, ue, seu,
sieve: Hen, en: Elleh, illae: Iaijn, vinum, Greek Oinon: of which, we need no
farther example, because they are already notably known.

And considering their proper Pillars, thou shall find them to agree both in
facion and place, with their opposed Figures.

Lastly, I advise that every Letter henceforth keep to his own sound, as by
all other he shall be here pronounced according to his name, observing ever this
liberty, or rather propriety of spelling, to begin and end all Syllables with
a letter whose name and power is all one, (rejecting idle letters) and produce
the long Syllable by Accent for such a difference: Mad, mad: for mad, made: as
where Ce, is used for a Ka, there K: where Ph, is for F, there F: where Ch, is
for Q, there Q: The rest by observation, is easily learned.

Of the Hebrew Vowels, and all other Vowels and Accentes (because they be
things so unconstant and so moveable, both for employment and affection) I
meant not here to handle any thing, but to content my self with Alef and Tau,
and with that seal Eth, to sign and seal my work; delyuering it to the use
of Ezra the most excellent Scribe; or most exquisite Workman Bezaleel: and
consequently to all other of the like faculties, Optik, or Mechanical
whatsoever. And to such, I wish grace, understanding, and comfort f^^m him that
reuealeth all unto all:

Am^n.
FINIS.
Comparative table of letters and sounds


