A work entytled of ye old god and the new of the old faith and the new,
of the old doctrine and ye new / or orygynall beginning of Idolatrye.
Read most gentel reader, for many and diverse causes this most goodly book,
excellent and notable in doctrine and learning: that you may know, wheru^to
you ought to torn ye / what to behold, what to believe in this so great
dyssencion of all chrystendome, and in this so unquiet and troblous estate of
commonweals / Fare well in our lord.

Look how peuysshe a fool I am, most gentil reader (but what ca^ I be else,
but a fool) I do am bycyously set my name before ye book, unto which ye author
him self and maker of it through humilite and mekenes did not put his name:
for if I were the very father of this book, as I am but only the instructour
and teacher to hit, in as much as I have taught it to speak latyne: lord with
how goodly and glorious titles (so gredy of glory and renoume am I) would I
garnysshe it and set it forth? entitlinge it either The golden cheyne, or
else the mine of heaven, or else the flower of flowers, or else the rose of
roses, of the most cunning man Hartma^nus dulichius, maysted of the seven
lyberall sciences and an excellent doctor of divinity, (and then to show mine
hublenes and lowlynes, I would add these words though unworthy) But to take
this business, and labor of translatynge this work into latyne, I was moved,
because of the exceeding great goodness and vtilite of the book it self: to
thentent that it, being taught to speak latyne, might in what so ever places
it should walk abrod in the world: be so much the better welcome, and might
the sooner wind it self in to the familiarite and favor of all men. For there
are some men, which have more delight and pleasure in latyne works: and as for
the works made in ye vulgar tongue they do little set by, as things being of
less weight and value, And this I dare be bold to say, that scantly has
there ben any better book then this put forth and sent abroad in these
troblous times and in this great unquietness of commonweals, which is, no
doubt, most worthy to be read of all men. And to thente^t that it may in the
front and beginning appear, what is contained in the innermoste parts of the
same I will couche within a narowe rowme this large and long treasure, which
lies hid, and as it were buryde in this book. The sum and effect of this
work is this, The su^me and effect of this work.
It declares that ye beginning of Idolatrye did spring and rise of the
philosophiers, which through manyfolde dissensions have covered ye scriptures,
and through ye frauds of Satan have brought forth new gods. It shows in
the mean season the ruin and decay of the florishinge Empier of the romans,
and how the City of Rome, the lady and maystres over all ye world, was made
a pray to all nations, And how at the last by Iustiniane it was restored
from ruin and decay, from whense came also the riches of the Church, at the
co^mygne of which Riches forth with the book of the gospel was closed and
shute up, And the bisshops of Rome instead of evangelical pouertye begane to
put forth their hedes garnyshed with three crowns, After that it folowith forth
with, by what beginnings the primacy and preeminence of the pope of Rome came
first up, and how by his power and might the noble empire of the world was
brought from the Romans to the frenshe men / and last of all, how and after
what manner, by the craftye and subtle means of a certain pope being of the
famylye and kindred of the most noble dukes of Saxonye, it was translated from
ye frenshe men to the Germaynes / where began first the form and manner of
electynge of the king of Romans by the seven Princes of Germanye, which are
called the Electours. Then after ye Rome had wtdrawen their necks from under
ye yoke and domynion of the Emperor, which the popes did fear, forthwith ye
popes being instruted and well armed and made mighty and strong with the riches
of ye Chryche, did break in violently in to ye kyndomes of ye world takynke in
to both their hands the materyall sword, the sheder of blood, instead of
the spirytuall sword, whereof comes the cursed natyuite and birth of the law
called canonycall, which (Oh good lord) how little canonical that is to say
how unruly is it. what needs me to make many words? thou shall here
perceive very plainly the beginning, the progress, and e^crease, and the
dominion of that strumpet clad in purple, which holds in her hands eue^ yet
stylle a golden bowl full of blasphemies against almighty god, with the which
she makes all men dro^ken. Thou shalt se, also how under the title and name
of holy fathers, those religiouse persons have gotten and occupied the tyranny
of the world, whom with great injury and wrong doubtless, we do call Monachos
either because they are not in the world, Monachi, solitari and religious men.
when in very deed the world, yt is to wit Envy, Covetousness, and such
other monstruouse vices are in no place more vyolent and strong than in
Monasteries and the houses of religeouse persons, either else because they be
solitary, wha^ in very deed they have so mightily and strongly wound in them
selves, (as it were pestyle^t and myscheuous veins) i^ to all the me^bres and
ly^mes of ye world, that they are dreed and feared both of all Emperors and
Princes, yea and also of the pope of Rome being yet more mighty than all the
said Emperors and Princes, which said pope has set round about him self a
guard of these stout chaumpyons, to thentent that he would be taken of us eue^
for Christ him self. Thou shall also find here and perceive the cursed and
ungracious crafts of relygyous persons, their monstrous habytes, and also fro
whens came so many thousands of names / whatte is mente by Thomasys dooue, by
domynykes star, by Frau^ces wou^des, the dyuersites and vices of ordres are
here dispraysed and rebuked / there is aso set forth here the offices of
Bysshopps, and of abbotes / and the pompes, the manners, and the abuses of
priests, namely of great prebendaries and canones. Besides this the
ceremonies are here judged and set forth: and the hurt yt is in them, is
pyked out / and what good is in the^, here it is showed. Briefly religious and
this our christen life are here so tried that thou may perceive the deceyte
clokede under them. Here I do wittingly pass over many things, lest I should
make such a prologue, where by some might find ye defaulte, that hit were
longer then is the hole work, for as much as in this work the hole narration
is marvelous compendious, being deryued out of the very own propre
fountaynes, deducynge all things by a very godly order of hystoryes, so
freely, wisely, and so plainly that the Author him self of this work (who
ever he be) may be accounted and taken as another Brute, which did reskue and
deliver the chrystyan lybertye being beseged round about by tyrannous laws
and brought out of the right shape in to a certain Iudaycal supersticion and
bondage. In the second part of this book (for all ye before rehearsed things
are in ye first part) the Author does show, what god is, and his word:
that men might come to the knowledge of the^ both, what faith is, and what
hope and charity are, whense we should seche and desire our health and
salvation, and in the mean season he puts forth and shows merueilous
goodly cou^sayles, by which the chryste^ relygeon may be suckered and helped,
which is sore sick and accombred with superstycyons. He vttreth and sets
forth before us ye troth, as it is, most sy^ple and plain / and therefore I
thought it best, to use in this my translacyon semblable manner of oration and
speech, and not any such which should set forth it self gayly to ye sale, with
craft and colors depely sought. I have translated it well nere word for word
/ to thente^t that ye oration should keep it self within ye da^mes of his
orygynal ronnyge nothing at all out of the banks and yt I would neither add
neither put to any piece of mine owen clothe to the naked truth / nor yet
deminyshe and break away any piece of ye same. Thou have no cause therefore /
reader / to be offended / though some things here do not ryghtly fall in to
their own mete clauses and sentences / or though some things do gape wide /
and do not join very closely together: seeing that I did not regard nor had
respect / how eloquently I could translate this book: but how faith fully and
truly I could do it: for as much as it is a work so excelle^tly virtuous and
godly / and also erudyte and clerkely that never a one of the pyllers of the
church (as they call them) who ever he be / need to be a shamed of it / the
co^tentes whereof would to god yt the hole world not only would read: but also
would i^ their minds emprynte / and that they according to the councelles of
it / would order the publyk state / so that there were nothing whereof we might
repent us gretely of this our time / both learned men / yea and also unlearned
persons do every where make works being moeued with sundry affections / but
to speak of a work / which did so wisely / and so plainly and boldly / say
the troth at large / that even ye very adversaries are constreyned and
compelled to confess and grant all things to be very so / and none
otherwise / I never saw any as yet hitherto. The world is all out of quiet /
and sore brosed and troubled with great dissencyons and stryues / that a man
in a manner / can not know / whether he may torn himself / by the reason
hereof yt in the steed of Idolles: Christ him self is restored again unto us
/ and in ye stead of the law: is restored grace / and for the flesh is
restored the spyryte / and instead of ceremonies: the true honor and
worshyppynge of god / and instead of gross and carnal works / are restored
the very works of god: which are to believe in hi^ whom the father has sent /
as it is written in the sixte chapitre of John. All which things we are nota /
of us able to take and perceive* and hereof are risen so great discordes and
debates. But by that time that thou haste ones read this book / thou shalt
without doubt understand and perceive / what thou ought to regard / and
what to believe / and whereunto to leave and trust: so that it may be plainly
and utterly to the in yt stead of a certain squyre or rule / according to
which you may direct thy mind in these so great troubles and unquietness.
For it shows unto ye / christ and his word: unto the glory and vyctorye of
whom I pray god it may turn what so ever is written: for all other works /
what thing else are they but folishe vanitees and very tryfles be they never so
eloquently and connyngely made. The study of many men which do write and make
works now a days I do commend and allow / but the ambycyon of them and
their gredy desire of glory and praise I do hate and abhor, namely of them
which do so directly fight against the gospel / which vndoubtedli have
through the grace and favor of god: very valyaunte and stout capteynes and as
it were certain Annyballes / whereupon ye side and part of the pope fo Rome /
there are many such as were in old time / Se^pronius Flamynius and varro yea
and far exceeding and passing all these said persons in temeryte and
ignorance / let Christ be Judge. Fare well good reader and look well upon this
work: for to thy profit and behofe it is made / ye.xxiiij. day of Februarye
in the year of our lord god. A thousand five.C. twenty and three

The preface in to the work entytled of the old god, and the new god / of ye
old faith and doctrine, and of the new faith and doctrine.
The grace and fortytude or strength of the lord be unto all Christen men in
Christ: and unto those that are seduced adn do err, a return again in to
the right way: and unto the blind and obstynate and hard herted pharyseys, a
fore-warnyng of the terryble and dredful judgment, and knowledge of the
unmeasurable and infinyte goodness of god in Christ Jesus, Ame^.

FOr as much as the swerd sent down from heaven (whereof our lord does
speak in the.x. chapter of math) has in this our time renewed it self, and
is now come forth fre and naked from the covert of ye close scabert / wherein
it has been long hyd, (that is to wite, from worldely wisdom / from
tradicions of men / from ceremonies / from counterfeit and dysguysed holiness)
but yet being through dust and long being unoccupied / vnbright and defiled
with ruste. Our lord Jesus christ pytieng this condycyon and state of that
sword, which he had many years agone delivered and betaken to Paul, and to
the apostles, to overcome and subdue ye mighty scepters of kings and princes,
and ye Empyers of darkness: has now again commended and betaken the same
sword unto his wryte^ and elect Captay^es and mynesters: which being drawn
forth and rydde out of the seabarde: forthwith at the beginning of the
furbyshynge and scouring out of ye rustye spots before gathered, suddenly do
break forth and spread them selves abroad mystes of all manner kinds and
sorts, yt is to wit of ye worldly wise men / of proud rich men / and men of
power / of covetous men / of the servants / of lechery and bodily lust / of
counterfeyte and feigned relygion / and the devil him self also, which being
again adredde and stondynge in fear of him self to take hurt and to be
overcome, does coueyte and desyere the old wicked and ungracious peace, the
quyete and peaceable seat of his power ini hypocrisye, does look about by
Ambassadors / and by pertyes, by his friends, for aid and soccourre: wherefore
the hid and secret treasures are now opened and showed / yt is to say,
where as above certain hundredth years a goo, kings, princes, lords, cytyes,
rich men, even until this day have given lyberall gifts to the honourynge
and worshyppynge of god, as chyrstes Monasteries / benefices / prouynces /
castelles / vyllages / tithes / lybertyes / and such other things, wenynge yt
thereby high reverence does come to god / which goods of the church are now
granted to ye sons of kings and princes for this intent and purpose, that
they also should be of those parts and sides / and the same goods also are
given in the stead of stypende and wages unto the pestylent and myscheuous
flyees and locustes of Aegypte: for by this mean (as they believe) they shall
close up again ye fearful swerd in his sheth or scaberde, and shall obtain
and get our old peace / but the glyttrynge bryghtnes of the fyery sword,
has so perced and entered in to the eyes of many men's hertes, yt strife is
spronge and risen well near in all the earth the sone rysynge against his
father / and the daughter against her mother / and all the hole house being
in a stir and great unquietness, and every one in others top / through
dyscorde and debate. Besides this the colleges of the men of the church, and
the parts of the religious persons, which are excellently learned and wise,
holding their peace, as if they were dumb, and their speech taken from them:
the simple and unlearned comynalte do enserch the deep and merueilous mysteries
of, god and speaks them after diverse ways to and fro: whereof is risen a
proverb among many men, I take perte with ye old god, the old faith, and
the old doctrine / I will believe as my father, and mother, and mine auncesters
have believed / and either of the parts will accuse ye other of error and
iustyfye them selves and show the right / all the which things have
constrained me to give knowledge, brefly what is either the old god or the
new, and by the course of holy scriptures and of histories to give comen
instructyon in all such manner questyons and contrauersyes or stryues / by ye
mean of which instruccion every man being not of a stubberne nature and of
obstynate manners might ye sooner wax wise and amend / and that no man should
bind him self to contencions and false understanding of the manyfolde
honourynge and worshippynge of god as a vain, a corrupt, and hurtful thing,
of no value and an obscure and dark thing, and yt we might follow straight and
dyrectly the scripture of god, and that according to it as to a rule, we should
direct our selves and all our deeds / and that we should search out ye curnell
or inner meat of ye scryptures / betakynge the chafe and the husks thereof to
the wind. Now in this book is showed the very orygynall fountain and
spring / out of the which did issue our banyshement in to this vale of
wretchedness and mysery and how that blyndnes and the malygnyte of sin in us
did begin and spring of ye incredulite and unbelief of our first father Adam,
out of which as out of ye rote all Idolatry has grown and spronge up.
Consequently in this book is also showed and rehearsed by the hystoryes the
very beginning of all manner superstycion in the worshyppyng of false gods /
and whereby Lucyfer / Belus / Pallas / Juno / Venus / Saturnus / Jupiter /
purchased and gate to them selves the names of gods and goddesses. Then
afterward is showed ye blyndnes of the Jews after the Natyuyte of Christ,
impiete of philosophers, and ye perverse and corrupt understanding and
mysconstruynge of ye scriptures used of herytykes. Last of all is showed, how
through the sleyghte and deceyte of the deuylles, that proud creature which
we do now call the pope, has been exalted and advanced above god, even
divine honors being decreed to the same pope by ye most pestyle^t host of
flatterers, which fight under him as their captain / from the which pope as
from the head of abused power and auctoryte, the pope is hedde
the multitude of errors have descended in to all the bodi of the whole world,
Christ being well nere so put out of place, and brought out of mind yt he
is in manner more unknown to us, then any stranger. And in the Church of Rome
(much after the fashone that was in the old time under the feendes) are used
diverse ceremonies and strange and marvelous worshyppyng of god, which
knowethe none end of varyete and sundry fashons / which thing is open for
every man to se. It shows also how Rome does co^fyrme / does condemn /
does judge all things / so that a man may not without good cause call it in to
trial and Judgment / whether he yt now reygneth at Rome / be Antychryst /
or else we ought to look for some other Antychryste hereafter to come: seeing yt
this man in all points yt is to wit both in his doctrine and also in his
living / is far disagreynge and in manner clean contrary to the doctrine and
life of Christ which both hy^ self and also his apostles did neither teach
so / neither yet did have any such things in use: but did forbede, and also
did curse such manner doctrine, and such rytes or ceremonies.

andThe first book.
THat there was a deperting and deuysion made even from the beginning of the
world, forth with as soon as reasonable cratures, received life: the nature
of aungelles do euydentlye declare / for part of them did follow god and part
of them did depart and fall away from god, making a new god to them selves,
that is to wit lucifer / man in earth, (for of Ada^ forthwt brake forth Abell
and Cayne two sundry and diverse ways: i^ to which al their posterite have
entered and do eue^ yet walk in they and so shall walk even to ye world (end)
did search out high acts / now if we do read the old historyes, In ye book of
Genesis and thoroughe out the Bible.
as manetho among ye Aegeptions / Berosus ye histo. of ye chaldeis / Mochus
and Estius of ye syrya^s / Hisiodus and Josephus of ye Jews / and Tytus lyuius
of the Romans: then do we find most sure and undoubted, and also most true
tokens, that all men of all times have been both in other things, but most
specially in the honourynge and worshyppynge of god, maruailously disagreing
and stiffly contrary one to another / in so much yt every land and regyon
has devised and ymagyned to it self a propre and a new and strange god,
not herd of before. The first origynall cause of so manyfolde and diverse
gods, was the incredulite and unbelief of our first father ada^. For after yt
ye eternal and the very god had showed him self unto Adam, and he had given
little credence to the word of god he came therefore in to i^obedye^ce, which was
ye occasion of his hedlonge fall: for in the mean season when he did not fere
god by faith and belefe, he did search out things perteinynge to his own
self, that is to wit, yt he might get the co^nynge and knowledge of good and
evil, trusting yt thereby it should have come to pass, that he should have be^
made like unto god: then suddenly the lord god did reiecte him and cast him of
as one being an unbeliever, and as one being disobedient unto his co^mau^dment.
Thereof has diffydence or unbelief, and wantonness, and temeryte entered in and
possessed all the lo^des of Adam, out of which we all seli wretches do crepe
forth, and that nature we have all the mayny of us sucked out of the breast and
bosom of our mother Eve, with so great vyolence and might that all we men
and women are by the comen progress and course, gendred and brought forth
indyffydence, and unbelief as saint Paul says i^ his epistle to ye To.
Therefore aft mine opinion and Judgment, what original syn is.
origynal sy^ne is none other thy^g then incredulyte or unbelief, and wytchynge
or rebellion and disobedyence against god, which co^eth with us in to this world.
Therefore the offering up of sacryfyces in the law of nature, and Circumcision
in ye law of moses, and Baptism in the law of grace, are certain diverse
tokens of belefe toward god i^ which men have faithfully and boldly
excercysed them selves to faith to the sygnyfycacyon and betokenynge of the
inward man being obedyente and gyuynge credence to the words and promysse of
god / for ye sign and toke^ without faith and belefe is vayn and unprofitable /
and when ye sign or seal and mark of faith which was imprynted in us by the
inuocacio^ of the name of god, does come to our mind and remembrance: the^ we
ought evermore to take an occasion from the innermost desire of our heart to
give crede^ce, and to give thanks unto ye excedy^ge grace of god given unto
us, and to his most benygne and liberal promyses. For the greatest of all
sacrifyces is a right and true christen faith: which after yt you have
excercised, you do verily a profitable work, and do not widder and dry up
with ydelnes as certain blind persons do. If Adam had verily belyued the word
of god: he should never have fallen, upon who^ ye Justice of god (and not
vnwortheli) took ve^gea^ce and punyshement / ye same perverse and corrupt
nature of unbelief and disobedience of our first pare^t, al we his ofspryng
have taken and received as our inherytau^ce every one after other: so yt
comenly nature guydyng and ledynge us there unto, we are in all things holde^
with the love of our own selves / and our own things we do seche magnyfye and
aduau^ce / and do prefer them before al things, and of our selves do form
and make as it were a certain god / so did Cayne prefer him self before his
brother Abel, and did byelde ye first cite, The first begynnge of Idoltrye
called Enoch and made himself a king / so also Nembrothe being proud and
high my^ded began to byelde ye proud kyngedome of Babylon / so sen the king
of ye assyrianes, The first greece or step.
grau^de father to Abraham, did byelde ye first temple of Idolatry, setting
forth me^ for to be honored in ye stead of god / not long after when Belus the
son of Nembrothe had governed Babylon and all the kingdom of Assiria with
meruaylous peace and tra^quilite by ye space of three score and fyfftene years:
Ninus ye son of Belus, willing to get ye favor of ye people, and glory,
did set up an image of his father very cunnyngly and workemanly carved upon
an high pyller, in the mids of the market place / pronounsinge and openly
declaring it to be a certain sanctuary and place of refuge, yt who soever, of
what so ever trespase or crime they were gyltie, did ru^ne for socoure unto
that image, they should be safe and untouched, and delivered. Into the which
image anon after the old serpent lucyfer did enter gyuing oracles and answers
unto men: by ye reason whereof ye Assirianes and the people of Babylon began
to worship a new god called Beel. Beel ye first new god.
After the death of Ninus forthwt came Beel in use, and by succession and
process of time Beel was taken for a very and an old ancient god / which
Beel continued afterward in babylon by the space of fyftene hundredth years,
as long as that proud kingdom did stand vndestroied. The three goddesses of
Paris.
Pallas. Juno. Venus appeared unto Paris the son of Pryamus the king of Troy /
whiles he was a sleep, as unto a Judge which of them was most excellent in
beauty: upon whom the young man was so meruayllously inamoured, yt both ye
images of them were set up in chirches, and also yt ye very Images selves /
which did speak and give answers by ye fraud and deceit of the serpent, were
accounted and taken for goddesses. Saturn.
Saturnus being a very wyttye and also a diligent and good husbondman
purchased and gate to him self such lawde and praise among men: that whom
they took for a king in his life time, the Image of him after his death they
did worship as the god of the earth. Iuppiter.
Iupyter the son of the said saturn in the I Will of Creta enclyned and prone to
play at the dyesse, being also ambyeyous and desirous of honor, and also an
horemo^ger, for to purchase and get to hy^ self most high honor and worship,
spente largely much gold and silver, and gave exceeding great rewards,
specially about ye deceiuynge and wy^nyge of young women, which were excellent
in beauty and fayrenes, whom he did begyle thrughe dysguysyng of him self, in
many sundry appelles, and so apperyng in diverse lykenesses: of the which
sleyght and craft Ouyde took the occasyon of writing his book entytled,
Methamorphoses. And the same Iupyter also after that he was deperted from this
life, was called by the name of god: and in process of time was made an old
god. The cause of idolles.
Se^blably may we rehearse al ye gods of blind antiquite. For who so ever
was notable / whether he were a king, as Belus, or else a coueytous man as
Saturnus / or else ambycious, as Iupyter / or else a cruel and blody tyrante
as Mars / or else wyttye and eloquente as Pallas and Mercuryus / or else
given to voluptes and pleasures of ye body, as Venus and Priapus / or else
drunken and ouercome^ with wine, as Bacchus / or else a sothsayer and teller of
things after to come, as Appollo / or else a wise and co^nynge hunter, as
Dyana: breefly what so ever notable, specyal, and synguler thy^g they did find
to the use and profit of men thereof they got the name of a god. The^ as soon as ye images of such excellent men or kings were set up in the steed of a
god: the devil entered in to ye said Images, The craft and deceit of ye devil.
playenge mastryes in these stocks, otherwhiles casti^g forth fyere, or else
making and causyng dreams to men, that if they would lay sick and deseased
persons before this or ye Image, and would kyl some beast, and offer it up i^
sacryfyce to that god, they that were diseased should receive their health
again: by this craft and mean was Idolatrye begone, and also continued and
increased among them of ye old time. Afterward i^ so great a multytud, and as
a man would say, an host of diverse and sundry gods, every king, when he
should goo forth to make bataylle, chose him out a god, some one, some an other
(as diverse me^ are of sundry appetites and affections) such a one as they
thought mete for their business: as for example, the god Mars / or the goddess
Bellona, (I take record of the Capitalie house in rome, which was full of
diverse gods) to whom he would make sacrifice, and whose cou^sailles or
oracles and au^swers he would take. Another desyring a young woman to his wife /
and yt a fair and a well favored one: wurshipped venus. The husbo^d man, yt
was gredy and desirous of corn and fruytes of the earth, did honor and made
his prayers to Saturnus: likewise as he yt was sick and diseased, did make his
prayers to Appollo, for ye recovery of his health / And they yt were desirous of
sapience and wisdom (as the greeks) did pray unto Dyana or Pallas which
gods and goddesses had every one of them their own propre prestes / which
did comen with the prodigious and wu^derfull images, The prestis of the gods
called Flamines.
as interpretours of their minds / unto which prestes the co-men people both
men and women did resort to take instruction of brynging and offering
sacrifices and gifts to the god: and so one land after a another falling from
the worshypping of very god, would have a propre god of their own, whom they
supposed to be more mighty and puissau^t then all other gods / wherefore ye
holy prophet Helias did mock and scorn ye gods Baal, and their four
hundredth prophets, And hereof also the Ephesyons were proud of the most
noble and famous temple of Dyana, The temple of Diana within the city of
Ephesus.
which was rekened among the meruayles and wu^derful works of the world,
which thing was unto many men an accasyon of entering in to their prouynces,
brekynge the gods all to gobettes, because the gods being egal in goodness,
thus dyssencyon and stryeffe among them selves, did war each to destroy
other. And this supersticion lasted and co^tynued about the space of two
thousand and three score and two years, before the coming of our lord Jesus
Christ. But after yt the lord and king of glory, ye son of god came down
from heaven, from the bosom of his eternal father unto us wretched and blind
sinners, to take upon him self the nature of mankind: than was there a brydel
cast upon these cou^terfayted, Christ Jesus the vanquissher of idolatrye.
and forged, and new gods (which yet in their time were among me^
accoumpted for old gods) and a mark was prefyxed and set up, yt they should
not from the^sforth so myghtely have dominion and rule over the world, that
the scripture should be fulfilled. sapi. xiiij. And Christ Jesus began to teach
man kind, that the very eternal god, and the old god, which was before the
beginning of the world, was to be acknowledged and to be worshypped in spyryte
and troth / by the reason whereof in diverse and many places the temples decayed
and fell down, the images at the coming of the truth of Christ / waxyng
dumble, and the prophesyenge spyrite or breath of the caves or dens wearynge
out and vanyshynge away, and the might of the christen faith and relygyon
encreasynge and waxing stronger and stronger. This thing could not the old
serpent abide and suffer, to see him self thus to grow all together into
contempt: The cause of the persecution of ye christian men.
he did therefore conspyre and spoke to the prestes of ye false gods (which
were called flamines) yt they should chase and drive christen people out of all
places, and oppress them, because they did teach strange things and new
things against the old faith and belefe: and so ye kings and pry^ces being
persuaded thereunto by ye said prestes, did exercise excedy^g great and cruel
tyrannyes, and whersoeuer the christian people had become or styrred them selves:
there was no remedy but forthewyth they must needs lease their lives / and as
though death had not ben enough for the^, they were vexed before and tormented with
intolerable torments, and ye most sore pains yt could be devised / and ye
tyrauntes did suppose and wene, that of such cruel handelyng of the christen
men, there did come high and synguler reverence to the gods, and also ye by
the reason thereof them selves should have ye better speed and fortune. But after
that the chosyne and elected soldyers of Christ most virtuous christen men had
put their confydens and trust in Christ: he assysted them with his present and
mighty aid and help / worki^g by the^ through his myghtie and wonderful power
many maruaylous things / as that the ydolles did fall to duste and powder, and
were brought to naught / and that the slayghtes and deceyptes of the prestes,
and of the prophets and sothesayers came to light and were openly known with
their great infamye and shame / and that the kinds and their Empiers, (as it
were compelled) were subdued to the Christen faith. Then the old serpent,
Lucifer the first new god.
the first and new god Lucyfer, did cast and compass in his own mind these
craftye counsayles / The ydolles or images, and the offering of beasts in
sacryfyce (said he to him self) decays and gothe away / thy name is
despised, The craft and subtylte of the same Lucifer.
seorned, and set at naught / al divine honors, and also the sweet smellyng
fra^kentens are taken a way from the: you must find another way and some other
crafty prouysyon, seeing yt this way has deceived the. As long as christen me^
did not greatly esteem nor set much by temples or chirches, and by ye pompes
of ye same, but all their power and might stood in ye scripture, they
vaynquysshed and overcame all me^ with their speech, and no man was able to take
the^ in so meruaillous a doctrine as they did teach: yt god has a son / and
yt the same sone had taken flesh upon him, and afterward had suffered
passion, being nailed on a cross / had dyed / had ryson again from death to
life / and that they ought to believe the gospel according to ye rule whereof we
ought to live, to be pacient i^ tribulation and necessite / to love our enemies
/ to do them good / to pray for the^ and such other things, which the prestes
of ye maumettes had never told to ye kings and princes, but had often times
told them the contrary things to these. Also chryste^ men did so constantly
and perfectly lead an honest, a loving, and a peasible life / that one of them
(yt is to wit Augustyne) did say, I would not believe the gospel, onles the
auctoryte of the chirch (yt is to say, of the christen me^, which by the means
of the gospel have grown up in so commendable a life) did compel me / as
though he should say, seeing yt so honest me^ and virtuous, so good and so
charytable, and loving among the^ selves, and so holy and just men do spring
and grow up of the doctrine of ye gospel: it can not be otherwise but that
the doctrine of the gospel is true and just. And afterward this wicked and
ungracious serpent full of a thousand crafts and gyles, The second degree of
ydolatry.
considered and pondered the first pryncyples, yt is to say, the foundation
and ground work of the christen faith, dysputyng and reasonyng in this wise
with him self: thou waste among all creatures the fairest and most beautyfull
/ the most wise, and the most noble in nature / and most reasonable, and most
perfyte of understanding / and you gave no credence to the word and
commandment of god, but thou wast dysobedient to his precepte: therefore you
wast cast down hedlo^g from the place yt thou wast in, and was rejected and
forsaken. Then afterward he used such a manner of argument also. The first
men Adam and Eve, they also by the reason that they did not believe God, nor
obey his commandment, came in to the same estate of perdition: And like wise
Cayne and Saul. wherefore experience does teach me, that who so ever does not
believe God, and give credence to those things, either which he has promised,
or which he has spoken: that man shall be rejected and forsaken of God, and
shall be dampened. Of which things does follow this corner stone for the
foundation, That there can be no greater, no more profitable, nor none more
acceptable work to God, than if a man does holly in all things give credence
to the words and commandments of God, with out any questioni^g or
enserchi^ge of the causes: as my capital and deadly enmy Esaie does say in
the forty chapitre / who was of counsel with him? Besides this I do understood
and perceive of the apostles that they utterly believe their Jesus of Galyle /
and what soever they do speak, it is scripture / they do neither add any
thing thereto, neither mynishe any thing therfro, leaving the words as god
spoke them. wherefore Messiah does assyste them so strongly, that no power of
the Emperors of Rome can any thing prevail against the^. For ye mo christen
men yt are out to death by sore and cruel torments: by somyche the more
cherefully, and the more boldlye and manfully do they fight for the faith, and
do teach it. But this polycye and craft thou shalt use, and thus thou shalt
do. Thou knoweste very well he worm, with which ye hoke was bayted, wherewith
Adam / Eve / Cayne / Nembroth / Saul / Hieroboam / and such other were allured
and taken: Thou shall cast thy hoke again, and let it hang / thou can not
tell, what fysshe thou may happen to draw up at ye next draught, if the
hoke be devoured and swalowed in together with the bayte: and so the old wylye
and gylefull serpent began his fysshyng, coueryng and hyding the hoke with meat
/ and convenient bayte for his purpose (by the hoke, understanding
dysobedyence / by the bayte incredulity. For whosoever distrusteth, does
believe nothing) So anon he gat certain of the Iuwes / which did repyne and
speak against the doctrine of ye Apostels accusing them to be seductours and
deceyuers, which went about to wtdrawe the people from the law of Moses to
an other law, and therefore that they were not to be followed, nor their doctryn
to be believed / for who so ever (they said) were not circumsised, and did not
live according to ye law of Moses: that man was fallen from eternal health
and salvation. O how delectable and plesaunt, and also how bright and how
clear a bayte did yt most ungracious and myscheuous deceyuer lay for ye jews?
Suppose you, or wene you yt the jews might with honestye have said, The
Apostles do teach a new faith, and they do teach errors and heresies / but
we will believe in the old god of Israel, and we will give credence to ye old
faith and doctrine: whereunto what did Paul answer? he did not make any
phylosophycall disputation and reasonyng, but said, If you will be circumcised,
Gala. v.
then is Christ not profitable nor aduayllable unto you. O folyshe creatures,
who has bewytched you, that you should not believe and obey the truth? O Paul
would god you were living now these days. with this deceiptfull bayte the old
serpent did crepe thorough all ye corners of ye world, and in what soever
place ye apostles and disciples did preach ye gospel, suddenly the chief
priests and the pharyseys brake forth, laying against them the law of Moses,
the old god of Israel, the old faith and belefe: and when they were not
able to make their party good, nor to match them in doctrine / then they fell
to opprobrious and rebukefull words / to raysynge sedicions against them / to
beatynge and punishyng of them, which thing the most noble captain Paul does
witness in ye.xi. chap. of his second epistle to the Corinthyanes, most
grievously complaining from ye botom of his heart, of the labors and trauaylles
/ of the strokes / of the shypwrakes / of manyfold dangers and ieoperdyes of
false brothern. etc. which place I beseech the to read dylygently, and it shall
make the sorye at thine heart, to see that Paul for his so great labors and
trauaylles was so unkindly and vngentily entreated. And this most ungracious
and cursed bayte of unbelief the devil, carried about, nygh the space of two
and forty years, until that the jews were all wholly vaynquesshed and
ouercome^ by Tite and Vespasian, and were compelled to forsake their own
country, and wandre about like banyshed men: which said jews even yet at
this day do receive the aforsayd bayte of perdition, wherewith (alack for
pity) they shall be stangled for evermore. But after that this bayt was so
publyshed and so well known, The third degree.
that men being ware and wife would no longer be taken and be made fast with
the hoke, despisynge and setting at naught such manner meats: Then he put
upon the hoke meat of an other color, that is to wit, the power and
authority of the emperors and kings (as we have taught hertofore) according
to the comen proverb: when words can nothing avail, tha^ we must provoke to
strokes. But by how much the more cruelly the princes did exercise their
tyranny: by so much the more the christian faith waxed strong and gathered
fast rotes. The fourth degree.
Then did the ungracious wily serpent cast this in his mind, by this way I am
never the nerer to my purpose, The kind of men is constant / strong /
steadfast / and do stand styflye, and will not ones be stirred and moved out of
their place: I must take some other way / and devise some other policy: seeing
yt for all yt ever ye jews and tyrants can help, yet thou art never a deal
the further: now take also on thy side ye disciples and scholars of ye priests
yt served the idolles, (which were the philosophers that had in times passed
learned many things of the said priests) and first he perceived the Greeks
to be very mete persons for this busynes, as the Athenienses in Boetia /
Corinthia and Achaia. These philosophers did rise against christen men,
laughing to scorn all that ever they did speak of the Nativity and death of
Christ: bryngyng forth arguments and reasons out of the books of the
philosophers / Aristotle / Socrates / Pythagoras / and of the seven wise men of
Grecela^de / and by crafty and very subtyl sylo gismes, they did infer and
conclude it to be impossyble, that a deed man could rise again from death to
life. And what soever such things the christen men had put forth concerning
any point of our faith / the Greeks always gayn said and withstode it very
subtilye and wisely with their philosophy / in so much that saint Paul also was
moved and styrred to say to the Corinthians in the first epistle and the first
chaptre, But we do preach Christ, crucified / to the jews an occasion of
falling / and to the Greeks folysshenes. But yet not withstandyng when
miracles did follow the doctrine of the gospel: at the last they did believe the
gospel. And this disputation and strife between the christen men and
philosophers endured and continued after Christis ascension about the space of
three hundred years. But yet (to speak as to the worldewarde) the christian men
must needs than be in thraldom and subjection / and to keep them selves within
a narowe and strait rowme: for contempt and despisyng did follow them (as the
shadow follows the body) thorugh banysheme^tes / turmentes, persecutions, and
dethes. But never did the church of christen men stand either better or more
blessedly and prosperously, than in those three hundredth years. After which in
the year of our lord three hundredth and enleuen came Constantyne, Constantine
a good man and a noble, and a great fauorer and lover of the relygion of god,
which when he should make against Maxe^tius the tyrant, a murderer of christen
men, and a turmentour of good men, a neocromancer, and the aucthor and causer
of ye murder and destruction eue^ also of his well-beloved. And when the said
Constantine took great care and thought for that battle: it happened him as he
lay a sleep in his bed to have a dream or vision that he was making battle
against Maxentius, and in the mean season appeared to him in the aier a cross
of gold toward the east, and when he asked and demanded what manner a sign
and token this was, there sou^ded i^ his ears a loud voice sent down from
heaven, saying: Constantyne in this sign and token thou shalt win the victory.
Anon after he awoke, musing soore what manner image this should be: and when
it was day light, he gathered and assembled a counsel of his nobles and
great lords, by whom he had profit understanding and knowledge, that the
Cross is the sign and badge of christen men, whom he did also send for
afterward, which did preche and tell many things to him of the holy
cross, and of the christen faith, to whom Consta^tyne the emperor made
answer in this wise: If I have good speed in my battle against Maxentius, so
that I do get the victory: I my self also will become a christen man. And so
he did, as it were arm him self and his soldiers with the holy cross of
Christ: and fyghtyng with Maxentius he did most valiantly get the victory
of him, and also did most prosperously triu^phe. And wha^ the Romans
according to the usage and custom had decreed to Constantine, pompouse and
royal orname^tes and other things appertaynynge to a goodly tryumphe: he
answered and said, These things are not due to me, but to Christ, and
therefore he did set up a very noble and goodly cross, and was baptized and
became a Christen man. Here the Roman history, which is had in the.xcvj.
did. Constantinus. etc. does say that the donation was made of the Emperor
Constantyne, the.iiij. day after his baptism: wha^ saint Hierome in the
history called Tripertita historia, does record, that Constantyne was not
baptized before the last end of his life, and that not at Rome, as these men do
say, but in Nicomedia, which things do not stand well together nor agree one
with the other. The Popes law in this place does feign many excellent and
goodly donations and grau^tes / to have been made to the pope of Rome, yt the
rule and gouerna^ce of ye hole world is granted to the pope of rome, and yt
the majesty of kings and princes is subject to him. etc. which things do
take no likelihood or color at all of ye testament of Co^sta^tius. For this
Constantius likewise as his father Co^sta^tinus governed thempier of Rome, And
after Consta^tius likewise did Iulyanus. etc. This is of truth, he gave to
christen men license and leave to build churches, and he adorned the same
churches with rich gifts, and he granted liberty to preche the gospel in
every place: but he neither gave rome, neither yet any other province or
nation. The crafty polycyes and counsayles of Satan.
The old serpent took recourse again to his old crafts and subtylties, he
perpared and ordened a crafty bait to ye hoke, reasoning thus with him self,
it is now come to pass, yt the emproour of ye Romans has forsaken the for
his captain / he is fallen from taking thy prote, and from worshippyng of the
/ yt images of ye gods in the capytalie house do decay, and are trodden under
the fete / their temples are shytte up and do fall down to ground / thus shall
you do trustyng to ye help of philosophers, you shall sow false sede into ye
field of ye scryptures, yt is to wite, prouerse and wrong understanding, so yt
the unite and concord of christen men may be broken in sondre into diverse
protes, Herespes did spri^g of philosophy.
and by the reason thereof, their faith shall begin to wax weak, to fail, and
to be suspected and mystrusted, and then shall thy gods rise up again / and
so the hook being covered with this bayte, a certain priest among the
christen men did devour and swalowe it in, whose name was Arrius, a grecian in
Alexandria of Egypt, Arrius.
when he fortuned to read that place in the xiiij. chap. of John^: Pater me
mayor est, my father is greatter than I: he took thereof occasion to teach a
dyfference in the most blessed Trinite, saying that the father is the greatest,
and most puissaunt of all / and that next to him is the son, but inferior
and less tha^ the father / and that last of all follows ye holy ghost, the
least of all in the Trinity. Pluck up your ears, and listen o christen men,
how full of wonderful frauds and gyles ye old serpente is, by which he
would break ye corner stone of the true christen faith? in what wise he has
imagyned and ordered all things from the beginning of ye world, to the^tent
yt we should neither believe God, nor trust in him. Thou Arrius, why dyddest
thou not also read that text in the.x. of John^, Ego et pater sumus, I and my
father be both one: And like wise when he said to Philippe, Qui videt me,
videt et patrem, he that sees me, sees my father. And what other thing did
deceive Arrius the priest, and bring him in to error: than the phylosophyes?
whiles he would measure and judge the holy scripture by Aristoteles lerni^ge:
Likewise as even these days over many me^ do, the more pity. This Arrius did
draw after him a great flock of disciples and folowers, which did extolle
and magnify him for a new god, by the reason of his doctrine. For those
things, which he taught, he did fortify and strengthen with many
philosophical arguments and syllogysmes, and also with many examples. But than
that old Leuiathan did tread on roses, and was not a little well appayde,
after that he saw this inue^tion and devise of his to go forward, and to come
well to pass: that the christen men did disagree and were at variance among
them selves. For both Constantius did consent and agree with Arrius, and also
many excellent bishops, as Eusebius in Nicomedia, a city of Asia the the
less: For in it and in Morae and in Achaia, and in Macedonia, al philosophers
welnere did spring up and begin, which did reign there in schools by the
space of many years, continually fom the time of Daris, ye king of Asseria and
of Medea, and these phiosophers did believe nothi^ge else, but only that,
which reason did teach / and lead them unto. In this said time ye good and
well learned man Athanasius was promoted unto the bishop rich of Alexandria /
which took upon him to show the veryte and troth to Co^sta^tius. Athanas;ius
But what busynes had than the old Leuiathan? what crafts and subtle gyles
wrought he than? He proved false accusers / which did is false lies so accuse
that good and well learned bishop Athansius unto the emperor Constantius / that
he was so far brought out of favor with the said emproour / yt he did a long
season seche means and occasions to put Anathasius to death: but the^de and
proof of ye thing did full well declare and show his innocence. For Arrius
within a little while after dyed a shameful death / his entrelles and guts
falling from him in to a privy or sege / in the Synod of Nece / as
afterward the aforsayde Athanasius in the city Treueres openly did express
/ and put in writing upon the psalm Quicunque vult. So when the old dragon
had drawn to him this fysshe hanging fast on the hoke / he preserved and
kept the bayte to begyle and take moo with all, The beginning of heresies
because he saw that there was a great multitude of Arrianes / which pyckyng
out diverse and sundry textes of the scripture, did season them with their
brothe of the philosophies / and cover them with a disceytefull color, and
fastnynge them on the hoke / did take many unprofitable fysshes nothing
apperteynynge to the vessel of salvation / as Macedonius / Nestorius / Eurites
/ Simon / Valentiniane donatus. etc. In process of time about the nombre
of.lxviij. of such unprofitable fysshes, as it were ye first draught / did
swalowe in ye bayt and the hook withal. Hereof sprange so great dissentions
and stryfes among christen men, that the holy fathers and bishops were feign
to take excedi^g great labors and pains in disputy^g and writing against
errors and heresies / as Anastasius / Eusebius / Hilarious / Cirillus /
Damascenus / Ambrosius / Hierome / and Augustine. etc.

This dissencion and diverse understanding of the scryptures, lasted and
endured in certain places, about the space of.viij.C. years. And who soever is
desirous to see the steps and tokens of the new gods, and of the new
faith by name, let him read the decretalles in the.xxiiij. cause and ye
third question Quidam. etc. In such manner disputions occasyon was offered to
good and worshypfull fathers, by subtle and crafty objections of philosophy,
to take in their hands whatsoever manner weapons, to cast forth against them /
although they were otherwhyles unlike and not agreing to the holy scripture.
But yet for asmoche as they did it full sore against their wylles, and did
fight of a pure and a good faithful mind: they were promitted and suffered to
retreat, and call again such things as their works do suffycyently witness
and record. wherefore saint Augustyne said not unwisely, other men's works
(says he) I do so read, that, be they never so excellent in holiness and
doctrine / yet I do not therefore think their sayenges true / because they did
so say and think: but because they have been able to persuade it unto me to be
true / by ye canonical scriptures / or else by probable reason. Ungracious and
cursed Lucifer continually trustyng after heavenly honor and worship / still
compassed and did cast all polycyes and crafts to and fro in his mind and
left no way unassayed, having his mind stedfastlye set upon all the state
of christian men, and well auisynge it / he proceyued and marked the^perours
maky^g war among them selves / and other provinces: by the reason whereof
they had ones fallen again from the faith of Christ / and might little give
their mind to holy scriptures: The office of ye bishops in old time,
which the bysshoppes did study / all other things despised / preaching the
gospel in pouerte / neither was the bishop of Rome any thing else at that
time, than a pastor or herdes man / not a king and lord / as he is now / and
so likewise in other cities also, the bisshoppes did exercise the office of
sheperdes / they had not the dominions and lordshyps / and the governance and
rule of ye world nor did not seek their own honor and lucre: they taught the
people the kingdom of God / they conforted and cherysshed pore folks. For at
that time the people did mynyster and give to them their necessaries, and also
money to be distrybuted among poor and nedye folks, according to the
example given by the apostles: but of the great and noble estates, and of ye
dukes and lords they had many injuries and persecutions done unto them / and
they submytted them selves / sufferynge patiently all aduersyte and trybulation
for the name of the lord. But the come^ people with great fidelite confortynge
each other / as every place was most in quiet and tranquilite: so thither they
did most assemble and gather them selves together. As for example in Egypt /
where saint Antony did win many dysciples unto Christ / the christen people
swarmyng there so thycke / that certain thousands of men and women did in that
place live a life according to the heavenly philosophy, that is to wit,
according to the gospel in mortifieng of the flesh as saint Hierome does
witness.

The decay and fall of ye Roman Empier.
In those days in ye year of our lord.CCCC.lxxvi. and after, the Emperors
stylle making wars (for by desteny the end of the Romayne Empier was then
nere at hand) the famylyes and lynages of the said Emperors were destroyed
and plucked up by the rotes, and there was a capitayn made gouerner of Rome
called Orestes, which had given this honor to his own son / that he should
be called not Augustus (which was the propre and true name of the emperors)
but Augustulus, which was as you would say / a small encreacer of thempier.
For the old Roman Caesar the emperor of the west prote, that is to wite, of
Rome / of Italy, of France / of Germany, was thrust from yt empier / and in
his stead Isaurus the emperor of Constantinople, had set Orestes one of the
senators blood / and had made him captain and governor of Rome / which did
substitute and make his son Augustulus governor of the city after him
self, and so the noble city of Rome / which sometime was lady and maistres of
all the world / did serve under a captayn without any Roman Emperor. Then rose
up a prince beyond the borders of Hungary (as I suppose out of walachia) whose
name was Odoacer Russus, which with a great army assembled, took his iournay
straight toward rome / agay^st who^ came forth ye captain Orestes being also
armed with his legions / to mete with him / and to withstand him: but at the
first sight of valiant and bold Odoacer, he fled toward Papia. But Odoacer
Russus pursuinge fast after him, laid siege to the city / and wanne it by
battle / and slew Orestes. And afterward walky^g to and fro throughout all
Italy / making havoc and great destruction in all places where he went /
when he found none enemy that durst wtstande him, he went straight to Rome to
make war upon it / and in co^clusyon was aduau^ced by the sword to the
Empier of Rome, and did govern it after his own pleasure / and as he list him
self / And this is the decay and fall of ye Roman Empier. The decay and
fall of the weste empiere.
In the year after the bieldyng of the City of Rome M.CC.xxix. and after the
natiuite of Christ CCCC.lxv. after that Odoacer had reigned at Rome.xiiij.
years among other provinces and regions / which were tributarie to the
Romans, France also was one, and after certain years wha^ the Romans did
require trybute / the french men did rebelle and did try the natier with the
Romans by battle: wherein ye Roman host being overcome and driven out of
France / the french men did elect and make a king over them selves, one
Pharamundus / and in like manner ye other provinces also / which before time did
belo^ge to the Romans / did now one and then another create kings of their
own / forsaky^g the city of Rome from the yoke of obedyence. Of which said
city withdrawing them selves by little and little / they were their own lords /
all servitude and subjection clean shaken of. For as Odoacer had won and
gotten Rome by violence and strong hand: even so likewise was it taken again
from him / for he was slain of Theodoricus of the Gotthes / so the the noble
and famous City of Rome was made a pray to all out tyrauntes and nations:
Rome turned into a pray.
even so as the city of Melayne has been in our days, whereof at one time an
Vngaryan / at an other time a Greciane / at another time a Gotthiane / and
within a little while after in Armenyan has had the rule and governance: he
that is most mighty / and can do most with weapons and gu^nes, is nerest it and
most set by with them.

There is not one word in any writing, that the pope at those days did desire
Rome or that he made any war at all / either against Rome, or else against any
other nation, he had hid him self in a corner in pouertye, and aduersyte,
living by his own ioyse and mosture. But in ye year after the incarnation of
Christ five hundred and.xix. Iustinius the emperor, a very good man / a
Gotthiane, did govern the city of Constantinople, which calling forth the
bishops from the corners, wherein they lay hid as banyshed men / did show
toward them great benevolence and favor. After whom succeeded Iustinianus
his systers son / which was so great a lover of justice and righteousness,
Iustiniane.
that he did gather together all the constitutio^s of ye Roman emproours, and
did set them in order / which until this day we do call the Civil or
themperours law. This Justinian considering the ruynes and decays of ye
Roman empier / did recover again certain provinces from the enemies of the
Romans, and so did set up again the Roman Empire / which for the most
part was decayed and fallen down / and he did also bielde goodlye churches in
the honor of god, specially at Constantinople / enrychynge them with great
treasures and riches / adding also thereunto yerelye meat and drink and
clothe to ye mynysters of the same. This thing did encorage the bishops and
prestes / and they began to take heart again / and to be cherefull and glad,
al thoughts and cares clean cast away. At this time the bishop of Rome
called Agapitus was sent to the emperor by Theodotius to make peace and unite,
Agapitus bishop of Rome.
al discordes and debates laid aprote. This Agapitus was so holy a man, that
as he entered the gates of Constantinople / a certain blind man received
again his sight: which things were done in ye year of our lord.CCCCC.xxx.
neither could than the new God Lucyfer leave using of his frauds and crafty
gyles. About the year of our lord five hundred and lxxx. Gregory the first.
Gregorius Magnus ye first of that name was made the bishop of Rome, ye first
emperor also then being of the Greeks / one Maurice a Capadociane. At that
time the riches of the bishop of Rome being well increased, the old serpent
brought forth his hoke again / styrryng mouyng entysing Maurice, that he
should deadely pursue Gregory, and that all the other bishops also should be
in great contempt. But when the emperor continued and hylde on stylle to hate
holy Gregory: the providence of god granted vengeance to be taken upon him,
that is to wit that he was taken of Focas, which beheding Maurice, did
afterward hold ye empier him self. This Gregory the first was the last
bishop of Rome that did follow the steps of the martyrs and apostles, in
living and doctrine. And albe it that from the reign of Constantine the
bisshops of Rome had daily increased more and more in riches, and had not any
longer all of the^ ordered and led al their life so straightly and perfectly
according to the rule of the gospel as they had don before that time, but
declynede and fell down by little and little from the gospel to ceremonies,
making and publishinge one law after another: yet had they but tollerably
changed the^ selves until the time of Gregory, after whom they did utterly
close and shytte up ye gospel book breakyng in by salutations into the courts
of princes openly / as folowethe. The fyfthe degree of idolatrye.
In the year of our lord.CCCCC.iij. Focas a man borne of a low stock and
degree but a valiant man of arms and a doughtie warrier, was first in service
with the captain and governor of Rome, and afterward being elected and
chosen Emperor in the tents, was a cruel tyrant. In ye second year of his
reign deceassed out of ye world the holy father Gregory: which is accounted
and rekened one of the.iiij. doctors of the church. But than the old dragon
did garnyshe his hoke with a bright bayte by this craft, The laufull emperor
was reside^t and had his seat in Constantinople. But yet nevertheless he had
chosen and taken to him self a protener and fellow, which should occupye and
govern the kingdom and Empier of the west part (as Rome, Italye / France /
Germany) the emperor of the westpart then being slayen, as we have said
before, and driven out, so that Rome was set out to rauyne and robbery unto
every man, and the nations did ransake away whatsoever things they might. In
the mean season riches grew and increased to the bishop of Rome but not
regions or peoples / but as it happens other whiles in treasures of money.
Therefore than began the spirit of the gospel to kele and wax faint in him:
because that the bysshope of Constantinople did prefer him self before the
bishop of Rome, to whom forthwith the old serpent did proferre and reche
forth a bayte, which he had prepared and made ready before for the same
purpose, Boniface the third.
(ye bishop then was Bonyface the third of that name) wiht this manner color /
what? wylt thou always lie still in misery and in co^tempte? Rome is the head
city of all the world, it is a foul shame and rebuke to the, that thou thy
self art not also called ye head bishop of all other: which name should much
more ryghtfully agree and belong to the, then to the patryarche of
co^stantynople. The domynyon and empyer of Rome is changed, and thou thy self
art not in so low a condycyon and estate or degree among themperours / as thy
predycessours have been. The hoke of this pride together with the bayte did
Bonifatius utterly swalowe in fleing to the friendship of the emperor Foeas,
to whom he made insta^te request and prayer for the preuelege, yt the bishop
of Rome should be ye highest of all other bysshoppes / that is to say, that he
should be pope or father of fathers / and that the church of Rome should be
head church of al other / which thing albeit that it was long and much adoo,
How the name of pope first began.
ere it would be granted: yet for all that thrughe importune request and
prayer he opteyned and brought it to pass at the last, that Focas did consent
to the said pryuylege. But this thing do ye Popes now a days wisely
dyssymule, and speak no word of it at all, cryenge out ye the pope is the
greatest of all bisshopps, and the church of Rome hedde above all other
churches: and that by the ordena^ce of god immediately, as they do say in the
xxij. distinction omnes and.c. why or for what cause then was the donation of
Constantine forged by which the bysshopryche of Rome, should be above all
other bysshopryches / and reign over them al? as they have it in their decrees
in the.xc.vi. distinction, Constantinus. etc. The Romanistes do say even what
soever they list of their own privileges and do put into their law what so
ever thing smyteth into their brains, and comes in to their mind: but yet no
man durst be so bold to say against their law, onles he will be contented to
be called by that terrible name of an heretyke, as it is decreed in the.x.
and.xij. distinctions, and also in the distinction, Sic omnes. et cete. This
bayte of glory, as I have said, did Boniface the pope devour and swalowe in.
But whether this thing be comfortable and agreeynge to the gospel of God,
let other men judge: and this same hoke did also catch and draw all the
bysshoppes that have succeeded the said Bonyface, so yt it is made a law, yea
more over a deuyne law, under pain of committing deadely sin / who so ever
should have other opinion or should think other wise of the primacye or
preemynence of the bishop of Rome: Here began the name of most holy father the
pope.
and hereof came the name of the most holy father the pope / and so they fondly
framed ye scripture, tu es Petrus. etc. thou art Peter to the privileges of the
emperors / and of both these they made them selves a divine law. Oh what a
strong and mighty Idol, and a new god, did then spring up and begin?
For this name had never any bishop of Rome before that time. But when the
fyar of contempt and pouertye was quenched and put out / tha^ did riches, and
slothful ydelnes bring forth such manner fruits, as we do se remaining
stylle even at these days.

Bonifacius even then forthwith usurped the title of Pope, writing him self,
Bonyface the third of that name, greattyste bishop, and he gathered a
counsel at Rome of ye other bisshops and priests / in which counsel he
decreed, that from that time forward, the pope being elected of the prestes
and the people, should be of the same stre^ght and authority, and of as great
reputation, as if he had been also confirmed by the emperor / which decree was
clean repugnant and contrary to the old usage and custom of the emperors,
and against the auctoryte of confirming the bishops, which they had used from
the first begynny^g yt emperors became christen. But Boniface after he had
obtained and gotten the privilege of the emperor, yt he might call him self
pope: this recompense he made to Caesar to acquit him his kindness withal, he
did pryuely derogate and minyshe themperours majesty and prerogative / and
presumed to be lord and ruler over the same emperor, of whom before, as of his
lord and emperor, through humble petitio^s and lowly requests, he had
obtained the pryuylege of primacy and preeminence above other bisshopps / how
be it neither he him self, nor a certain mayny of his successors durst be
so bold, as to put this decree openly in execution and use: because at that
time the emperor had set a captain and deputye under him at Rome, one of the
Senatorie stock, by whose election and approbatio^ the popes were created and
made. But yet from then forward ye popes did so bear them selves, as though
by right they were superiors to the^perours, without whose help they did
what soever thing they might: teaching bishops, that they should obey the
pope / rather than the emperor. Yet is there one thing, that thou maiste compare
and match to this so passinge and outrageous pride. For not long after Focas
being slain, which had granted so great pryuileges, to the vicar of
Christ, so humbly and louly requirynge and besechynge him. Heraclius was made
emperor in the year of our lord six hundred and twelve, The beginning of
mahomettes sect and belefe
at which time the new ydole in very deed and the new god Mahomet an
Ismaelite did rise / which had byelded and set up a new faith and belefe,
in which the Turks do live. After that the first new god Lucyfer had promoted
and put forward his cause so far forth, that he had gotten one among
christen men / which did take unto him self the name of highest bishop, and
the greatest lord of all men: the said Lucifer was well apayde and proud
thereof, and thought this in his mind: Thou shall proceed and go further
fourth yet, seeing that thou have thus broken the bedge and lept over it, he
cast forth his old bayte well ouerlayed with gyles, before the pope Constantyne
in the year after the natiuite of Christ six hundred.lxxxvij. which bayte he
gredyly swalowynge in, did desire moo priuyleges to be confirmed of Justinian
the emperor of Rome / the third of that name, (not of him that made the Civil
law) by which things it is easy to perceive, by what mean yt so great holiness
has sprongen and growe^ up. And so the popes of Rome fell from the holy
scripture, taking so great a name unto them selves, and taking also the chief
rule in all matters and busynes / and the chief seats and most honorable
places, and began to join amytie and frendshyps with princes and emperors,
and learned to visit their courts / entermedlyng and making them selves to do
with all matters and causes / that were to be treated of this party and that
party / growing also and encreasynge welfauouredly in possessions and riches,
which manner of living endured and continued by the space of one hundred years.
The mischeuous and cursed feende took great joy and pleasure, that his
sleyghtes and crafts did go so royally forward. For within a little while
after, about the year of our lord seven hundred and eyghte / the Emperor
Leo, the third of that name, a Syriane borne / deposed the patriarche of
Constantinople, which was a Germayne borne, and did substitute in his crown
Anastasius. Then the pope Gregory ye third brake forth, The first dissentio^
of the pope and the emperor.
and wrote to the emperor, that he should restore the Germayne to his old
honor again, which thing, wha^ Leo the emperor would not do, Gregory after
the counsel of ye old serpent did move and persuade all Italy that they
should forsake the emperor (but not according to thensample of the old popes,
which lived after a low sort / whom also he did excommunicate to the^tent
and purpose / yt whiles the emperors did keep wars among them selves, the
empier might fall in to his hands, for asmoch as he was of great name among
the princes. The old serpent strayghte way without any delay anointed bayte,
and put upon the hook, to cast it forth again: (for this was all his
travail and labor, that if he might not suppress and hold under the faith
of Christ, yet at the least wise that he might by some manner, what so ever it
were, entangle and trouble it) he gave this counsel to the pope: and did put
these thoughts in his mind: In as much as the laufull Roman Empier is
destroyed, and every stranger from every part of the world does break into
it, making him self emperor at Constantinople / and setting here over thy
neck some of the Senatorie blood: why do thou not put thy life in ieoperdy,
that thou may not only have the name of greatest, but ye thing also with all?
Rome shall be thy seat, thempier shall be at thy pleasure, to whom soever it
shall like ye to give it. The first breaking in of popes in to kingdo^s.
After Leo the emperor succeeded Constantine his son, a very tyrannous person
/ under whom Pypine sent ambassadors from France unto the pope in ye year of
our lord seven hundred and.lij. and the pope likewise again of his part /
layenge their wits together, and brewyng craft ye counsels between the^,
that pope zachary should take certain power and auctorite upon him, and so
deposyng the old king, he made Pypyne king of France / with the favor and
consent of the princes to the same / and this Pypyne is rekened the first
king of that land, made by the benefyte of the pope, as the popes laws do
record in the.xi. cause, the first question, De quidam. The next year
following, the pope zachary being deed, Stephen the second was substituted in
his place. This Ste. willy^g to use his power when king Astulphus did molest
and disease him in Italy, he did forthwith call upon Pypyne and met him
certain miles of the way, besechynge him to give aid and defense to ye
church of Rome: for he had lever to be a confessor then a martyr / thinking
it enough, if he did by that title break in to heuyn. Then ye old wicked
devil took no more thought, thynking his matier in good case enough, after
that he had made the true kernel of the christian divinity corrupt and
fautye. For those me^, which in times before passed, were the most strong
pyller of all christen men, in contempt and martyrdom: now being alienated
and turned from the holy scriptures, had taken upon them worldely and earthely
busynesses / of creatyng e^perours and kings / of drawing kyngedomes and
lordshyps unto them selves / sechinge and going about to get royal and proud
tytles, offering forth their feet to be kyssed / yt no business should be
brought to an end without ye pope, which did threaten vengeance and
punysshement upon his ennemies. And so the devil being free and void from all
thought and care / neded no longer to walk about as a rampynge lion / of
whom Peter speaks: for he knew well enough that saying of ye gospel. No man
can serve two lords and masters, and also that saying of Paul, No man that
warreth on gods part / does entangle him self with worldely matters or
busynesses. And ye old Satan was excedyngly glad garnysshynge and preparyng
his bayte more gayly, and castyng it forth again before the new god to be
devoured and swalowed in of him, and his deceit and gyle was so contrived, as
I have made mention a little here before. In the year of our lord seven hundred
and.li. when there reigned kings in France by title and name only, the
parlyame^t (as it is also even to this day) determynyng all the causes of the
realm: the pope did somewhat make the heed of France to bow downwarde / at
which time there reigned king Hilderike of noble blood, of the ancient
famylye and stock of Merouenge. But Pypyne the graund father of great Charles
otherwise called Charlemayne, was the governor and ruler of the realm, in
whose room, after his deceasse, succeeded his son Charles, which also was a
gouerner and orderer of ye realm, no thing less than Hylderyke (as the which
was sprongen of royal progeny) the king of France, I can not tell with what
faith and trustines Charles was over seer and ruler of the realm: but this is
plain and undoubted, he had ye pope of Rome fauouryng and leaninge to him. In
the mean season dyed Charles, leuyng behind him three sons, Charlemayne,
Pypyne, and Grypho. Charlemayne had opened and showed his mind to Pypyne /
that he purposed to enter in to religion and was in deed made a monk / so by
the reason thereof, occasyon was opened to Pypyne of inuadyng the realm, under
the cloak and pretense of administratour and governor, Even yet Hilderike yet
being a live, Pypyne thrustynge after the regal dignity did join him self
to ye pope, and the pope again joined him self to Pypyne, moved both of them
with their own pryuate and singular profit, Pypyne therefore (consydre here
and mark well in the mean season the gyle and craft of the old serpent) did
se^de over to Rome one Burcard the bishop of Herbipolis / with a chaplayn also
of his own, called Fobrardus, unto the pope zacarie, to have his answers and
counsel concerning such manner demau^des and interogations, The counsayles of
ye pope against Hilderike.
whether of the two were more worthy to be king, he that did bear all the
burthayne and charge of the realm, or else he which being free from all
cares and busynesses of the realm, was king and governor only by name. unto
which things, zachary by the instruction of the devil made answer and gave
sentence: that it was more profitable and behouefull that he should be named
king, which by his dylygent care, did order the matiers and busynesses of ye
realm, and which took upon him all the labors and pains, (which is the very
office of a king:) than the other which was an idle king only by name.
which sentence the pope had learned of his own law in the.xxii. cause and
the.v. question. Si quis conuictus. etc. when Pipine the minister had perceived
and found so great favor, and saw so great a wyndowe opened, and so great an
occasyon given to him self, for to invade the realm: he conceived in his mind
a purpose to win by force the regal majesty, which enterprises were
deceyptes and gyles against the natural and laufull lord of Pipine and
king, that is to wete, Hilderike. For he (eue^ so as it is seen now a days)
was governor of the realm, by a custom fet and brought again from the
most ancient kings descending of Meroue. Such manner power had the pope
neither granted to him by Christ, (which would no divide the patrimony between
ye.ij. brethern) neither yet by any other man, I mean that he might give a
disagreinge sentence and judgment for the servant, against the lord mysdemy^g
no such manner thing: but the old serpent had his plays and pastymes, and they
came end as he would have them. And so (as we have said) Pipine clened to the
pope, and the pope also to Pypyne / sechynge defense and mayntenaunce of his
own power / (as like always reioyseth and is glad of like, Proverbs
and there is no pot, but it fyndethe a mete cover) but there was neither
example / nor law, for it / that the pope should make kings. wherefore he did
turn him self to other subtylties and crafts / he purchased and gatte to him
self and Pipine, the amite and friend ship of many of the princes of Germanye,
and like wise of the people of France / yt they should consent thereunto, and
so was the barlay brothe (as we say) brued, that the Pope might take the
sword of his power / aduau^sing Pipine unto the regal dignity / according to
the tradition of the holy laws in the.lxxx.viij. did. Epreus. etc. Good lord
after that the true, and good, and the old king Hilderike had understanding
and knowledge hereof. what should he do? for all things, both which were to be
done, and which were to be left undone / were in the hands and powere of
Pipine / as orderer and governor of the realm / wha^ the very good king did
monyshe Pipine his mynyster and put him in remembrance of his promise that he
had made, and of the oath that he had taken: then brast forth the holy father
pope Stephen (which succeeded zachary) and did assoyle Pipine and dispense
with him for all the oaths which he had made, The power of the pope more then
hethenisshe
and the faith / which he had given and promised to the old king Hilderike:
and not only he did this to Pypyne, but also he did the same to all other
princes, which did consent unto the making of Pypyne king, and the very good
king Hilderike, The pope a new god.
they did thrust into a house of relygyon. Therefore like wise as Christ did
refuse and flee from the kingdoms of the world, Ioha^ vi.
and the apostles did despise and set at naught the honor of ye world, and
the old holy bishops did fight with the holy scripture, wyllyngly and gladly
sufferyng death for the trouthes sake: So at this time ye bishops of rome with
open face did boldly break in to all the world, sechinge the highest honors
and the riches and power of the world, yea usurping also the heavenly power,
against all ye cyuile laws made by themperours, against all natural, and also
agay^st all divine laws, in that he did by fraud depose ye laufull and
natural king from his seat (whom they fayn to have been unprofitable to the
realm: and what manner of folks be they?) and also in yt he did assoyle and
lose the oaths holely made, and the faith and true allegiance promymysed. what
more perfect joy and pleasure, thynkeste thou could have happened unto the
old serpent: than this matter brought luckely to pass? How be it the Pope
has a color of this power and auctorite in the holy canon law in the.xxvij.
distinction Omnes. etc. The first new god Lucyfer was of good conforte and
courage upon the setting up of the temple and of the new god, in comparyson of
which temple that sumptuous and gorgyous temple of Diana was in a manner
nothing, but he would also receive and bear aweye the fruits and trybute of
his labor (for thempier of Rome was plucked up by the rotes, and clean
destroyed, the city of Rome was become ye Popes seat / which reioysedde
greatly, and was proud in spirit, that he was come^ into the place of so
great an emperor) he took again Astulphe king of Lumbardie, which did war
against the pope, and did sore vex him for that he did so by little and little
take away of the lordshyps lyenge nere unto the city of Rome with the iniurye
of the pope.

wherefore Stephen the pope did desire Pipine of aid and help, and yt he would
defend his goods and the province from the king Astulphe, so Pipine did on
his harneys, and went to Rome with the Pope, (which was comen his own self
unto him for succor) and did drive out Astulphe from Rome. At which time
Pipine did grant unto Stephen Raue^na and certain other cities as a gift. In
the mean season, How the pope came by ye cities of Italye.
wha^ Pipine was thus ordained and made king of France, by the power of the
Pope / and the favor of the people: there reigned at Constantinople Leo the
fourth Roman / and as much as France grew and increased: so much did ye
reign of Rome / and of the^perours, minyshe and decay, all obedience at Rome
/ being clean extincte / and no lawful Emperor gouernynge Rome, where as in
old time of ancient custum there had been lords and rulears. Now the pope had
found mayntenaunce of his power in Pipine, which gave freely unto him,
according to his own lusts and pleasure, cities / provinces / and nations in all Italy. For what cause I do rehearse these hystories, thou shall anon perceive
/ for they are profitable and necessary / but ye thou may get out the very
treuthe, what the pope is. After these things don which we have rehearsed, in
the year of our lord.vij.C.lxxxi. Leo being dead at Constantynople, there
succeeded him Consta^tyne his son / and Pipine also the king of France died /
leuing behynd him alive his two sons Charles / and Cherlemaine, Charles
being king of France, came to Rome: and was very lovingly received of pope
Adrian, whose two sons, yt is to wete, Pipine, / and Ludowyke / he did his
own self make and anoint kings / the one that is to wit / Pipine, of Italy
(the old king taken and banysshed) and the other that is to wit, Ludowike, of
Aquitania / the comen people was taught to say, that Charles was of the
senatorie stock governor of Rome. This Charles and Pipine had subdued unto
their own dominion all Rhenus even unto Antwerp / Saxony / Durenne / Colayen.
etc. Bauarie / Normandy / Britaygne / Austria Vngaria. In the year of our
lord.vij.C.xcix, ye popes living quietly in good peace, and no man daryng
openly to vex or troble them for fear of the kings of France, (which were
the only refuege of the popes, and in whom the popes did put all their hoope
and trust, How the kingdom of France came from the pope.
and which had given to the same royal gifts of regions and people. In the
mean season Constantyne the son of Leo the emperor dysceassed without any
heir: after whom his mother Hyrena reigned by the space of five hole years /
then came the time in which it was or deyned by desteny, that ye kings of
France should / clymbe up to higher honors. The pope of rome after Adryane
was Leo the third / to whom the Romans had done I wot not what contumelye
and dyspleasure: which he taking very heuely fled unto his wont remedy
charles ye king of france, declarynge unto him with lamentable words his
calamities, and besechynge him of help. Charles then gatherynge a great army
incontinent went forth right fyetsly against the Romans, (Oh how great a
reioysynge and gladness was this to the old serpente) and revenged the pope
gaylye of his adversaries / for which cause he was of Leo the pope, crowned
king of Romans, all the people crieng Charles the great emperor. So this
was the first king of France, that ever was made emperor of Rome, In the
year of our lord eight hundredth and one. But from that time forward the
emperors of Constantynople had no longer the name of the roman emperor, but
were content with their own title, medlynge nothing at all with Rome / which
was the cause, that moeued me to rehearse this history / for thou have herd how
the people by little and little forsook holy scripture, An epilogatio^ or
recapitulatio^ of all ye things a foresaid.
the gospel and the steps of ye old bishops, falling from poverty /
conte^pte, heaviness and low and vile state / and torning him self utterly
unto the contrary things. The^ afterward how he gate the preuylege of the
emperor Focas, that he might name him self the highest of all bysshoppes and
pope, and his church of Rome the chief and heed church of all other.
Forthermore how they gave dylygence, and labored, that their pryuyleges
should be approved and confyrmed of Justinian the emperor, gatherynge also in
the mean seasone many other preuyleges by flateryng / by subtle crafts and
deceites (for true christen men, such as were the first bisshops of Rome) had
no need of such pryuyleges and lybertyes / neither did they ones coueyte and
desire any such / wherefore according to their deseruynge they receive the
croune of glory, of etnal god) but these me^ did wind them selves in to the
courts of princes and kings, being chose^ and called otherwhiles to be of
their counsayles (as the use and manner is even now a days also) dyspatchyng
and bringing to an end their matters, always well and honestly to sight and
apparaunce. In conclusyon they desired aid and help of ye kings and pry^ces
against their adversaries and enemies, and did suffer also that they should be
slain albeit yt they did greatly abhor and hate to bear ye name of the
effusion of their blood. At lenght they did co^federate them selves with
princes, and began to take counsel with them, as it chau^sed with Pypyne the
admynystratoure and orderer of the realm, against the ryghtfull and natural
king hylderyke, when they did cast away all clokes and vysures, and boldly
with open face did embrace and take unto them selves great power (but yet with
fear in ye beginning) that is to wit / of making kings whereof they had made
pactions with princes / last of all, because all things went forward luckely
they did also adourne them selves with most goodly cytyes and prouyncies,
connyngly and peacybly obteynynge Rome for their own selves, which should be,
as it were, the myrrour of the christen faith, in which all the whole world
might see and learn the very christen and euangelyke life as they do write
them selves in ye syxte of ye decretalles, in the sxyte title, and the first
book, and the xvij. chapter / Nu^quid. And by their own propre power which
they had taken unto them selves, they promouted Charles unto themperourshyp of
Rome / and by such feats, they have so crepte into possessions and domynyon:
(allways under the semblaunce and color of holiness, and under the cloak of
saint Peter's name) that now they are lords of all the world. The pope is
compared and likened to an yuie tree.
And here comes to my remembrance a propre symylyrude. In like manner as the
Iuye tree does in the first beginning / it is a tender twygge rysynge out of
the ground, and crepynge low on the ground: but by little and little it
ioynethe it self to the rote of a strong and a very high tree, as a fyrre
tree or such an other, which fealeth nothing at all so slender and so weak
a sprygge, for in the winter time it gets and receives diverse and many
iniuryes as in sufferynge otherwhyles the fall of the bows and of the leaves.
Nevertheless although it does in such wise suffer, yet does it contynually
grow up until it have fastened it self within the bark of ye tree, that it
may cleave always more fast, until beside the bark it do grow fast also to
the body and substance of the tree / and then is it no longer in danger to be
hurt with wyndes. Then contynuethe he to goo forth on myghtely wyndynge him
self about ye tree, and when he is ones cropen up so high that he may get
hold of the branches, then does he shed and depart him self unto the way
of the branches of the tree, embrasing them every one in such wise, that the
tree has miche work to grow: In conclusion there do break out so many
branches, of the Iuye so many leaves, so many beryes, and that so thycke, and
so great a nombre of them: that the very right tree it self is straungled and
choked / and so that excellent and noble tree does peryshe and dye, upon
which the stynkynge Iuye does grow to such bygnes, that it is a tree of it
self, and does occupy the place of the former great tree. Compare now ye
narratio^ yt we have made, what thy^kest you? did it not come even so to pass
in old time: as it does even yet also daily? an example hereof fetch in the
xcvj dystinctio^ thrughe out all the chapiters of it. But Adryan afterward
the pope, when he did perceive him self to be unequal in power to desyderyus
king of Italye: he raised up against him Charles the great, which coming with
a great host against desyderius, took the said desyderius prisoner, and
commanded the pope with an hundredth and.iiiij. bishops and abbottes for to
assemble to a counseyll at rome, The aucto^e of thepro^ to (...) pope
in which the pope Adryan with ye whole counsel did offer unto the emperor
and all his posteryte for ever all his auctoryte and powere for thenherytau^ce
and ordynation of the Roman see. So yt all the archebysshops thorough out all
lands, should take their investiture (as they call it) of the emperor, and that
none should be consecrated without it, under pain of excomunycation and gyuyng
to the devil, which same thing Leo the pope next elected after Adryane did
also, which in an open counsel assembled in ye church of saint Savior, did
both his own self and all the counsayll a forsaid with him confirm unto
Otho the first of the germans yt was emproour of Rome, yt the same should
e^dure and co^tynue for evermore / as it is read in ye lxiij distinction
Adrianus, and also in synodo. This motion they made to Charles, yt they might
have one of ye senatorie stock and a defe^der against ye king of Italye, who^
Pipin and Charles had deprived of his ki^gdom, gyuy^g it to ye pope of rom,
which sat i^ pesible possession / after yt he had submited him self, and all
his clergy, unto the emperor living then in securite, and without any fear or
dread, he did at ye last i^ process of time, take all the goods of ye whole
province of Thuscia by prescriptio^ i^ to his possession. The old serpent
knew his nest well, and therefore willing to bring forth some new thing in
the world, he conveyed him self in to his own counterfeyte new god. Charles
the great deceased in ye.xlvij. year of his own reygne, which was ye year of
our lord viij.C.xv. after whom succeeded Jews his son and the pope Adryan the
first of that name like wise dyed which with the counceyll had given the
before rehearsed lybertye unto Charles / harken now an hystorye. (The great
Iuye, which as I said before was grown up: had felt hurt) in the election
of the new pope, they did create and consecrate pope Stephen the.iiij. neither
calling to counseyll thembassadours of the emperor neither so much as
speaking one word of ye matter to the emperor jews. But after yt it was
noysed, that the emperor was displeased and angrye, for that ye pope with the
hole counseill were shortly found false and untrue brekers of their own
judgment and sentences: and yet they do now a days say that it is
impossyble, yt a counsel should err or lie, then Stephen fled to gylefull
excepcyon framyng letters which should witness the contrary. In the begynni^ge
he did confess it to be true, yt to thelection of ye new pope before yt he were
chosen there ought to assemble the bishops, and prestes, and the senatoures,
and the people of Rome: (and he dissembled the name of the emperor and of his
ambassadors) but after that the pope was elected and chosen, that then
themperours ambassadors were to be called, in whose presence he should be
consecrated, and not before. Consydre the wicked craft of the pope. The
eleccyon belonged to them with out any knowledge given to the emperor the
consecration of the pope belonged to them: only themperours ambassadors must
stond by and look on at the time of the consecration. But where was the
cou^seill of Adrian left in ye mean season? The pope by him self alone did
infrynge the said counsel: and yet did not the pope alone neither decree, nor
make nor give that liberty to the emperor. But the pope invented a craft and a
subtle exception as the history says: yt the^perours had been some time unwise,
and furyous, folowi^g their own brains, nothing regarding the voices of
their men (where as in ye counseyll of Adria^ there was no such word, that
the emperor should give his voice with other: but that the emperor alone should
have the Iurysdyction of electyng and confyrmyng the pope, which as a new god
had changed ye words of the council, and turned them a contrary way) and
that they did fall sometime into heresies / from which them selves god wot
were saufe, wherefore themperours should not meddle with ye eletio^ of ye pope under
pain of excomunycacio^ / of these things, let every man judge, what holiness
followed ye popes from day to day, after yt they had ones gotten cytyes and
domynyons. But if any other man had said against the counseyll: in to how
great heresies should he have fallen / but Stephen the Pope was greateste of
all men, there is another reason in him: now is it tolerable to se how
pertely he percheth forth of his neste? getting unto him pretely the power of
kings and emperors, so yt now, hense forth he neadeth no more their favor.
Afterward Pope Stephen sent ambassadors to jews the emperor in to france,
to myttygate his indygnation, for that he was not saluted nor spoken to about
thelection and consecratyon of the pope: for he would come to him his own self
personally (se ye wicked craft, the pope took boldness upon his back, vysityng
the emperor in his own proper person: but by that craft he brought to pass
that thing which he desired, that is to wit, the dystructio^ of Adryanes
counsel) when the pope was comen in to France unto themperoure Jews, ye
good and patient emperor went forth toward him with a great company to mete
him, and received him very curtesly and louyngly: where the pope said mass
and crowned Jews the emperor of Rome / whom the pope did then desire that he
would pardon and release to him the priuyleges granted by Adryane his
predecessor unto the au^cesters of the said Jews: The good prince being
perswadede did consent. Then this renu^ciacion forth with they did put in to
the popes laws, and from that time forwards the Romanistes have made us popes
after their own will and pleasure. This jews was the second emperor of Rome,
which was made by the power of ye pope / and he left successor of the
kingdom his first begote^ son Lotharius, and his other two young sons
Charles and Jews being kings only in name, he made the one prince of
Acquitania (which is a regyon of France lie^g toward spayn) and the other
of Bauarie. After ye deceasse of their father Jews, there arose discord and
strife between the three brethren. The younger brethren were dysconte^ted and
angry, that they were depryued and put from their kingdom of their father, and
which was heredytarie to them: wherefore they made as it were Just and
ryghtfull battle against Lotharyus in which battle there was so much blod
shed on both parties, The change of thempyer.
that all the power of the said brethren was mynysshed and decayed: In
conclusyon Lotharius was ouercomen: and so france was divided, Charles had to
his part, all that ever is between the English see and Mosa: and to Jews part
which was thelder brother, fell all Germanye whole eue^ to the river called
Rhenum / And all the region lyenge between, as Lothoryngya (so called of
Lothorius) Treueris / Colayne, Mogu^cia / Braband / Flanders. After this manner
did thempier of Rome fall in to the lotte of dyuyson. The old ancient kings
of France, as the Meroue^ges took their name of meroue^s, the sone of Clodyus
/ so like wise the Carolines were called of Carolus the first son of Pypyn,
which said carolines, did reign about an hundredth and ten years, and as long
as ye Roman Empyer was co^tynually remayny^g and holden of ye Frenshe men In
these three brethren the famylye and stock of the Carolines was quyte extynete
/ Jews (which was also called Suendebalde) being the last of them all. And
Otho duke of Saxonye by the voice and consent of al men was called to be
Emperor of the Romans is the year of our lord ix.C.xiij. Otho the first
Roman emperor of the Germans.
This Otho layeng for himself very great aege, and be sides that his own
impotency, yt he might be lyghtened and eased of so great a charge and rule of
ye Roman Empire. By his judgment therefore and counseyll a certain man called
Conradus, one of the Germaynes was elected Emperor / of whom it is doubt,
whether he was of the lynage of ye Carolynes or else not. But when he had
raygned seven years in Germanye, he dyed / and afterward. Otho ye sone of ye
duke of Saxony, was called, the first emperor of Rome, yt was made of the
Germanyes. Now it was necessary to the old serpent, that he should make this
so plentiful a fysshing, ons so happily and luckely gotten, propre and sure to
his own self. Therefore after that ye roman empier was common down from the
frenshe men to the flemynges, in the year of our lord.ix.C.lxij. with in a
little under or over. The pope in the mean season about the space of.C. years
both had put in certain emperors in thempier, and had enoynted them / so
that the auctorite of that thing was now waxed strong and had gathered rotes:
albeit yet nevertheless some men other whiles did speak against it, and also
did therefore war agynste the Roman dominions and lordshyps / and when it was
ones comen to pass yt the Frenshe men did fall from thempyer, being nothing
of might and power of them selves singularly above other: then the Pope also
(wisely in deed) looked another way, turning his heed from them, and made Otho
duke of sax onye Emperor of rome / but yet under a condition, yt his own
power should from thensforth remain steadfast and stable unto him self, if at
any time an account should be required of his possessions, and also yt he should
have, to who^ he might trust and lean for socour and mayntenau^ce. John^
therefore ye.xij. pope of yt name which was gotten up to the popeshyp by the
aid and power of his friends, did prescribe an oath unto Otho, in which Otho
should acknowledge him self to be ye popes phasalle (as we do now call it) The
pope requirethe an oath.
and so by these crafts and sleyghtes ye most noble and mighty empier of ye
world did receive of ye pope. Ius clie^te lariorum predicorum, under whose
very great holiness it has for ye most perte continued also. The said oath is
written in this form and manner / in ye canon law in ye.lxiij. distinction To
the lord John^ ye pope, The form of the oath.
I king Otho do make promise and an oath, by ye father, ye son, and the holy
ghost, and by this tree of the quickening cross, and by ye relyques of
saints, that if it please god to suffer me, that I may come to Rome: I shall
exalte the holy Church of Rome, and you the governor of it, according to all
my might and powere, and also you shall never lease your life, no neither any
member of your body, neither this honor which you have, by my will, or by my
counseyll, or my consent, or my exortation, and I will make no decre or
ordenau^ce in Rome concerning any of al those things, which do belong to you,
or to rome, without your counsayll: and what so ever lands of saint Peter's,
shall come in to my hands and power, I shall restore it unto you: and to whom
so ever I shall commit and betake the governance of Italye, I shall make him
swear, yt he shall aid and help you to the vttermoste of his power, to
defend the patrimony of saint Peter. The pope has power and auctoryte to
require such a manner of oath as this, for so does the canon law witness in
the twelfth cause and ye first questyon Clericus. This is indede to devour and
swalowe in the soppe that is laid before the. From this Otho, all themperours
that followed ever after even to this day: have been compelled to bind them
selves unto ye pope as to their lord, by such an holy oath. Oh Roman empire,
such a meat or supping as this is you would in old time not ones have
tasted of: But now there is no remedy but that thou must eat it clean up /
but thou will none other, for the scripture also must be fulfilled. To the
making of this great oath, first Otho the first of that name did consent /
then afterward his sone Otho the second, and after him Otho third, also did
the same, breefly the same did all the dukes of Saxonye. But when Otho ye third
was elected, bey^g yet in a manner but a child, the Romans were greatly
offended and grieved therwithall, for they did covet greatly to have had a
certain man Crescentius magnus which was consul of the city of Rome, made
emperor / whom when they had also elected and chosen, then pope Gregory
the.v. fled to Otho in germany, whose cousyn he was. And otho going forth with
very great strenghe besyeged the city of Rome with a passing great host, and
wa^ne it: in which bykeryng Crescentius was stryken thoroghe and slain, and
the new pope John^ had his yeis put out / pope Gregory the.v. therefore
gathered a counseyll, that he might decree, after what form and manner the
elections were to be made of the new king or emperor: for the emperors were
in the power of ye popes, because they had sworn to them as unto their
lords, lykwise as the Othoes had don, wherefore the popes took then up on them
selves to govern and rule thempyer with full powere and auctoryte. For when
one would not swear to such things, as they did require, nor keep and fulfill
such things as he had sworn to: there was found another prince, which was
full glad to swear only to thentent that he might ones be made Emperor. And
such manner contentions and pride of ye Princes did give the pope occasyon, and
place often and sundry times to invade thempyer. In this great counseyll it
was decreed and ordained by the pope (he being a Germayne), which descended
of the lynage of the dukes of Saxonye, that from yt time forward there should
no more any Emperor be made of the line or blodde of the Romans, The
beginning of chosyng ye emperor in Germany.
but only of the Germanyes: and it was put in thelection, power, and
auctorite, of the princes of Germanye, to make emperor whom they list. And
this thing was constytuted by Gregory the.v. and by the counseyll in the year
of our lord M.ij. From such a beginning it came afterward in to a custom,
that thempeours were made by the voices of seven princes of Germanye the
electours, which thing we do se to be done even at these present days. and
therefore the king or emperor of the Romans is named the son and the defender
of the church of Rome, oneles we will that our faith should decay and perysh.
After such facion do the popes now a days vex diverse ways and subdue unto
them the sely emperors of Rome: even as coursers do horses / what soever thing
they covet to be brought to pass in any part of the world, they do send a
cardynall called a legate a latere unto the emperor, puttyng him in remembrance
of his office and duetye, and of the oath which he has made, and oneles he
will be made perjured, he is compelled to assyst the pope in all things,
whether it be right or wrong, which in the mean season being instruct with
goodly painted eloquence, persuades even this thing also, for that the Pope
can not err. etc. Read thou ye histories, whether this thing be true or not
/ and now all power and auctorite is turned clean contrary to the right way.
Constantyne ye first, with his successors which professed Christ, did create
and make and confyrme all the popes of rome, and also all the other bishops:
but now the popes of Rome, do make both kings and emperors bishops, and
abbottes / and what so ever is in the world. Moreover the pope, that he might
order all things according to cou^seyl and polycye of the old serpente, did
assemble one counseyl after another, in which counseylles he did constytute
and decree what so ever thing made for his purpose: and what so ever thing did
not like hy^, or did make against his purpose, that he did forbed under pain
of ye thunderbolt of excommunycation. Thus were the pryuyleges of the church
of Rome invented, and afterward obtained by the confyrmation of the Roman
emperors, and dylygently gathered to gether into the canon law / but yet if
any thing had been forgoten by their necligence straight ways they patched to
an extrauagant, with this law ye pope has well armed and fenced him self,
that there should be no man at any time which might be bold in any thing to
gain say him, Here the pope settith his seat egall to god.
or to reprove him, constytutyng and exalting him self above all men in the
whole world, as it is written in ye same law in ye.ix. cause and the third
question. Nemo. etc. with many other vain tryfles / and he did not only
reiecte men from him self or his own person, but also he has drawn both
the very gospel, yea and all the hole scripture, in to captyuite no man
darynge ones to use it, but as farforthe as his consent and favor shall
permit and suffer. Be sides yt he has decreed that no man shall either
teach, or understand ye scripture, otherwise then as the Pope has given
sentence and judgment vnpon it. Also yt no man shall either trust or give
fast and sure credence to the virtue and auctoryte of the holy scriptures: if
the Pope will not consent thereto, in the.xvij. cause and in the fourth
question. Nemini. etc. and in the.xxiiij. cause and the first question.
Quotiens / and so co^seque^tly in diverse other chapiters. But what other thy^g
is the scripture then the word of gods mouth? as the.lxxxvj. psalm does
wytnes saing Dominus narrabit in scripturis. etc. The lord shall speak or tell
in the scryptures. The scripture therefore is the speech of god, which is the
very truth self / and his speech is truth, in the.xvij. of John^. Moreover
Christ says, I am the way, veryte, and life / If christ then is the truth
and the scripture (as is said before) is also the same truth: now then seeing
scripture (as is before declared) is ye popes captive which makes of it what he
will, it follows necessaryly that christ ye eternal god is the popes captyue
also and presoner. Oh serpent Lucyfer what manner a new god do thou here
bring forth to us, and what manner a new faith? it lacks not much, but
that I do think him to be, that beast, with.vij. heddes and.x. horns, of
which John^ speakith in ye.xiij. chapter of ye apocalypse / of these things
does follow this proposytion, that it were as profitable, (yea I had well
near said more profitable also) that all the hole scripture and the holy
gospel were abrogate and clean put away, then yt it should contynew in such
state and captyuyte / If this holsom message ought to be preached, and showed
to no man more largly (as they do say) then as much as the pope / will
confyrme and allow. Be sides this we do se openly before our yeis that the pope
does in some places most openly and plainly reiecte ye scripture, and mynyshe
the auctorite of it, setting his own laws in egall degree of honor, and
making them egall unto it in reverence and strenghte and virtue: which thing
that thou may perceive to be true read the canon law in ye.xix.
distinction Sic omnes. etc. But wherefore serves the holy scripture, or what
needs us to have it: if ye pope him self be to us ye scripture? Oh wretched
man how far does thy madness proceed, which doeste make thy seat equal to
thy lord god? which did not suffer neither Lucyfer in heaven, neither Adam in
paradise, so long as he does patiently suffer yt in earth. But such manner
blasphemies against god, does the old serpent bring forth by Aristotelycall
and Thomisticall diuynite. Freers, and the subtle ymagynation of the
Scotistes, do raise up such manner gods: likewise as the lord god has
sygnyfyed by his holy prophet Ezechiel in the.viij. chapter do you not think
that the walls of our heart and the usage of the church does contain the
most greatest part of the pyctures and the images of abhomynations, which are
mentioned in the said chapyter? and under a good and religious semblaunce, even
such golden calves also as hieroboam did make in the old time? The pope a new
god.
even likewise as if he did say in that place you christen men look well upon
the Pope, which is your god, which has in his power heaven and hell you do
believe him, iii Regu^ xii.
what soever he doethe is ryghtwyse neither do you need to require any more of
jerusalem, tarry you still in Bethell, there to offer your brent sacrifices.
Many things might be wryte^ of this boystous new god: but who soever list to
know his new faith, his life and his governance, let him read the canon law
which he has made / and let him compare it to the holy scripture, and to the
old faith of Christ: and it shall appear to him more clerly then the son,
that he is a new god and a new faith / let any man search thoroughe out the
chronicles, and hystoryes, and he shall find in a manner yt not ye devil hy^self
was ever so persu^ptuous so filthy, and so synful and mischeuous. Now he that
has been at Rome, Pope Alexandre the vi. and pope July the ii.
in the time of Pope Alexandre ye vi. or of Pope July the second: he shall not
need to read many hystories / I put it to his Judgment, wether ever any of
the pay nyms or of the Turks did ever lead such a life, as did these our
most holy popes. And albeit peradventure that I do ouermoche touch the
fundation and do meddle to much with this matier / which may turn me to
dyspleasure: yet that not withstondynge, it is profitable and very necessary,
that the troth be assysted and defended least that any man do prefer or
make egal the Imaginations and inventions of man, unto the everlasting
ryghtuous, most good, and most great and mighty god, and least man do put his
trust and confydence in man, and so by the reason thereof be condemned
aeternally. The greattest plage and punyshme^t in earth.
This I do say, god could never have suffered a greatter nor a sorer
punyshement and plage to fall in to this world, then blyndenes, ygnoraunce
and unbelief: for the scripture says most euydently, who so ever does not
believe: (understand you the holy scryptures) he is already judged. Therefore when
we will by no mean give credence to the holy scripture, but we will with roten
gloses expou^de it, and turn it in to all facions after our pseasure, as it
were a peace of wexe: the god of his ryghtuousenes does permit and suffer,
that we can none otherwise judge nor otherwise know, but that in so doing we
do all right and well. In such, manner and incredulyte we do continue, and in
our own carnal and wordely wisdom we do contynually proceed and go
forward, and so we do raise up a new faith / we do set up a new god / of
whom we shall also receive the reward of our merytes and deservings. O. woe.
woe. be to this reward eternally. O most tender and dearly beloved christen
men, pluck back your foot, give your selves to Christ the most good and
gentill lord, that he may govern you, which may help us for evermore. The
cause of the exaltation of ye pope, and of saints.
So then the old serpente Lucyfer has brought to the world, this excellent
and strange new god no less craftily, then in the old time they which wrote
tha fable of transformatyon as Ouide among latin me^ by showing of Homere (as
I suppose) in which said fable men are turned in to wolves, into asses, in to
gotes / in to birds / in to herbs / in to stones / which thing the gods
and goddesses Iupyter, Pallas, Juno, Appollo, Venus. etc did work by their
power, which after their death were made gods of me^. For i^ ye old time as
every man or woman was excellent and notable, which had syngularly either
invented, or else done any thing which the people knew not before: so was
he or she magnyfyed and exalted for a god or goddess: as Hercules an excellent
strong, and hardy man, a stout enemy of vain men / and a defe^der of al
innocent persons being oppressed of tyrannous men / of whom he was a very
valiant co^querour and queller: this hercules (I say) being so good, so wise
so strong and valiant a man (being much like to Samson, whiles he was
liui^g, in his time) after that he had done so excellent and noble acts, was
of all men magnyfied and lyfted up with lauds and praises even to ye sky / was
worshypped and after his death also was deyfied. For ye old serpente
instructed and armed with his deceypte and craft, exepte to, putting men in
the mind, that of most valiant hercules they should make a demonyake.
Likewise in a manner came it to pass in Christ / in peter / in benedycte and
fraunciske / which all were most virtuous and most parfyte christen men / but
the posteryte and successors of them did only keep still the title, and did
hyghly exalte and magnify the goodness and holiness of these persons before
rehearsed, and setting them selves in to their roumes do challenge like titles
unto the^ selves / and under ye pretense and clooke of such holy names, they
do occupy the tyranny of ye whole world / they do rule and reygne / yet is
their living nothing at all agreyng to their titles, but they do al things
clean contrary thereto, and yt openly, and without any manner shame in ye world.
And if any man do speak any whyt of their manners and living, or do rebuke
them, or wtsto^de the^: what do they? straight ways they do cast forth against
us holy men, The comen oration and speech of relygyous persons to the lay
people.
as it were a certain shield to defend them selves with all, Christ our lord /
the power and auctoryte of Peter / the most weyghty auctoryte of ye works of
Thomas of Aquyne, ye wounds of saint Frau^cyske / the temperaunce of Benedicte
/ ye charity of Augustynne: behind whom stondethe this cursed hypocryte and
new god with his tyrannycall and new faith, pretending and making the people
believe, that blasphemy is committed against god and his saints / and against
ye catholyque church, sedytions to be moened / inobdedience to be brought in /
ye peace of christe^dom to be dysturbed / and with such and other like false
reports, they do blind and deceive princes, and lords, so that a man cannot
lightly rydde out him self therfro, neither know what is right, and what is
contrary to right / and so thus we do walk forth on in our bly^dnes our
children have learned this thing of us and their children of them / and so by
this means it does and has contynually grown and increased by the space of
many hundredth years / Be sides this, if at any time god pytyenge our blindness,
does elect some good, well learned, and virtuous man, which will restore yeis
agyne unto our understanding, and which will god about to teach what
dyfference is between precious things, and things of small value, between
lead, and pure gold / between ye true faith of christ, and the new
superstition, between the doctrine or law of men and the heavenly and dyuyne
scripture: then do these brethren fall to their vttermoste defense and shyfte /
first come forth the Relygyous men / the burthaynes of chyrches, The malingnite
of prestes.
with mischeuous words hatefully accusnyg him and informynge the new gods,
yt there is a certain fellow spronge up which would put them out of place /
and drive them out of ye world. All the new gods then assemblen them selves
together and do take, their counsel against him / covering some ungracious
and wicked person with the innocent garment of christ our lord and so being
instructed and prepayred do go up in to the pulpet of their vnshamfastnes,
cou^trefaytynge an holy and godly work and gesture, in such wise that an
ygnoraunt person would swear / that there stood in ye place either saint peter
/ or domynyk or frau^cyske his own self / and there they begin to sing their
forged song: but suddenly forgetting their matier / when they ought to show
them selves as Christ taught: they do show themselves to be none other manner
ones, then was Belyall in the old time / they rave / they rage / and rail as
it were mad men / without scripture, without reason / lewdely and shamfully: whose
chef doctrine and wisdom is this, he is an heretic / a sedicious person he
wresteth ye scripture to a perverse and wrong sense / he will preche and
teach to us a new faith. Oh good god, the sely comen people does inwardly
sorrow, by reason yt this pharysaye does so boldly and presumptuously inuey,
rage, and feircely speak against the true doctrine being offered and put
forth unto them: Also folyshe freers do walk a bout among ye comen people,
bablyng in this wise / fre^des, how think you by this new doctrine? what
think you will follow thereupon? we ought not to vysyte the church / we ought
not to offer unto ye altre / we ought not to make our confession and shrift,
the priests ought to be spoiled of all their goods / (yet they do falsely and
shamefully ymagin all these things, for there is no man, yt does so teach
without diffrence) what is your best counsel i^ this matier? Noli Noli. To ye
fire, with ye knave / suppose ye yt al our forfathers were foles? or that they
were dampened each one of them? what meanethe this heretyke to bring in new
things? I will stycke to mine old god (that is to wete, to the canon law, to
ye rules and ceremonies and to ye book of rentes and pentions) I will a bide by
the old faith (which that is / like wise which is ye new: you shall hear a
little hereafter) to what so ever place my fore fathers have gone after their
death: thither will I also with a good will. The sy^ple unlearned comen people,
when they do hear so goodly narratitio^s, do think this in their minds /
seeing that the priests do so strongely resyst and strive against this
doctrine: what have thou to do with it? thou shalt enclyne to the more part /
and so even now a days is that saying of christ fulfilled, if one bly^de man
be guyd to another blind man both of them shall fall in to the dytche. Even
likewise did ye mynisters of the alter of ye new god Beliall, Examples of ye
(...) of true ^ten me.
in Babylon, unto the good prophet Danyell, and semblably was innocent Susanna
entreated of ye two vngratyous priests / and Hieremie, Danyells.
which was sanctified from his mothers womb, was none otherwise handled of
the false gods and their mynysters / and after ye same manner was Jesus Christ
dealed with all, of ye new gods in jerusalem and of the priests thorough
out all Jury / and after such facyon also was ye excellent martyr saint
Stephen handled of the new god Annas, and of the mynysters of the temple. In
like manner was saint Peter and saint John^ entreated / what need mani word?
always the hole council / ye chief prestes / the doctors / the pharyseys /
the relygyous / the senyours / have thought and judged the contrary, yea and
also in their counselles have decreed what soever these before named holy and
ryghtuous men did teach, to be heresy and blasphemy against god, putting
forth and layenge before them ye old faith / ye old councelles / the old
statutes / the old usage and custume: and therefore they did drive out the said
holy men out of their cities / they did beat them with scourges / they did
stone them and slay them also: but do you wene yt Christ was therefore an
heretyke / that Hieremye, yt Esaye, and all ye apostles, were heretics: Take heed you prestes
because the priests of the temples with their new gods, did rage and rail
against them? that is nothing so / for the truth is truth and shall
evermore endure / although the most wreched priests of the temples with their
new gods will go down to ye deuylles, let that move the nothing at all:
for to hell they do belong, onles they will amend and be heartily repe^taunt
and sorry for their blindness and tyranny: for it chau^seth scantly otherwise,
but yt to whom soever many things / have be committed and betaken, Luc. xij.
of the same is also a great reckening and large acompte required. But thou
wylt say, A questyon concerning gods service.
what is it that thou sayeste? are the ceremonies, and the rytes and usage of
the chyrches, superstition: as thou doeste show? for thou doeste in mockage
name religious men, and priests, the servants of the temples / thou do (I
say) name them the mynisters of the new gods / of the princes and doctors:
did not god him self command and appoint unto Moses many ceremonies to be
used in making of sacryfyce to him self? I make answer / if I do speak
after ye comen usual manner of speaking, which is found in the scripture: I
trust I have done none injury. Mymnysters of the temples.
The name of ministers of the temples is most openly noted in ye first chapter
of ye prophet Iohel. Now whether he be pope, or bishop, or person, curate
doctor, religious man, or who soever he be, that doethe not his office and
duty, according to the most simple and pure sense of holy scripture with out
any addition, which ye scripture neither has in use, nor can bear: or else
which does abuse the scripture to his own advantage: or else does forsake
his sheep, and does not feed them with the most sweet fode of holy scripture,
but does cast before them thystelles, and stinking and filthy doctrine, and
fodder of vile wedes, ye doctry^e of men repugnau^te the one to the other /
that man (I say) may well be called a new god, or ydoll, as ye scripture
witneseth to me most openly, in the.xi. chapitre to zachary. And where as they
bring in me^tio^ of ye ceremonies, which Moses taught: we will at this time
let those pass. For all these things were fygures and significatio^s of grace
to come, which the heavenly father promised to us under such manner shadows, and
has now fulfilled his promise, and has given the said grace by Jesus
Christ his dearly beloved son, to whom be praise worlds without end Amen.

BUt for as much as we christen men do hold and keep many ceremonies and rytes
in the chyrches, and daily do ymagyne and decre mo and mo new: I do first
say, that ceremonies are not evil, but good, if every man did well and wisely
understand, why and wherefore this or that ryte and ceremonye was brought in,
and what thing were sygnifyed by it, How ceremonies ar to be suffered.
for ceremonies of them selves are nothing at all, neither are they necessary
to be done. Now the simple men do think, that the more proud the mynysters of
the temple are namely religious men, ye greater by so much is the honor and
worship of god: and yet in very deed all the ceremonies that are, be nothing
else but certain examples and sygnyfications / when the mass is in singing
in great and cathedral chyrches, then is the burnt frankense^ce in the
sencer, and it makethe a smoke a bonte all the altre / and this day the priest
has a red vestime^t, to morrow he shall have upon him a whyt one, and an
other time a grene one, and when he syngeth mass of requiem, he has on a
black vestiment. There is also joined to him deacon and subdeaco^, and one to
sing the epistle, and the other to sing the gospel. But although none of all
these things were done at all, (as it happens oftentimes in vilages) yet
should there nevertheless be done a lawful mass. The thing which ye ceremonies
do betoke^, is good / if there were also a good heart and mind: peraduentur
the sacrifice should not be unpleasant to god. The monk goes well nere
smothe, Monks.
having all his hear in a manner quite shaven of / and covered also with a
great cowll that nothing may be seen / his garment is side down to ye foot,
his hose either being gray or white do touch his kne: when he passes by the
alter, or by his superyour, then he lowteth and makes lowly reverence / he
casts his hoode far at his back, and so afterward with a trembling heed
he goes a part in to his own place: although none of ye said things were
done at all, so yt they were endued other ways with good manners and with
honest operation of ye body, it were very well done: and they should reserve so
great lowtyng and reverence to ye humylyte, benevolence, and charity toward
their neighbor. The pope writes him self, seruu^ seruorum. that is to say
the seruau^te of servants, and by this mean he weneth him self to be
conformable and like to Christ, which called him self the mynyster of his
disciples, Math.xx.
and did teach that who soever of them would be greatest, he should be
least, and ye servant of all ye other. Therefore it is instytuted, that upon
maundy thursday the superyour does wash the feate of ye inferyours, for
example as ye pope does wasshe the fete of ye cardynalles, and so lykwyse of
other / if this thing be done unfeignedly with the heart, ye devil fetch me
out of the world / for instead of this wasshing of feate, they are all the
whole year beside lordly and tyrannous, and they would not so much as ones
sharp a prycke to their neighbor. But wherefore serves this hypocrisy their
works, being so far contrary? yea it is rather a mocking and scorning of the
humble and meke lord Jesus Christ / what if this said wasshyng of fete were
laid aside and left undone, and the prelate all the year beside did suffer
gentyly and patiently shame and ignorance of his subjects, did with myldnes
instruct wretched and blind sinners / did with a lyberall hand succor and
releue poor me^, whom ye bishops for ye most perte now adays do devour
even quycke, and do destroy them / did in time mynistre justice to poor men,
as well as to the rich / did rebuke sharply, with ye swerd of gods word did
hold under, open and obstynate blaspemers against god / and did not so
cruelly suck the sely priests of the country even to ye very bone, nor did
fley their subjects out of their skins, to whom they never vouched safe to
speak any loving word? These were the very works of washing fete, by
which every man should easily learn and perceive, how humble the prelate were
and the servant of servants. But oh good lord, how is the pure gold
turned in to copre. That ceremonies ar not of ye substance of the true
honourynge and very seruyse of god, I may perceive even hereof, seeing that
either none or else very few ceremonies are prescrybed in the books of ye
new testament. The po^pes of ceremonies are not necessary.
Secu^daryly I find the said ceremonies on every side sundry and unlike among
them selves. Thyrdly they be excedyngly mutable / wherefore it were good, in
asmoche as there are so many men, which do so hyghly regard ceremonies, that
there were sometime declaration and instruction given to the comen people,
concerning the same: but in such wise yt they might learn and know ye
dyfference between the very worship and service of god, and ye ryte and usage
of the chyrches. For if a man do come to mass, and does here it, he weneth
that he has done his duty gayly well: and he does not yet know what the
mass is. But in our times ceremonies have gote^ this name of ye goddess
Ceres: for they do give or bring in bread and vytaylles by a good fyere. And
therefore we do not suffer, Whereof they are called by this name ceremonies
yt any man shall speak evil of that manner of worshipping god. Let no man be
angry nor micsontent, if I shall some what speak and give sygnyfycacyon of
them: for ceremonies after this manner are in a manner ydolatry / and that thou
may perceive and understand what they are consydre and mark well these
things following. If we will at any time do ye offices and works of ye
church, and keep divine service and honor: what do we? do on a white line^
surples: which ought to sygnyfy our innocency and chastity of life, and also
the clear understanding of the holy scriptures, which same thing white and pure
silver does represent and signyfy in the holy scripture: but in our judgment,
we are no less of weyghte and auctorite, nor less wise, then the very
scripture of god, besides this, The amyce of furre what it signyfyeth.
we do on us a calabere amyce of dead beasts skynnes, which does betoken
mortality: for if we should be only cladde in a lynen garment, and that same
also being white, we might perhaps considering yt thing which it
signyfieth, yt is to wete, yt we were so greatly ennoce^tes / of so chaste life
/ and so excelle^tly learned in holy scryptures: we might (I say) by ye reason
thereof fall in to pride: for connyng and knowlyge oftentimes makes a man
proud. Therefore we do look upon the ouermost amyce of gray skynnes, which may
put us in remembrance of our mortalyte, by the reason whereof we fall in to
humylyte and meknes / and so being full of clennesse / of innocent life of
great knowlyge of the scryptures / and most deep humylite: we do go forth into
ye temple to give unto god his honor and service / what say ye my neighbors,
are not this gay gods? The seven hours canonycall.
So then prime (as we call it) is begone / i^ some countries there must one com
forth armed with a bag fulle of money, to confort such humble and heuye
hearts which same thing is likewise done at Tertia, Sexta, and Nona / who
would, were not this: do the dyuyne service? here are heaped together
i^numerable psalms, Antemnes / Collects / many prayers, although they do
nothing at all agree one of them with another: and making haste, as it were
hunters in a wodde we do mumble together and make a busszynge none otherwise
the^ do waspes or gadde bees in an old stock of a wyllowe tree, at which
noyses both of them, it is pleasant and swate slepyng beyond measure. For we
do sing so easily and tenderly, that even in pryme alone, we are feign to
chaung our tune, and to take it higher, twyes or thries often times even
hole.iiij. pertes. ad totam quartam. Canons or lords of the close.
Afterward do come in our masters and lords of the close covered with gray
amyces, and having on a very white surples, but not such one as the forsayde
chaplaynes do wear, but of most fine raynes or sylke, brefly so fine and
thynne yt a man may se thorughe it, in token of most high and perfect
excellency in holiness / in chastyte in innocence / and in profou^de
understanding of ye scripture / namely in the epystles of Paul, and in the
gospel. For albeit that they be very excellent in other things yet in these
things they are excellent, as who is most excellent. These me^ beholdi^g their
amice to furre, which has in other cou^tryes a great gyrdle of grene color
hangyng down (as thycke as ye cord wherewith the mynorities are gyrded) with
many tasselles, and wretched sylken thredes very thick as are ye brusshes of
drapers or taylers: then is their heart stryken as it were with a knife, when
they are thus put in remembrance of teryble death: wherefore for passing great
heuines they compass their heed rownd about with a purple tiara and they are
nothing so proud as they, which do sing in the quier, which do continually
ru^ne in to ye church cladde in a garment gnawen and eaten of worms and
mothes, but they have three or five servants waiting upon the^ and two
chaplayns, which follow hard at their masters heels, to thentent forsothe
that they also might drink in so great conte^placyon, and so might learn well
to consydre and remember death / but they are of a very high mi^de / they
honor ye chapleins, neither do they trouble them in labors / they sing either
nothing at all / or else very little, because ye other should not be letred,
they have also but comen or course breasts: but yet they resort to the quyer
very worshypfully / they do hyghly honor to ye lamp / they do make great
reverence to the saints / and so after that they have ones presented and
showed them selves in the church / anon after they desire friendly and loving
departinge / they go forth of the quyer, co^myttyng the resydue of the dyuyne
service to the chapleynes / but yet their mind is much set upon him which
walks about with the bag of money / to whom after that they have humbly put
forth their hand, then is there no longer any cause of taryenge: for they are
exemted, and the birds do leap up at home fasting ye whelps do tear one
another / ye old cokesse and the young cokesse do braule and fight / they
must neades be commanded to keep peace. But least the chapleynes might say,
whiles these men are idle and do naught / we must be feign to sing continually
in the queare: they are wise / they do part and deuyde ye labors with them,
so that the chapleyns do sing myghtely, and them selves do myghtely receive
money / to the end that all things may be brought to egalyte yet nevertheless
they do give to these me^.iiij.d. But if mass be begone and the time of offering
does draw nere, Oblatyon.
here also is dyuersyte: for ye chapleins armed every one of them with an ob.
do cast their ob. in to the basen kyssyng ye sudary. But the masters them
selves do come with a very deep conscience / and when they are comen nere unto ye
basen, they do think in their minds / peradventure thy money may be a
possessyon or goods untruly and wrongfully gotten: they will not therefore
offend any thing at all / and do touch the basen right well with an emty
hand / very honorably drawyng back again their arms / kyssing also the
sudary / and making curtesy very goodly tournynge rownde about / and so fair
and softely they go again to their place / who would call these things /
tryfles / when they do so honourabli make their oblation to god? Oh how goodly
mynysters and service are daily don to almighty god? how goodly shryll songs
do sound daili? here ye musicions do sing songs of five parts / according
to ye.xc.ij. distynction Canta^tes. The song used in the church
etc. Otherwhiles they do so strain their voice above their reach / as
though they would be stra^gled, with in a little while after they do let their
voice fall so low / that thou woldeste wene / yt they did weep / one man
sings on this part, an other sin gethe on another part / and by and by
afterward they wax dumb: anon after one begy^neth to crow as it were a
hen, which would lay eggs / and then follows a sound of a full voice, as
it were the sou^de of a drone or of a ledder pype: insomoche yt often times in
so great a strife and dyuersytyes of manyfold voices it does seem necessary to
cry peace peace / they do howl so pytyously, that we have in very deed pity
and co^passyon upon them: much like to the houling of cattes i^ March. But
what shall I say of the gospel? when it is song? Oh how goodly ceremonies are
then done? (it is much like to ye facio^, which ye Jews did use i^ old time
about ye sepulcres of ye prophets, whereof it is me^cioned i^ ye.xxiij. of
Math) There is borne a ba^ner of sylke and garnyshed with a goodly cross, The
ceremonies used at the reading of the gospel.
in token of ye victorious and blessed tryumphe which Jesus Christ made of
subduing ye world unto him self by the doctrine of the gospel John^ the.xvi.
And also because in baptism all we did be come sworn to christ under this
sign of the cross, and also in token yt ye world is to be ouercome^ by the
gospel / besides that there are borne about two brennyng tapers in
sygnification and betokenyng yt the gospel is the very heavenly doctrine, by
the which all men are illumynated and saved, and not by any other thing / to
thentent yt we should keep fyrme and steadfast faith in ye gospel, Ioha^
ye.viij. chapitre. Then afterward a priest bears a se^cer of silver maky^g
a fumigatio^ and savor of ensence, as long as ye gospel is in reading to
syngnyfy our inward affection toward christ with devout prayers to him, to the
laud of him / for his grace and doctrine given unto us. There is also borne
about the gospel book rychely covered with gold and silver, garnyshed with
precious stones: in ye sign and token of our great estymation that we have
toward the gospel, and yt in our judgment it is ye highest treasure, which
of feruente love enclosed within our breest with many virtues and christen life
does break out in to works, which thing we do se a manner daily.
Afterward there thundreth a great bell / by which we do sygnyfy our christen
preestly and apostolycall office / yt it is well done and executed of us
likewise as christ has committed and given commandment to us preelates, in
the.xij. of luke / and in the last of Mark / last of all the gospel is borne
about to every person in the quyer, and offered forth to be kyssed, in the
sygnyfication of the great fervent charity yt we have toward Christ and his
doctrine, where we do openly show, that we will be perpetually the friends and
folowers of the gospel: for yt oath, which we did make at the receyuynge of
ye sacrament of baptism, ye same we then confyrme with a kiss / and we do go
about to get that glory in the sight of ye lay people, to whom ye gospel
is not in like manner offered to be kyssed. Oh how great honourynge and service
of god is this? for if this be not high honor to god then wot I not what is
honor to god. Now ye Lutheranes do always come against us with the gospel
making Jews and phariseis of us / how should we otherwise worship the gospel?
is not this reverence great enough and enough again? for even whiles the
gospel is in singing, we do put of our cappes, we do rise up on our fete / we
do wake out of our sleep / we do spyt and reatche strongly / which thing does
help well / although our mind in the mean season be in another place
occupied about other matters / which thing can not hurt for as much as we
do stand there present / as it is had in the.x. distinction fixu^ strosack.
Anon after these things done / we do go in to the chapitre house (as they call
it) and there we take great care, and do take weighty counseyles / by what
means the service of god may be mayntayned / where the lettres of the pensyons
do ly hyd / how much treasure is in the treasurehouse / how they may lend
money to bring in increase yt our canonshyppes might be made the more fat:
and we do also make a new statute, how long season a new chapleyne or chanon
shall receive no fruits, at the beginning, that ye buyldyng might go forward
by the pensyons / for this entente they do give charge to ye preacher under an
oath given, that he shall make no sermon in which he shall not proclayme and
declare a great buyldyng to be in hand, and great costs and charges /
wherefore he must exhort the people very dylygently to give money promising
many a thowsande years of pardone / beside I wot not what le^tes and he
says yt all things do not belong to pore folks, for almesdede may be well
done also upon chyrches. But if god does no more desire of us / then this
outward garnishynge and pomp it is a very easy excuse: but I fear greatly
my well-beloved lords least those things may be laid to your charge, which
are written in the first chapyter of the prophet Esaye / Our bishops have
their name of considering and ouersyght, Episcopi bishops.
as ye which ought to be watch men, kepers and ouerlokers among ye people, yt
if at any time the said people do err and go out of the right way fro the
law of god, they may by the bishop be called and brought again in to ye way /
be monished, be thaughte and rebuked: wherefore Hieremie in the first and second
chapyter does by a true name call the^ pastors and herdesmen, which by knowledge
and ye doctri^e of ye gospel do teach faith to ye people. But now the
bishops have turned their eyis an other wey, and not one of them preaches any
word, yea they do moreover think it an unseemly thing for them to preach,
albeit yet yt it did beseme / saint Nycholas saint Martyne / Vlryche and was
very convenient and semely and also worshypfull to the appostles yea and
Christ Jesus him self also did walk about on his feate in diverse regyons
preaching the kingdom of heuens. If to preach yt word of god were a shame,
if it did mynyshe and appayre the honor of Bishops: then might Christ have
rested in Bethanye with lazarus, and have committed that office to ye apostles,
whose master he was in good peace and rest living his own self pleasau^tly
and easily in all kind of pleasures, as our bisshops do now a days. Actorum.i.
But he began first to work, and afterward to teach. But now a days the
bishops do begin stryues and suits for benefyces / pensyons / castelles /
cytyes / these matiers they take in hand / these things they do wene to be
honor unto the^: but they are asshamed of yt thing, whereof and by which they
have gotten their name and possessyon. I say to you bishops, that your dygnyte
is great, and it is worthily given to you for the honor of Christ, if you do
follow his steps / but who soever of you does not every sunday in his own
person teach the gospel in that place? where he is abiding: surely he is no
pastor, and he shall be compelled to give a sore account and rekening of his
deed according to the word of ye lord in ye.xxiij. chapitre of Hyeremye. Also
if he do preach his own law, and the doctrine of men / in the stead of ye
word of god: he shall give an account for all ye harms growi^g thereupon, so
is it written Esaye xxiiij. If you be the vycars and successors of the
apostles: execute ye office of apostles, in your own parson, in that place
where you ar resydente and abiding / how greatly should ye gospel be regarded
and had in high estimation: if ye fathers ye bishops did teach it their own
selves: for tha^ ye persons and parish prestes would dispyse the^ selves like
wise with good trust and boldness, to follow the^. But now you al for ye most
perte are very despisers of the^ which do faithfully teach and preach ye
gospel. Oh lord, save me from that terryble Judgment which you bishops
shall receive / your vycars / your offycialles / notaries / your advocates,
Offycialles Notaryes.
and proctours are very tyrau^tes / they do regard one person before another
with great percyalytye / they love brybes / they vex pore men and desolate
persons / they suffer simple sely men to perish: they think in this wise / I
am out of all ieoperdy, what so ever I do, it belongs to the bishop, and he
shall abide all the danger / all the sins therefore of them / all ye blood
of innocents oppressed, does cry up to heaven for vengeance upon you bisshops
/ for you ought dylygently to look upon these things / and to enquyer and
serache out of such men as are not suspected, what is ye state of all things:
and not to give credence to your flatterers. This blood was committed to your
hands, of whom it shall be required again by the justice of the straight
judge, even unto the least farthynge / which things I do speak to you for
your profete. And if you do not thus: ye are ydolles, according to the
testymonye of the dyuyne scripture in the.xi. chapitre of zacharye. Also in the
second cause, and the.vij. questyon Non omnes. etc. if you do say that it is
not the usage and manner of ye church, that you bisshops should teach the
gospel: then I say to you that you have none other auctoryte or office of god
then in the word of god, in which all things are comprehended, as Paul
says writing to Tyte in the first chapitre, and to Tymothe in the third
chapter of ye second epistle / wherefore if you will not execute your office,
lay from you your bysshopryche: but yet considre, what this name does conteyne
within it self, in the third chapter of Ezechyel. If you be asshamed to make
a sermon: Nota.
be you also asshamed to receive and take the reward which you have not
deserved / we might much more profytably set in your place a man made of
straw: which if he did nothing labor, he should again also nothing eat, who
soever does not labor: let him not eat, according to ye doctrine of saint
Paul. These things have we spoken to your vtylite and profet / for in open
sermons no man dare tell you one word of ye truth / wherefore it is needful,
yt we do send those things in to your houses which we would have you know,
that your office and duetye may come in to your remembrance, and also ye judge
Christ Jesus, in the.xxiiij. chapter of Mathue. Now let us set upon the very
mischeuous persons, by whom spiritualli above measure the greatest honor and
service of god is daily done by six hundredth diverse fashons among them
selves in all points unlike: for every one order of them has set up a
special ydoll, holy Helyas, the prophet called by surname Thesbis, in the old
time before ye natyuyte of Christ, certain hundredth years, did dwell nere the
river Iordane about the Mount Carmelus, but not perpetually / to ye same
Mount came the mother of saint Anne, yea and also saint Anne her self, and
last of all blessed Mary Christ's mother was brought thither, (as they say) to
ye dedicatio^ of the temple. In this Mount (I say) of Carmelus, rose up the
holy order of them, The carmelytes come^ly called ye white friars.
which are called Carmelytes. I cannot tell what came in to their minds, they
have made them selves a better name now a days, and they are called the friars
of saint Marye our lady: I maruayll greatly, in asmoche as our lady saint Mary
was never Nun, nor never did make any relygyous man: why they do call them
selves our ladies friars: they should much better and more rightfulli be
called Helies friars, of Helie / from this beginnynge has so great dyuyne
honor come forth of great holiness, from so old an orygynall of that order,
even from Helye (if it be true) But if a holy place, Nota.
and long time may make good and virtuous men: then should the devil be very
good and holy, whose order began in heaven before the creation of man. But the
soldane considered the thing the right wey for after yt they changed their
orygenall, he drove the^ out of his land, to whom before he had been very often
benefycyall. Dominik was a good man, Friars prechers come^ly called ye blakce
fryres
and of a good mind he did invent a mean way, after which, men might live
better according to the gospel, at such time as he was yet a chanon regulare.
Now they do a scrybe to him, that he was called by gods own self to that so
high and excellent order and yt god had put hy^ in to it, and that the blessed
vyrgyn the mother of god did upon him his religious habyte: I never knew that
our lady saint Marye did make freers. que certe re^ quasi acu tetigit. for ye
dominicanes do give great honor and reverence to our lady, as in Berna, and
Senis, laudably and gloryously / and likewise in other places, as we have often
times hard say / I maruayll greatly, yt you also are not called our Ladies
freers, sith it is so ye you have received your habit of her. But peradue^tur
ye Carmelites have gote^ this name from you at rome, of ye pope, which adourned
them with such a name. If yt another man should do this: we would say that
he did renye his own name. Thomas of aquyne.
Afterward Thomas of Aquine lyked well the life of Domynyk, and therefore he
took it upon him and so continued: this said Thomas / when at the beginning he
did love natural arts and wisdom, in process of time, he fell to the study
of dyuynyte, wherein he bestowed all labor and dylygence to get the
understanding of the holy scryptures / and according to the old usage and
custom of philosophers, he began to compare the philosophies to ye scripture of
god, and by ye philosophers he did measure and judge it / howbeit yet it was
never his mind, yt those things, which he had written should be accounted and
taken for artycles of the faith: for he does submyt all his works to the
prymates of the chryche, and to the judgment of wise men, which thing may be
suffered / but what things have spronge afterward thereof? In like manner as I
said here to fore of hercules / saturnus, and of other wise men which after
their death were set up for gods: even so also do ye freers preachers, now
extol and magnyfy their Thomas / holy Thomas / a holy doctor of ye church a
holy doctor approved by ye see apostolic: much after ye same fashion as the
prophet says / the temple of the lord / the tempell of ye lord / the temple of
the lord / they say also, that Christ from the cross spoke with thomas: and
said O Thomas thou have written well of me. They do fashyon to him a great
dyadeame, and do set a dooue upon his sholdre / which does look in to his
ears, and doethe whysper somewhat in to them: make a gose on the other side
which may betoken his great dyuynyte and godhed / when we do enter in to their
chyrches, all the tables are full of freers painted lyenge in beds, to whom
does come golden beams from they wyndowes by these beams god does
wonderfully talk with them from above, one miracle upon another. Besides this
they do cry saint Thomas is ye greateste and chief of all doctors and teachers
of holy dyuynyte: nere at his hand they do paynte an Instrument of ye body of
Christ, as though he had excellently written thereof. Saint paul ye apostle did
never boste, yt him self was above all teachers: but he called him self
least of the apostles, and unwise, and yet to him god had given testymonye of
wisdom. But you freers preachers have made good saint Paul inferyor to
Thomas: and do you wene yt you have done a great pleasure to your Thomas, that
you have exalted him for a god? verily it is no pleasure to him at all / who so
ever does not hold saint Thomas, yt man is susspected in his doctrine: who so
ever does mynyshe ye auctorite of him, he does greatly hurt the tender ears
of the Thomistes: and who so ever does reiecte Thomas, that man immedyately is
an heretyke, and worthy to be cast in to the fire. Now I do know, if Thomas
be conferred to the scripture: he does halte greatly / yea he has defyned
many things falsely, which thing neither him self nor any of his friars
did ever understand or perceive. My cou^ceyll therefore shall be / that Thomas
should contynew Thomas, he is a good and sufficyent defender of his own self,
where he wrote well / but in such things wherein he did err, in those you
cannot help him, though you do magnify and exalte him never so high, contrary
to his own will / for Thomas is nothing else but Thomas, when you have all
done that ever you can / be content and suffer that he may abide one in the
nombre and sort of other good fellows. Do not cast your selves within every
gate and door, then shall you not be pressed and thrunge: who so has ears to
here: let him here / last of all, you do hang forth a great table a broad in
sight, in which table do stond froth diverse of your freers goodly painted, one
a cardinal / another a bishop / the third a doctor / ye fourth an
astronomer / one holds a lylye in his hand an other a shepehoke / and many
relygyous women, leaves of books are me^gled among, cleaving fast in the
branches of a painted tree to and fro, as it were doves, covered with great
diadeames / which of ye deuylles has showed by revelation unto you yt al these
are in heaven? do you suppose, yt the pope may make saints? if I had money:
even my servant should be made a saint hipocritically / you do wandre from one
place to another as it were pies / (I do tell you a thing as true as an oracle
you are known) neither will ye ever rest until the same thing do chance to
you, which in the old time did chance to the relygyons of the templaries.
Saint Fraunciske
Take now forewarning / where is our good franciske left which was ye son of
the very mighty and rich marchaunte, borne in a stable, and laid in a crybbe,
even likewise as Christ him self was: yea peradventure he did also flee in to
Aegipte for fear of Herod. I do not believe that there is in any hystoryes
mention made of any saint, which has been so famous in workynge of so many
miracles as franucyske. And yt is no maruaylle in asmoche as he has also
been crucyfyed and has received wounds I marvel greatli where you kept him
in the mean season, until such time as he was fastenid to Christ upon the
cross, now first within these.iiij. years why have you not set up a special
cross in ye honor of him? least homly rusticall parsons might mystake, and be
ygnora^t / which were Christ's cross, and which the cross of Fraunciske. But
peradventure it is otherwise red in the old hystorye, then in ye new. Saint
Barnardyne likewise stondeth among other saints set forth to the show, being
garnyshed with many myters and bisshops crosses, which do lie on this side and
that side round about him. whereto neadethe or wherefore serves this
gloriation and bragging of the contempt of worldly honors? seeing that ye do
now adays with all dylygence, labor to get the proud and most high
dygnytyes of Cardynalles, and do obtain them not without great so^mes of
monye / seeing also yt you do entremedle with the greatest matyers of the
world, and do determyne and end them: ye do make great booste of your
vows, and of keeping the counsayles and rules of the gospel: but if a man do
behold and co^sydre well the thing nere unto ye light, then have you well nere
dyspensed against them all, spendyng all your life in ceremonies only, as it
were wild horses, eating only straw and chafe, for asmoche as ye true
grains and good corn is utterly unknown to you. There are many of your.v.
or.vi. sects, most pestylent and poysened dispysers (but yet under a good
color and semblaunce) of the most holy gospel of Chyrste / if a man would
brenne you all (I mean ceremonial persons) in an heap: (I swear ye truth)
you could not tell what is the gospel, you are rather a certain glitteryng,
then fruits of ye gospel. But yet you have a prerogatyue that none of you shall
go down to hell, oneles peradventure it should fortune so that onye man going
to heaven did fall by the way, at the sound of that excellent and credyble
revelation, which the holy angel did bring to Fraunciske, as his brother
Ruffyne, Leo and peter, have showed in ye chapter. Nevertheless to say the
truth, there are some (though very few) reverend and good fathers, and
brethern / in yt order: which have the right and true understanding of the
scripture, and also the clear dyfference between the flesh and the spirit.
wherefore I hope it will ones come to pass, that these old servants of the
temple shall awake and shall forsake ye law of Moses, and come to ye true
lyberty of Christ. The friars augustynyans.
The Augustynyans do make unto their Augustyne a Heart, which he holds in
his hands stryken thorughe with two arowes: verily I do not perceive, what this
thing does mean, except the one does belong to Augustyne, betokening his
love toward god, and ye other to his friars betokenyng their brennyng love
toward Margeret other whiles when they be inamoured and burn in love, as we
do se daily, and do perceive also by ye comen fame and rumor. Abbottes.
If great abbottes would take my salutation in good worth: it should be ready
for them / your house is called a cloister, because it ought too be shytte
and close: you have a side garment even down to the foot, either black or
white, and this is needful above which you do on a scapuler (as you call it)
whether it be of lynen or else of woollen clothe, it does signify ye yoke of
Christ crucyfyed, obedyence, the exyle and mysery of this life patiently to be
suffered for gods sake. The cowll or hode.
Besides this you bear a round hode which covers your head well in sign and
token, that your five wits have renounsed the world with all worldely
affections, and that they are dead to the world, your hedde is well nere
altogether shaven and smothe, a little garlonde and rundell only being left
to signify your mind to be erected and lyfted up unto god: The garlo^d of hear
upon ye heed.
and ye garlonde betokens the passion of Christ with this apparayle you do
appear to all men. Some are apparailed with black wings hanging down from
their arms: to betoken their inward love to be very fervent and boilyng
toward god / The monks of saint Blase.
and also yt by hymylyte they do fly up an high before the face of god / but
under these tytles you conuente us upon all our goods, as belongyng unto the
temple of god: your monasteryes are made free and ye abbottes also are made fre
and without all charges. By what reason can such lybertye stand with you,
which have offered your selves to the lord god, in all obedyence and
aduersyte of this life to bear ye yoke of Christ, which can not stond togider
with such seculer liberty, except you will behold and consydre the papale
immunityes, in ye.xvj. cause and the first question placuit. Moreover also
there must be some ducale Abbottes, and that by the donatio^s and grauntes of
the pope / how can the pope contrary to the propriete of your name give to you
immunytyes or lybertyes: The lyberties of monks.
seeing yt you are called monachi, which ought to be solitari / shit up close,
and destytute, and to be acco^ted as a baraine tree, as saint Hyerome says,
which asks this question. Interpret you (says he) this word Monarchus, that
is to wete thy name: what do you in the preace and multitude, which by thy
name art alone and solytarye? cities are not ye habytations of heremytes and
dwellers in wyldernes / but of the multitude and people, whereof it has that
name / what answer do you now make to saint Hierome? will thou defend the
by the pope? then provide that he may change thy name and thine habyte / and
thou shall be no longer a Monk: for he may make of ye a lau^ce man of France.
If thou art not a Monk / for what cause and under what title or name do
thou convent us upon our pensyons and goods belongyng (as thou say) to the
Chrich? if contrarywyse ye have a dyspensatio^? then do ye lay me^ well also
to dyspense with you, and give you even as you are / that is to wete, nothing
at all / you do also bear (which god wot is very nedeful) a bisshops mytre
garnyshed with gold and precious stones / bearyng also in your hands a
shepehoke of silver and gold: could ye not else rule your monks / although
you had none of these things? wherefore do you bear ye ornaments of pastores
/ when you ar no pastores? nor do feed your sheep / as saint hierome writes to
Helyodorus / but do cast forth before your sheep for their fodder the rule of
ye order? and what is ye rule? to be cladde in a black or a white coule / to
sing mate^s, to keep syle^ce two hours daily at dinner and souper to quaft of
two cannes or ta^kardes of wine / also to fast from myghelmas to Christemas /
not to go out of the Monastery without license / lay men do none of all these
things: and yet that notwithstondynge they also are good christen men. But the
canon law (I say) is ye very fode of christen men: what fode had ye people of
Jerusalem? which by the space of certain hundredth years were very good
christen men / and yet had never yt law canonycall? supose you that you shall
win heaven with you cowles and your own statutes and ordenau^ces? nay verily
/ yt will not be / nevertheless right welebloued abbottes with your garlondes
your mytre with two horns / and your shepehoke does show you an other lesson
/ and an higher albam (as they call it) with sweet smelling spyke, it is in
nowyse of that read growyng in the marshe ground, which you do greatly set by /
and what a monstre is this? where as you ought to were a cowle with an hoode /
you take a dyspensation therefore and do upon you the ornaments of a bishop /
you garnyshe ye one hand with a goodly shepehoke / the other you do arm with
a naked sword / and that is in daily use: sometime also besides all this you
have a Cardinals hatre hanging down side at your back. whereunto neade you a
sword? is not that sword strong enough which Paul does show in the vj.
chapter to the Ephesyans: but that it is also neadefull too borowe the sword
the shedder of blood, of emperors and kings? remember and think upon your
scapuler / and let Ceaser alone with his own sword, what wicked devil has
possessed you prestes and bishops: that you should be willing all of you to
be secular princes and kings? The secular sword of priests is against god.
either Paul and Christ do lie: or else you do possess the worldely sword,
against god and against right / you brag and boste of your relygyous state,
unto which (if you did read Paul in the second chapter of the second epistle
to Timothe, and Johan in the xv. chapter) you are unmeet, do you what so ever
you will and busy your selves to the uttermost that you can. But one error
engendereth an other / likewise as a change was made from the good holy
apostle Peter, and ever after contynually, ye popes have turned them selves
away from ye first fountain of whom there has broken in a clean contrary
form / as it has been clearly declared heretofore, until of a sheep sprange
up a roryng wolf / of a preacher of euangelycall peace, a law maker of all
tyranny / of a priest a man of war / of a pore apostle the most mighty Caesar
and emperor of the world / are not these wonderful acts? wherefore the state
of relygyous men does very well make them selves like unto their capytayne.
Such as the hedde is: such is the body. The pope is turned in to a worldely
emperor / and has his priests and relygyous men soldyers and men of war.
As ye pope does follow Christ: As ye pope is so are relygious me^
even so does the bishops / priests, and relygyous men follow their
professyon. The pope facyoneth of Christ the most patient lord, what so ever
hy^ self lists: for he alone does give strenght and auctoryte to the
scripture / he does interpret it / he does grant the use of it / in which
Christ does rest, after his pleasure. So likewise chyrches and monks do make
often their patrones and professyons / what so ever they list. The pope in
process of time has put forth and exalted him self for a god, wherefore
chyrches and religious persons do extol and magnify their saints and
statutes also for a god. The pope gives to them imunytyes and lybertyes: and
they again of their part do therefore worship him instead of a god, for so is
the facyon, help me then / and I shall help ye. Of those things it comes
to pass, that every one of the popes parts do without shame spytte out
blasphemies against the blessed Trinyte, In praising of ye pope is blasphemy of
Christ.
ascribyng and gyuyng that unto the power of the pope, which belongs only to
almighty god / for verily I my self herd with mine own ears, when it was
openly preached in a certain monastery, of one which, did proclayme and declare
indulgences / now four years a go: that ye pope has the same power, that has
the blessed Trynyte in heaven. Oh strange and wonderful blasphemy / let any
man read the books, which are made and put forth against such as they call
heretykes: he shall find in them great blaspheminations against god, such as
one may wonder to read the^. The gospelles they do name tryfles. Moreover the
pope does confyrme / what so ever thing we will desire / if money only be
present, he gives to the relygyous men saints, he canonizeth according to
their pleasure / and so are new gods exalted without nombre. Go to what
monastery thou list, thou shall find a very great multitude of holy relygyous
men made fat on the walls / and tables adourned with goodly dyadeames, and
each one of them holding a singular and special ape in his hands. Also every
company and felyshyp of artyfycers have propre saints of their own, holdyng
ye instruments of their crafts in their hands, one a shoo / and other a
twyble / the third a fysshe / the fourth a swyne / the.v. a smythes hammer. I
trust strongely that dysars and pryuy traitors also shall within a whil have
a saint of their own / who in ye mischefe has granted unto you this so high
and so divine office of making saints, which does apperteyne only to god?
wherefore it is not without a cause, A proverb ye old god.
yt many men do speak of the old god, and ye old doctrine and faith, and of
the new god / and the new doctrine and faith. But this is a point of craft
/ to understand every one of these things a right: that no man do take the one
for ye other. Often times some man takes a raven for a popyngaye or a pecoke:
if he never saw any before that time / other whiles we do by the fysshe called
Nasus in ye stead of ye noble fysshe Ascha: but when he is comen home and has
opened and boweld ye said fysshe, then does ye first perceive the fraud and
gyle / for the fisshe Nasus is black within, and the fysshe Astha is white and
full of goodly fatnes. Chryste^ me^ are admonyshed.
Now whiles we do live in this world, in the precious time of grace, if we
will not open the eyes of our understanding, but will be content in the
outewarde usage and custom wenynge that we have hytte the right nail on the
head, and in the mean season do not regard the true kernel and inward
things: we shall perceive afterward (but to our most and perpetual loss
and harm) our error and journey out of the wey, and that we did by and take
the fisshe Nasus instead of the noble fisshe Asta / but then ye market shall
be passed when the spouse shall be entered in and shall have shytte the yate
after him, And excusatyon.
wherefore most well-beloved and good christen men, do not take otherwise then
well, this my showyng and declaration of your error, although it be somewhat
hard and sharp: for the body is of more value then the cote, and ye soul of
more value then the body: all lordshyp peryssheth and forsakes us in the
extreme article of death. There follows no man but our own works to
accompany us unto the strayghte and heavy. Judgment of ye very rightuous god:
where both a king and a shepard shall be egally regarded, and the pope and a
simple priest, both much like reputed, we will be christen men, go we then,
and let us not thus banishe our most gentle and most mercyful redemer Jesus
Christ altogether i^ to wilderness, let us suffer that he may reuyue again by
holy scripture: nor let us not so rage and play ye cruel tyrauntes against him
upon his members, yt that psalm be not said of us to our perpetual infamy
and shame, Ouare fremueru^t gentes.etc. In that noble psalm we se what hard
and sore judgments god has given.

The second book.
Now will I add a certain little and brief instruction, and as it were a rule
or mark by which, any man what soever he be, of ye simple come^ people, (for
ye great doctors, and laboryours martires ye saruauntes of ye temples,
peradventure have no need at all of it, being certain and assured of them,
that they may perceive their own dysseases, and so shall they have help,
orelles never) I may easily perceive and judge in the daily custum of our
faith / and in the usage adn ryghtes of ye chyrches, which we do se daily to
encreace, what is the old god, the old faith, and the old doctrine, and on
the contrary part also, what is the new god, the new faith / and the new
doctrine, that many good men be not so myserably seduced / and suffered to
remain in dyffydence and mysbeleue of all their works and reward concerning
god and their neighbor whereof does never grow or come forth any good thing.

First what is the word of god.
For asmoche as no man does know for certenty, what god is, but only as far
as him self has reveled unto us, and ye only by his holy scripture: it shall
not be lawful for us otherwise to speak, to teach of god, to believe, to
hope, (which rule let all men well considre) the^ holy scriptures do teach
and instruct us, a form whereof appears in the third chapter of Exodus.

The second.
The highest worship, honor, and glory, which almighty god does ask and
require of all men, is: that every man should symply give credence to ye mouth
and words of god, without any humayne addition, John the.xvij. a form whereof
is most openly showed Numeri. xiij. and.xiiij. whereof it follows that faith
is the highest good work, and the greatest worship and service of god, and the
only mean of our health and salvation: for by faith we are united and knytte
to god, Ihon ye.xiij. Capytre. and the.C.v. Psalm. and Ecclia^st. xxxij.

The third / the christen faith is ye holy scripture, which scripture is the
mother of ye christen church, John^ the.xvij. and in ye first to the
Corinthyans, ye.iiij. chaptyre. All these men / which from the botom and
innermoste fountain of their heart, do give credence to the scripture: are
regenerates ye sons of god. John^ the first, and the.xvij. and as long as
they do continue in faith, they do also continue and are the sons of god:
and are also the coherytours with Christ of the kingdom of god. Roma.viii. Now
if they be inheritour of the kingdom of god, they are safe: wherefore it
follows, that all we are saved or made safe, only by the christen faith /
and by none other thing. Ecclia^st.xxxiiij. An example whereof is read in
the.xiiij. chapter of Numeri.

The fourth.
All the scripture which has proceeded from god, does show and teach unto
Christ Jesus the son fo god John^ ye.v. chapter. Now that follows that the
holy scripture is ye christian mother, which does gendre us by faith, John^
the.xvij. and that all men, which do believe the scripture (as it was said
before) are ye only daughter of it, a pure and an incorrupte vyrgyne, whose
merry and lovely spouse is Christ Jesus. Math. ye.ix. hereof we may perceive,
that which is comenly said, that no man can be saved out of the chyrsten
church / is in no wise vnderstonded in his fundation of the pope and the
bysshopryche of Rome, which are outward things and mutable. But this is
vnmutable cleaving fast unto the soul, and not of man's reason or strenght but
of the holy ghost.

The fyfth.
Albeit in the scripture faith is singularly spoken by it self in the second
chapter of the prophet Osee / and good charity is syngularly extolled in
the.xiij. chapter of the first epistle to the Corynthyans / and hope likewise
in the.viij. chapter to ye Romans: and semblably here and there in other
places of the scripture: yet for all that the christen faith is never in this
world separated nor departed from charity and hope, for as much faith as is
in the: as much also is there of charity and hope in the / and then first do
spring good works following as signs and tokens of thy faith, which thou
haste by charity in hope unto thy lord god. Mathue the.vij. chapter. Of these
things take a very necessary instruction and lesson. That the servants or
mynysters of the temples are excedyng folyshe, which do put all their faith
and hope in works to ye ceremonies of ye church, so that if they shall have
trymly garnyshed and decked the aulters with many images / candelstyckes and
shall have set round a boute the aulters as it were a certain of trees, and
then do offer, do sing mass / do make a clatteryng with belles / and do run
about in ye church, even until they do sweet and be hoorse: they would affirm
with an oath, that they have wrought a good work to god, albeit yt in all
these things now rehearsed there stondeth not the value of one peace: yea
although none of all these things were done, yet would not god be angry,
neither should we sin, though we did lay a side all these things, to speak
as towchyng to ye works of them selves / but not to give credence to god with
all our heart: in all his words / not to love him with all our heart and mind /
nor to trust and hope in him: this is ye thing that does dysplease god, and
which does separate and depart us from him / wherefore ye lord said. The
hour shall come when you shall neither worship ye father in this Mount
neither yet at Jerusalem: but the true worshyppers shall worship the father in
spyryte and truth / that is to sey in their heart desierfully syghynge to god
in faith, and such manner servants loves god. But the mynysteres of the
temples should dye for hunger, if such worshyppyng and service of god were
used. wherefore they will in no wise suffer such manner worshippyng of god /
sekyng somewhere rotten gloses for the mayntenaunce of their deed.

The.vi. yt there be open temples it is profitable specially for simple and
unlearned men that by the examples of other good men / they may be provoked to
think upon god, until that god shall grant and give his grace more largely
unto them / for as touching to the spyryte it is nothing needful to bielde
chirches. John^ the.iiij. and.ij. Corinth. v.

The.vij. The multitude of diverse ceremonies of ye church not being
understood nor perceived of the comen sort and most part of people, what
they are, and how much they are of weight and value: engenders and causes
many errors in the faith, so that the comen people does otherwhyles account
ye thing for a very great thing, which is least of all. As when ye ground
work and foundation is cast of a church to be byelded / or of a altar, then
do they lay thereupo^ strange and maruaylous relyques of saints upon some
goodly and costly pillowe / and when they are brought or carried away again,
two or four wax tapers are lyghted, which are borne before / the priest him
self is cladde in sylk, being accompanied with two priests the onbeyng
deacon, the other subdeacon. Now if a simple lay man do in ye mean season
stand near to a priest being at mass, and he is either at the leuacion, or
else at the recepcyon of the sacrament, this lay man seeing so great pompes
and royal solempnyte and so much cost about the relyques, where as a boute
the sacrament, there does scarsely one poor candell brynne: he forsakethe the
mass, and makes haste to a new altar, falling down on his knees / and I do
believe that many also do worship ye relics / for we may perceive by the
work, that the lay man does give more mind and reverence unto the relyques
(which peradventure are bones of a rotten horse) then to the sacrament /
which doubtless are manners / not semely for christen men. Also if a man do
stand nere the mass and sacrament, and in another place they do ring to the
leuation or sacrynge, this man runnythe about from one altar to another as
though the sacrament a^fone altar were better or of less virtue, then the
sacrament at an other altar. I do not se any other causes of these errors,
then be cause they are not well and ryghtly instructed and taught in the
faith. Now this manner and custom has co^tyuned many years / with many other
sundry and diverse rytes manners and usage of ye church, as thou thy self
may remember. Is this the old faith or the old god? I covet not this
faith: how soever the mynysters of the temple do babble, and prate they what
soever they list. But this thing we have disputed also here tofore.

The.viij.
As god is true and aeternall so is there a true dyuyne scripture, and a true
and an undoubted christen faith: The very old god.
and this is the very old god / the very old faith / and the very old
doctrine Ephe. iiij.

The bible.
The.ix. ye dyuyne scripture is ye holy bible of ye christen church (which
church what it is, was declared before in the third and fourth article, and
let no ye pope and ye Romanystes be vnderstonded by the name of the church) in
the holy ghost known and received as true what soever is written in it is
true: for it is the mouth of the lord which cannot lie. psalm. E. xvij.

The.x.
Besides the bible be any man never so holy, The doctors.
as Augustine / Hierome / Ambrose / Gregory / Thomas Bonauenture / Leo /
Cipryane / Crysostone / all the popes and bishops: yet are their sayenges and
wrytinges and what so ever they taught to be vndersto^den with reason and
judgment, and not to be compared and made egall with the bible in auctoryte
and credence / wherefore this argument is nothing of strenght, to say, Augustyne
says this thing, ergo ti must needs be true: or Thomas says it, ergo it is
true: or the pope teaches this: how can it then be error. This saying is
nothing worth. But the holy gospel says this, ergo it is true. This believe
thou of a certeynte / for in the believe of holy scripture is ye worship full
sacrament consercrated of the priest / in ye faith of it, we are assoyled from
sin. The kingdom of heaven is promised / the fire of hell is thretened / and
all things are true. Mathue the.xxiiij. chapter.

The. xi. All men, aungelles, wise men / philosohers, doctors, bishops,
popes, monks freers, and Nuns, if they be not fortyfyed and borne up by the
scriptures, and grounded upon it, they are every one of them new gods /
antychrystes / vain, and nothing worth / Sapientie. xiij. and Hieromie.x.
and.xi.

The bible is the rule of all doctrynes.
The.xij. The holy and dyuyne scripture, is the canonical, and true rule, which
does justly measure all things according, unto which all doctrynes / all
open sermons / all the commandments of superyours, either spyrytuall or
temperall or secular. The pope / and the emperor / all doctors / whether it be
Augustyne / or Thomas / The counsel or chapter / The church of Rome / or of
Bohemye: all men (I say) and all things ought to be measured and tried by
this rule, which I have said / and what so ever thing is approved by it,
let it remained still: and what so ever thing does not abide the trial and
judgment of the scripture, let it be refused as erroneous / let it be despised
as a thing brought up and begone by the new gods. Let it be cut away as
new faith and new doctrine. Actus the fyfth chapter, we ought to obey god,
rather then men.

The thyrtynth
All men yt live in this world, let them study and give their mind hereunto,
that they do learn to read and write / if it may be to the end that every man
may often times read the bible namely ye gospelles, to him self / his children
/ and his householde: specially on the holy days / for the gospel is of such
virtue and strenght, that ye more often times men do read it with desire: so
much the better they do learn to understand Christ / and the more fyrme and
stable faith to get toward god / and their charity is somoche the more
excited and styrred up toward their neighbor / and the love of heavenly
things do spring: to be short it is the highest consoltion that is in the
world in all aduersyte. And it is a shameful lie to say, that the gospel can
not be vnderstonden without the doctors for the dyuyne scripture is so set
for the by the holy ghost / that it does expound it own self, and does
open and declare one text by another / and one place does bear witness to
anotehr / neither has it any need to beg help either of the doctors, or
of our men, which of them selves are none other then liars / for as much as it
is rich and perfect enough of it self. For this is the close gardeyn, and
the enclosed or sealed spring and the fresh waters of life, which in most
haboundaunte and plentuous wise do perpetually spring forth and issue in to
all the breasts of them that do believe John^.iiij. and.vij. I beseech the for
the love of god, tell me, who taught all martyrs and them that inhabyted the
wyldernes, ye gospel? peradventure they also did continue in ye worshypfull
university of prohyse by the space of a dosen years / and they did here some
master doctor in the sentence upon the gospelles, in the scole Sorbona, where
god wotte, the gospel is much had in hand, and is in honor and custom,
none otherwise then a catte among skynners / who did instruct ye martyrs in
so honest, so good and so reverend and worshypfull life in god? peradventure /
Duns / or Thomas. Good master dotour what great dystynctyons did Peter / John^
/ James / Jude / and Luke use in thactes of thapostles, or in their epystles?
did they teach ye people (trow you) other things, then they have written.

The.xiiij. Relygyous men, of what so ever order they be / which do extol and
advance hyghly their own doctrynes and their own doctors and saints: what
other thing do they talk, sing or preach, or what else have they in their
mouths, then holy saint Thomas / the subtle doctor / master Duns / the
most excellent clerk Augustyne / worshypfull Albert. The aungelycall doctor
Bonauenture. The yrrefragable doctor Alexandre of hales.etc. Now I say, for
as much as in all doctors according to the nature of man, has been found
inconstauncye, and a certain fear to affirm in so much yt of their
doctrines to and fro many excedyng and noisome errors have been perceived and
espied out: if ye doctrynes and sermons which their doctors have taught, have
not openly and play^ly builded upon ye sure stone of ye deuyne scripture / but
if they do take any thing what so ever it be for sure and undoubted / if
either Thomas or Duns / or Ockam and such other have written: so I say yt they
do stand in great ieoperdy before god. For this is euydent and more clear
then day / that duns and thomas do agree with none other doctors / and they
two be also so repugnaunt and contrary the one to ye other / that what the one
affyrmeth and says / the other does deny ye same: the one says that this
thing is deadly sin, ye other says it is no syn^e. Now if the sely simple
people do here them make so contrary sermons / the one to the other / from ye
pulpyt: what other thing ought they to think, then that they are tryfles and
lies? Ecclia^st.xxxiiij.

The.xv. All princes, and specially bishops are bounden under pain of hell,
diligently earnestly and sharply, to provide, yt the people be taught none
other thing in sermons, then the gospel and scripture. Now if the bishops be
neclygent and slack, (as now a days many be, and do (alack for pyty) more
let then help:) it belongs to seculer princes, and they ought and may
assyste and stand by the gospel, that it may be preached / nothing
consyderyng nor regarding neither curse neither interdyction neither of bishop
or of pope: and the cause is / Christ him self: says in the gospel, who so
ever shall confess me before men him shall I confess before my father. But if
ye secular princes also will be blind (as I hope and trust they will not)
then it belongs to the comen power, Acts.v.
even by the promyssyon of holy scripture, to help ye gospel, and to give
honor to the same. For we ought more to obey god, then men, for Christ says
pleinly in the last chapter of Mark. Go ye in to all the world / and preach
ye ye gospel to every creature / he did not say preach you the canon law, or
preach you Thomas or Arystotle.

The.xvi. The word of god the holy scripture, stondeth not ne is grounded in
the wisdom of philosophers.j. Coryntheo.iij. wherefore it can not be proved or
measured, by Arystotle and Auerrois, neither have ye simylitudes of natural
science and craft / agreement in every behalf with ye scripture: by the reason
whereof many, even excellent learned men also are deceived / yea and some
saints also have erred.

The.xvij. The mouth of god ye holy scripture, is stable, vnmutable /
perpetual and true. Mark in the third chapter / wherefore it suffers not it
self to be crooked or bended after the mutation and laws of man: but
contrariwyse men ought to change and shape them selves according to the
scripture / if they desire to have eternal life. math. ye last chapi.

The.xviij. Now this is the dyfference between the holy scryptures / and the
philosophies and doctrynes of men: that the scripture can be vnderstonden of no
man, (be he never so high of wit) but only of him, to whom it is
syngularly given by god from above. John^ the.xij. and Esaye xcix. Now ye
grace of god is not given to any of all the proud, wise, and prudent, men of
ye world. Luke the first / onles they have before in their mind reputed them
selves for unwise and foles.j. Corynth.iij. But this thing is never done,
except god him self do work it John^ the sixth. But ye wisdom and
folyshnes in all ye wisdom of men before greatly esteemed, is caused and
spry^geth of ye right and true knowlage of a man's own self. Apocalyp.ij. the
knowledge of man's own self.
Now there is none other master of whom a man should learn to know his own
self: the^ pure and perfect humylyte proverb.xi. To be humble and meke: that
is to take from a man his life, and to ascrybe it unto god so yt a man do
think him self to be nothing / do nothing ascrybe to him self: but for
asmoche as his heart is taken away that he do wrest and sygh for desire to
come unto that thing, whereunto it is drawn / and whereupon it is steadfastly
set, that is to were to our lord Jesus Christ only. Luke ye first. Now if a
man does live in god / he is made one with god John^ ye.xvij. Famyliarite with
god
And when he is thus made one with god, he has also famylyaryte with god, and
god with him, which in these days is nothing else but the knowledge of god,
and of his will and desire. psalm. xxxv. after which succedeth also yt help of
the deuyne grace that we may be more, and more lyghtened in the will of the
lord. And the amyte and frendshyp, which god has with man, and man with god
is knytte and made one in ye dyuyne seal / which is the holy scripture To. xv.
for the scripture is closed up and sealed round about to al ye mighty men /
to all the wise / and the learned men / of the world / that they can not
understand it: neither shall they understand it whiles the world stondeth.
luke xvj. ye more over they are ye more blinded, and more obstynately made
hard herted / by the obiectyng and layeng of the scripture against them.
John^ the.xix. wherefore it should not force ye value of a straw whether one be a
doctor of dyuynyte, or not / whether he be a bishop or pope / or else a
swynherd / or any other abiecte and vile person. For god him self has
reserved to his own self the election and yate, whom he list to favor / and
whom to hate / and to whom he list give much of his grace, and to whom
little. Exodi. xxxiij. And although there were no scripture in the world at all
/ neither any other understanding / then this rule: yet nevertheless all men
ought to raise up them selves / and to lift up their heddes unto god / saying
in this wise / Lord I am a wretched syn^er / have pytye and compassyo^ upon my
desolation and mysery. But the wise men, the great doctors and masters, ye
old mynysters of ye temple, have no need of these things / there is weightyer
matters to do, they write them selves to be the enemies of such manner folyshe
and unwise men in Christ. Beware you subtyle wise men, least that yrene ring
of Senacherib be not fastened in to your nosethrylles / that your own propre
worldly wisdom do sclaunder you and give you a fall perpetually, according to
the word of god.j. Coryntheo.iij. whereto serves your power without the fear
of god / and the knowledge of holy scripture: but only that poor men may be
sore vexed and seduced / and that we may thrust down ye hueye burden of
pharao daily more and more most cruelly upon the necks of our innocent
subjects: albeit that they are fre from it / and have been delyuerd by christ
Jesus our lord / paul wytnessyth that our sins have so greatly provoked ye
indignation and wrath of god yt he has set over us for prices and rulers,
feminine heddes, Curlues / kyghtes / goshawkes / gripes / and we do daily
receive mo.

The.xjx. There can not a more excellent or a more noble treasure be found in
this world, then a true and rightuous preacher of ye word of god, in ye
pulpet. A good preacher.
Mathue.xiij. who so ever is of honest, of chaste, and of christen life: upon
such one the comynalte ought not to spare for any cost / for as the pipe
goes, so do the gestes yt are bydden, dance. If the preacher be true, and
well skylled in ye scryptures, no doubt of it, god speaks by his mouth: but
if he be untrue and gylefull, god is far from him: and Belsebub speaks by
his mouth. Mathue the.xiij. And where shall ye people learn to know god but
by ye open sermons? if then the preacher does set forth before his ears ye
pure wheat grains without any chafe? then the gestes which do sit at the
table, A symylytude of the word of god.
do eat pure and fine white bread / which after that it is dysgested, does
gendre pure subtyle, and natural blood: this blood causes good complexyon,
which good complexyon gives sure and stable health / and this good health
causes good operacyons, of which proceeds laud and honor. So ye word of
god is that pure bread set forth before ye people by ye preacher / ye gestes,
that is to wete the people, which hears ye word, if they do take it with
dilygence: they do digest it in contemplation and consyderation, what was
spoken / how it was spoken / and why it was spoken / whereof is gendred good and
subtyle blood: that is to say, if they do learn to understand, and know what
god is / what is the true honor of him / what is the true faith / which be ye
very right and good works / O man co^sydre.
what man is / that is to wete utterly nothing / and which is able to do no
good as of hy^ self. etc. This understanding and knowledge does engendre and
cause a quiet conscience, which else is troubled and disquyeted with peuyshe
questions, and with dyffydence and dystruste. Now a conscience having this
understanding, and being hole and quiet, does make a man constant in all
aduersytyes, that he may underprop him self with god and ye scripture as upon
a rock. Such good and strong establyshed health brings the very right manner
and form of things to be done, and to be left undone: whereof first do arise
good works, acceptable unto god. For a work how so ever great it be, or may
be, if it have not a pure will and entente, and also good and godly
cyrcumstaunces: verily it is nothing worth / but who shall tell and show so
high things to ye simple come^ people: save only a well learned preacher, and
which fears god? when the people hear none other thing then the pure
scripture: then also does none other understanding and perceiuyng chance to
the said people, concerning god and his will / then which is right and true:
Note and mark well you bishops.
as yt god is truth, god is eternal life: hereof ensues good peace and
compassyon among the people, which the word of god does cause, and bring
forth / what thing is better in this world, then peace, and to have
compassion among our selves, each with other, of our mysery? where undoubtedly
god him self doech dwell with good fortune and wealth. The.xx. There can no more
noisome nor more strong nor more pestiferous poison, either be devised, or be
found upon ye earth: then a false and gylefull preacher Mathue ye xxiiij.
(Turn the symylytude of the bread, which was given not long here to fore:
and thou shall perceive this to be true) Paul in ye.x. chapitre to ye Romans
says thus, who so ever shall call upon the name of ye lord, shall be saved.
But how shall men call upon him: if they do not believe on him? or how shall
they believe or trust in him: of whom they have not herd? and how shall they
hear, if he be not preached or showed unto them? and how shall he be
preached, when they are not sent for that ente^te. etc. That is thus much to
say to the comen sense and understanding / if ye people have none otherwise
understanding and knowledge of god then by faith, and faith also does come
thorough hearing and hearing comes by preaching, which comes from ye
mouth of ye preacher, (Now is ye pythe of the matter touched) if then the
preacher be vnskylled, unlearned, wicked, and false (as many there are now a
days / which in ye pulpit do none other thing then perbrake forth their
private braulles, hatredes, and pride, being not able any other ways to wrecke
and revenge them selves) what do thou wene / yt such one shall preach of ye
spirit of scripture? Nay that can not be. As he is so he syngeth his caroll /
he has learned the humayne wysdomes and phylosophyes, and the laws both Cyuile
and Canon, he has learned the arts of Arystotle and Auerroys / and ye master
of the sentence with six hundredth opiniators and questionistes braulynge and
striuyng among them selves, and as ragged and toorne as beggars are / as for
other he did neither study ever / neither can skyll any thing of them. what
other thing then should he teach / but human wisdoms? which if thou do
here of him / you do also learn, and exercise them: whereof spryngeth a
custom / which engenders forthwith co^fydence and boldness. And if this
have ones gathered rotes in the thou geuest thy self to rest and peace, and
at the last thou do conclude / that thou wylt neither enquyer and demand
more profoundely / neither thou will judge any other thing / and so thou
supposest, that thou have cast on a very strong bond / and sure hold upon
ye kingdom of heuenes, and that thou can not be disapoynted of it / (and yet
it is more then a.C. miles from the) who so ever then will go about to pluck
from the thy superstion, what so ever is said / how so ever plainly and openly
ye holy scripture be expounded and declared to the / and how so ever reasonable
causes be showed to the: thou art wont to thine old rotten and soft water /
(myche like unto a Tenche, which loves better to lie hyd in stondynge pooles
/ and in mudde and fylthe: caryng nothing for ye fresshe runnyng waters, all
though it be her death) thou haste a mad head, the true doctrine was never
herd before of the / it is a strange thing to yt: Ye froward speech of
superstytious people.
thou do therefore shake thyn hoar and mad head saying, what new and
strange doctrine is this? from whense is this stranger comen with this new
ware? I am now.lx. years of age and yet I never herd it otherwise preached,
before now, there were wise and prudent men also in ye old time / what? did
all they err? and were all they ignorau^te, what is right, and what is not? my
father also taught me so / if it were so, as these new preachers do preach
and teach now a days: then were we all ye ennemies of god, and very deuylles
/ and then also had all ye men in old time wandered out of ye right way, and
lived in error / how chaunseth it yt we are come^ to this point? it is
heresy, it is erroneous doctrine, that they do teach / it is new faith, yt
they do preach unto us / do not, do not believe them. I will stycke to mine
old god to ye old faith / and doctrine. And such things do their yongers
here and do think thus in their minds. Thus does the preacher, thus do our
person and curate, thus do the religious me^, thus do priests / thus does my
father / and our neighbors: and shall thou think the contrary, to all them?
falling to this new opinion? afterward the multitude assembleth to gether,
and one fool confyrmeth and encourages another. If there be but one word
spoken otherwise the^ their mad ass heddes do perceive and take: then they
cry out aloude not the scryptures (for that they are nothing skylled in) but
scorns / dyspysynges / raylyng words diffamatio^s, sclau^ders / blasphemies:
and afterward they do look whether any man will say, this is an excellent
man, and a ioly fellow. My fool tell me, when began thy god, thy faith, and
thy doctrine? thou will say to me, I have herd it preached so all my life
time. Now I here the very well / it is ye preacher then which has taught the
these things? ye verily. But what manner things has he taught the? (or else
thy ghostly father in confession / which is of the same sect and sort. Oh
confession confession / who will speak after the same manner of the / as of ye
preachers). Oh goodly declarers and exposytors of ye scriptures if god be
pleased.
Thou answerest and say, he has taught me saint Thomas / Duns / Occa^ /
Capreolus / Aristo. Auerrois. The master of ye sentences / Dormi secure /
Roselles / ye Sa^mules the popes law and themperours. Oh good poison / Now I
ask of the further / what are all these, whom thou haste now named? Men. If
he have preached men unto ye: then are men thy gods, thy fayeth and thy
doctrine? thou aunswerest. No forsothe not so: for they are in deed men, but he
taught their doctrine. Now tell me, what things do they teach? They teach
many good things of the lord god / answer me then further are all egally
saints, if they speak of god? thou say no / how then? Then put forth
maruaylous questyons, they disagre among them selves, none other wise and
facyon, then ye gods do strive and fight in homere / declare me therefore,
which are those questions? They do ask and e^searche, how, what, and where,
and wherefore the holy Trynyte is / which way and under what manner Christ is god
/ what he is, and of what office and power / of what virtue and stength ye holy
ghost is / and how the lord does work in creating wonderful things:
besides yt they do demand many goodly things of heaven, and of Au^gelles /
which way we may enter in to heaven / what is in purgatory / and in hell.
These things are not rare and gheson. Good sir by what things do they prove
these matters? one proves by this scripture another by another scripture, but
yet he reigns and bears ye price / which does most strongly prove and
fortyfy these things, by the reasonable sayenges of natural wise masters /
Ah, a good matter / as fer as I here yet / as touching to the scryptures / they
are yet in the preamble: but in the reasons of natural wise me^, they do fight
and strive for a blood wype. My friend, but which are those natural masters,
which have taught so great wysedomes? Arystotle is chief and head of al / then
plato / Auerrois / Pythagoras / Ah so then I do here that Arystotle / Auerrois
/ and Plato are censors and Judges / which may give sentence and Judgment of ye
holy scripture? thou answerest, these men do use them in their books thrughout
the hole works. Tell me further then / these natural masters and wise men,
were they christian men: or were they panyms and ge^tyles? gentyles / graecians /
arabyans. Expou^de and declare to me / whom do you call gentyles? these which
do not believe in god / so as we do now believe, and as ye Jews did under ye law
of Moses. O good sir, how could then ye gentyles judge upon the words of
god: if they never had knowledge of god? who was their god? The Son / the Moon / Iuppyter / Mars and ye other rabble of ydolles, Ah a goodly thing in
deed / and what were such manner ydolles: The famyly and householde of Satan.
The conclusion of this work.
Now will we sit down together and seek bakwardes ye old god, ye old faith,
and doctrine* what thynkest thou, if thy satan should at ye last be made thyn
old god? and Arystotle the murderer / Auerrois / the sodomyter / Plato the
traitor, thyn old faith, and thyn old doctryn? wherefore this saying of thyn
is naught / all my life time I have herd it thus said: and therefore I will not
change my mind and opinion. There is a comen proverb which goes about /
and it is full true. Not all that glytterethe is gold: what comparion is
there between chafe and pure fine whete? As who should say, none at al. Harken
this sentence. O thou old fool, how ye lord god speaks as touching to this
article, by his prophet Hieremie in ye.xiij. chapitre. If a man of Jude can
change his skin or a lybarde his chau^geable spots: (as who should say,
that may in no wise be) then can you also do well, when you have learned
wyckednes and syn^e. O woe, woe, how sore a saying is this? Thou fool, read
Hieremie thrughout, and he shall show unto the thy folysshenes / that he was
only sent forth of god for cause of this article, being so roially prepaired
in his mothers womb / and that it was long before showed to him how many old
and obstinate, and malycyous fools should resyst him with their old god,
their old faith, and their old doctrine / which should pursue him, despise him
/ and at the last slay him: and yet should they not for all that ouercom him /
would god folyshe wise men would dilygently read this prophet thorough / if
there did remain any sparkle of the fear of god in them: no doubt of it
they should turn them selves / and acknowledge their error. But what shall I
say, the voice and cry of them is, the lamb / the lamb, as the wolf did
continually cry when he was turmented and vexed with hunger. But I do not
marvel thereat any thing at all / for thexperyence of all times does
witness, that the lord god has been of no man more had in contempt, more
persecuted, Of men of holy order god is most despised.
and more despytuously entreated / then of them which have syngular and
special commyssion of him, that they should show forth the laud and glory
of god to all men / for that hoore cladde in purple / and garnyshed with gold
and precious stones / even until this day holds in her hands a golden cup
/ full of the blasphemies of god / offering and reachynge it forth to all her
wowers and lovers / with which cup she does make dronken all the princes of
the earth / as she her self is dronken of the blood of the saints and
martyrs of Jesus Christ. This harlotte shall exercise her own lusts and
pleasures / with this potion / even until the worlds end, that she may be
cast down hedlong and slain only of our lord Jesus Christ: for to him this
vyctory is reserved. wherefore let no man be offended or marvel, why they
are in so high estate and prosperyte / and why all things do go so luckely
forthwarde with them all their enemies being suppressed and undone / and
sometime slain also. For so it must needs be, according to the prophecy of
Danyell in ye.viij. chapter. who so has ears: let him hear. And take you
these things in good worth, and to the best: If I have been in any thing to
bold: what so ever I have done, verily I have done it for your proffet / to
the end that no man should come in to error / and so by the reason thereof be
dampened perpetualy / where from, god preserve us by his high grace, Amen.

Here ends ye book of ye old god and the new, of the old faith and the
new, of ye old doctrine and the new, or ye orygynal beginning of Idolatrye.
VIVE LE ROI.
Imprynted at London in Fletesrete by me Johan Byddell / dwelling at ye sign
of our Lady of pite, next to Flete bridge. M.v.C.xxxiiij. ye xv. day of June

Cum priuilegio Regali.

First read / and then Judge.


