EPIGRAMME in the oldest cut, and newest fashion. A twice seven hours (in so
many weeks) study No longer (like the fashion) not unlike to continue.

The first seven.

John Weeuer.

Sit voluisse, Sat valuisse. At London Printed by V. S. for Thomas Bushel, and
are to be sold at his shop at the great north door of Paul's 1599

To the Right Worshipful and worthy honored Gentleman sir Richard Houghton
of Houghton Tower, Knight: Justice of Peace, and Quorum: High Sheriff of
Lanchishire, etc. Adorned with all gifts, that valor may give, or virtue
gain.
KNowing, and admiring (Right Worcester.) the general applause, and love which you
have of your cuntrie, won (no doubt) by your virtues, seated in a heart of
courtesy: And the experience which many scholars have had of your kindness,
never to be forgotten, but with ungratefulness: persuade me you will animate my
young Muse, and vouchsafe to per use the fruits, of my not curious nor
careless studies: albeit I must confess far unworthy your Worcester: view;
Unless, (like the wisest senator) you would have your serious affairs
intermedled with diverse delights, to drive away the tediousness of time. Then
(most bountiful Mecoenas) if you favor the effect of my labor, it will serve
you for a jest, to refresh your wearied mind, continually exrcised in matters
concerning the common wealth. And thus I commend my Book to your mild censure,
and your self to your souls content.

Yours in desire Ioh: Weeuer.

In commendation of the work and the Author.
Nor do thou praise, a pockworne tawnie trull,
Nor do thou carue a liuelesse slubbred stone,
Nor do thou fill thy page with great oaths full,
Nor do thou sonnet of King Solomon:
Nor do thou like a loue-sicke milke-sop gull,
Unto thy Mistress for a kiss make moan:
But salt with sugar, honnie mixed with gall,
Must needs be praisde, must needs be likt of al.
Now I am sure thou tendes to virtues lore,
Shows reading, judgment, and invention,
Thus writ the Epigrammatists of yore,
And told the world her foul abusion:
Thus thou and thine shall ever enui de be,
And like a Page will Envy tend on thee.
In Authorem.
Why so? Alcyon makes first her nest,
And then into the river lets it slide,
To see if t'wil keep water from her breast;
So thou thy nest my friend in me have tried:
I like it well, it holds water out,
Fear fire, fire is the curious scout.
T. B. Genesis

In Authorem.
I wish my rough-hewne lines might gratify,
The first borne of thy pleasing Poesy,
These be but blossoms: what will be the fruit,
When time and age, has made thee more accute?
Mean while how ever Momus bite the lip,
Each man will praise the weauers workmanship:
When witty verse is worthily regarded,
Then shall thy verse be thankfully rewarded.
I. K. Mag: Art.

Ad Librum.
So great a sense withing in so short a verse,
So great a work within so short a space,
So great advise to find in so few years,
Adds fame to Grant, and thee to Muses race.
These Epigrams the buds of thy first spring,
Show what thy leaves in summer time will be,
For more they do sprout forth, the more thou sing
That th'after age thy wit may verify,
Thus Grant is made Pyrene our willowes baies
This Book the honor of thy young wise days.
Tho: Kedgewin Gent.

Vincit qui patitur.
To the Author.
Of Hemp and wool our country weauers make,
Such kind of cloth as keeps us whole and clean,
This silken Weeuer subtler loomes gin take,
And seven weeks web has warpt with finer beam,
His cloth discovers vice,
adorning virtues lore,
Wherefore of greater price,
then Weauers heretofore.
Ed: Gurney. Gent.

In laudem Authoris.
(...);
(...),
(...):
(...);
(...)
(...).
Eiusdem. In laudem Authoris
Queris Amalthaeae cornu? number quaeris and Artis?
Nec sine mente iocos? and sine dente sales?
Huc vertes occulos, animumque aduerte benignum,
Praeclarum doctae respice mentis opus,
Saepe Poeta nouem, celebrauit carmine mu^^^:
Nunc decima audita est, carmina Mu^al^qui.
M. Milwardmag: Ar:

Statuto bono, statuto
Lectores, quotquot, quales, quicunque estis.
O let my words be sweetened in a mouth,
(If your great highness can descend so lo^^^
As daigne to view my tender-blushing youth,
That twenty twelve months yet did never know)
Right Malmsey relisht: one which ever says,
Good, very good nay, excellent in faith.
Dew gracious looks upon mine infant Muse,
Nip not my blossoms in their budding prime,
These artlesse lines at leisure do peruse,
Only to add more wings to idle time:
My hou^ring muse could never get that spirit,
Which to peruse me might your favor merit.
I never lay upon a bed of Roses,
Twixt Beauties lips entombing of my tongue,
Smelling rose-waterd odoriferous Poses,
Pleasing my mistress with a Mermaides song.
Ofamorous kissing more then loue-sicke lavish,
Whose juice might make my words the Readers ravish.
The liquid waves nor did I ever plash
Of siluer-channeld / si^ purling river,
(Yet Nestor-old nymph-nursing Grant will wash
Her Nymphs: and scorns prehemine^ce to give her)
Nor have I spent in Troinouant my days,
Where all good wits (some say) are crown d with Bays.
I cannot show then in a sugared vain,
Wit, judgment, learning, or invention:
I cannot reach up to a Delians strain,
Whose songs deserve for ever your attention:
Nor Draytons style, whose honey words are meet
For these your mouths, far more than honey sweet.
I never durst presume take in mine hand
The nimble-tripping Faeries history,
I cannot, I protest, yet understand
The witty, learned, Satyrs mystery;
I cannot move the savage with delight,
Of what I cannot, Reader then I write.
Must I then cast in Enuies teeth defiance?
Or dedicate my Poems to detraction?
Or must I scorn Castilioe's near alliance?
Nay, I must praise this Poet-pleasing faction;
Lest in the Press my overthrow they threaten;
And of the Binders laugh to see me beaten.
O that I had such eloquence as might
Entreat the envious Reader boue the rest,
(For his deep wisdom censures all aright)
That by his lips I may be always blessed!
If this suffice not for the enuiest,
Know then, I am an Epigrammatist.
John Weeuer.

Intentio operis and Authoris.
For pride with Clio Tamyras contend,
For profit Otho, all thy Poems spend,
Pedro for praise, praise Burgl^neroes vice,
Please thou thy self, in reading over thrice
Tubro thy verse. Speak fair ye Gnatonists,
But whip and scourge ye Epigrammatists:
To whip and scourge, my chiefest meaning is,
With seven sower rods laid full seven weeks in piss
Yet pleasure, profit, pride, nor praise allures me,
To whip and scurge. But virtue that procures me.
To the generous Readers.
EPigramms are much like unto Almanacks serving especially for the year for
the which they are made, then these (right judging Readers) being for one year
pend, and in another printed: are past date before they come from the Press,
that you may put them up in your pockets (like your old Almanacks) as not
befitting this triumphant year of Iubile: yet I beseech you show me some
courtesy, in hope to have the next calculated more carefully. If you look for
some reasons because I keep no order in the placing of my Epistles and
Epigrams, let this suffize, I write Epigrams, and there is an old saying:

Non locus hominem, sed homo locum, etc: -- The placing gives no grace
Unto the man, but man unto the place.
Some faults you shall find in the printing, and more in the penning, all
which I reserre to your own correction, and my self to your mild censures.

Ioh: Weeuer.

The first week.
Epig. 1. De se.
NOr do I fear the Satyrs venim'd bite,
Nor choplogs teeth, ne Railors vile reproach,
Nor male-contented Enuies poysned spite,
Jove's thunderbolt, nor Momus long sharp broch.
Nor that I have in high Parnassus slept,
Or pledged Apollo Cups of Massicke wine
Or by the fount of Helicon have kept,
That none dare carp these Epigrammes of mine;
But that I think I shall be carpt of none,
For who l^wrest water from a st,^^^^ stone?
Epig. 2. Ad Lectorem
Of all my Epigrams, Reader, read not one,
Ne yet read two, but rather read just none*
Then read them all, or let them all alone.
Epig. 3. In Elizzbetham.
If that Elysium be no fained thing,
Whereof the Poets wont so much to sing;
Then are those fair fields in this Faerie land,
Which fair Eliza rules with awful hand:
By BAI the Egyptians signify the soul,
Which does the bodies appetites control,
ETH signifies man's heart, from whence we know
The fountain of their vital breath does flow.
ELIZA gives this land the name: BAI soul; har^ ETH
Name, soul, heart, of this land ELIZABETH.
Epig. 4. In Cormungum.
Cormung did wish well always to the poor,
Wishing they had of Corn or money store:
When wishing would not fill the poor man's box
The poor man wished, and Cormung had the pox*
Epio. 5 In Crassum.
You Are meddling with my hat, and meddling with my shoos,
You Are meddling with my ruffes, and meddling with my hose:
You Are meddling with my gate, and meddling with my looks,
You Are meddling with my wit, and meddling with my books:
Crassus, thy meddling has this guerdon only gotten
Medlers are never ripe before that they be rotten.
Epig. 6 In Brillum.
Two Contraries more glorious far appear,
When each to other they be placedneare:
Until I knew this axiom I did muse,
Why Gentlemen so much do Bases use:
Yet Brillus Bases adds to Brill no grace,
But make him baser, whom by birth is base:
Gentilitie then Brillus first should get,
Before base Brillus do in Bases iet.
Epig. 7. De Epigr^suis.
My Epigrams were all new ready made,
And only on the Printers leisure staid;
One of my friends on Sheeps green I did meet,
Which told me one was printing in Bridge street:
And would (if so it pleased to come thither)
Print with a warrant both against wind and wether.
I thanked him: my Book to Press now goes:
But I am gulld, he printeth only hose.
Epig. 8. In Thyrum.
Thyrus, thou told'st one I might be ashamed
To print these papers; and it did sore grieve thee,
And that thou would in print be never named:
Thou dare not Thyrus therefore I believe thee;
Yet twixt us two this strife we may soon stint
Look at your breeches, are they not in print?
Epig. 9. De Ingenio, Fortuna, Fama.
Wit scorned Fortune, followed after Fame,
That through the world she might extol his name;
Fortune scorned Wit, and gave him this therefore,
He might have Fame, but ever with it poor.
Epig. 10. De Fama, and Amore.
Fly thou from Love, and it will follow thee
But follow Fame, and it will fly from thee:
Then fly from Fame, and follow Love, if either;
Then thou wilt loose fame, and yet attain love neither:
Since diverse are the ways of Love and Fame,
No marvel then though love often end with shame.
Epig. 11. In Boscum.
Boscus at boules his shoulders cannot want,
He thinks belike their made of Adamant.
What way he would his brasil bowl should we^d
That way he does always his shoulders bend:
Hob, hob he cries, pox on that hob, naght's good,
Blow wind, hold Byas, succor there, Gods ()
But Byas wrong, that oath not shoulders drew it
Just by an ass, back to the ass which threw it.
Epig. 12. De carne leporina.
Plini reports of all beasts in their kind,
The flesh is best of a swift footed hare:
It does not only beautify the mind,
But makes the body, face, surpassing fair:
I wonder then why connies in request
Should so much be, when hares flesh is the best.
Epig. 13. In Rogerum Manners Rutlandiae Comitem.
It Is not the sea which does our land enclose,
That makes us mighty to withstand our foes:
Nor farms, nor mannours, but where manners be
There stands the city, from foes danger free;
If Manners then make us our foes withstand,
MANNERS may well be called ROOT of the LAND.
Epig. 14. In Crassum.
Crassus will say the dog faunes with his tail,
To men of worth he writes for's best avail:
Crassus thou lie, dogs write not deeds of men,
Then thou the dog that snarlest at my pen.
Epig. 15. In Monocerotem.
Monoceros has strength, but has no wit,
And therefore one horn will the fool befitte:
But how cannot be that he but one horn have?
When to his neighbor Brusus two he gave?
Epig. 16. De Poeno.
Poor Poenus had since statute was made so,
At every town some cheer, but whip and go:
But ever since the Clari-cords came in,
Of whipping cheer he surfeited had bin:
He never thanks his dearest friends therefore,
That such good cheer provided for the poor;
Except the Constables were physicians good.
To know the sign before they let him blood.
Epig. 17. In Felicem.
Felix the fool, I said, as foolish writ,
Therein my self more foolish I did show,
But then he proved himself to have no wit,
That did not call me ass for saying so.
Epig. 18.
Ask Lygdus who a Poet is by right,
He with harsh Horace thus will answer straight,
He that has pulld his hair quite from his beard,
And can invent brave oths would make one feared,
Pulld off his nails, and left no hair on's head,
Thus would he have himself a Poet read;
For Lygdus had a washing for three pence
Three years ago, he never need shauing since.
Epig. 19 In Nigellum
If I should choose, yea, for my life,
To be thy hawke ( Nigell) or wife,
I would the hawke choose of the one,
She wears a hood, thy wife wears none.
Epig. 20 In eundem
Dogs thou do love, dogs thou do feed,
Thy wife thou hat'st in time of need;
And still with her thou art at strife,
Better to be thy dog than wife.
Epig. 21
One sued for service at Florellaes shrine;
Florella kindly did him entertain
To be her servant, she a Saint divine;
This high preferment glad he was to gain;
To make this match her friends he forward found,
If but this one thing he himself would grant,
To feoffee her by year in forty pound:
He tried his wit (for wit often comes by want)
And brought them strait within his study door,
And there he showed them old Orations,
A common place-booke of ten quire and more,
Latins, Verses, Theames and Declamations;
He swore these cost four hundred pound at least,
(May be at learning he had spent so much)
That's forty pound a year by interest*
But mark, her friends served him a crafty tuch,
You shall have her (say they) but first know well,
For so much coin you must your papers sell.
Epig. 22 De se.
Some men marriage do commend,
And all their life in wiving spend;
But if that I should wives have three,
(God keep me from Polygamie)
I Will give the devil two for pay,
If he will fetch the third away.
Epig 23 Ad Michaelem Drayton.
The Peers of heaven kept a parliament,
And for Wittes-mirrour Philip Sidney sent,
To keep another when they do intend,
Twenty to one for Drayton they will send,
Yet hade him leave his learning, so it fled,
And vowed to live with thee since he was dead
Finis.
To the right worshipful and noble minded Gentleman, Robert Dalton of Pilling
Esquier.
FEaring (right Worshipful) lest I should die altogether ungrateful, Occasion
every day proffers herself to perform more than my wit dare presume to
promise: and it will be long (I fear me) before they iumpe in a full point. In
the mean time, take (I beseech you) a few lines in this waste piece of paper,
in part of a Scholars payment. And withal, if not a Gerfalcon, think yet I
send you a Hawke, which will be agreeable to my wish, and your Worships
worthiness.

Ioh: Weeuer.

The second week.
Epig. 1 Ad Robertum Dalton Armig.
GRace thou (kind Dalton) with a smiling look,
These rude pend lines of this my second book;
And I, my Muse, and Graces three will praise
Thy judgment, wit, and valor:
But I, my Muse, and Graces, are too few,
To pen thy praise, to whom al praise is due.
Epig 2 In Tortonem
Torto has crossed his ierkin and his hose,
So without crosses Torto never goes,
(Except whenas he dallies with his whore,
For then crossed Torto runs upon the score;
By all good tokens Roll a kissing took:
And Item for, did set on Tortoes book)
His greatest cross, that will cross al, I dread,
Is, he wants crosses for to cross his head.
Epig. 3 In Titum
When hare-brain'd Titus.
Desunt nonnulla.
Epig. 4.
When wit is waining thus we write of want,
As though our works were all lost by the way:
Or for their goodness stolen were we vaunt,
And printed sore against our wills we say;
Lets write in want, for I have tried this,
Than one too many, want one better is.
Epig. 5. De nomine in Marmore sculpto.
Great Marcus made his pure proud marble toom
In Paul's Church wall, for lack of better room:
Foul snake-ei'd Envy, s'daining his great praise,
Has cut M. thus () as though she meant to raze
His name quite forth of Fames immortal book,
And breaks the stones, makes all unseemly look:
If stones and names decay, what wonder then
Though death destroy us weak and mortal men?
Epig. 6. In Ruffinum.
Ruffinus lost his tongue on stage,
And wot ye how he made it known?
He spittes it out in bloody rage,
And told the people he had none:
The fond spectators said, he acted wrong,
The dumbest man may say, he has no tongue.
Epig 7. In eundem.
Ruffinus has no tongue, why?
For now he lost one:
Ruffinus has a tongue, why?
He says he has none.
Epig. 8. De Carione.
Cario bragges and swears his wife's a maid,
A lovely Lucrece, or Diana ^ath^^
Some sacred saint in woman's clothes arraide,
And why? his children are so like their father:
Yet Carioe's cousoned, do what e're he can,
She thinks of him, lies with another man.
Epig. 9. In Coruum.
Now old-cook Coruus you which do yet scorn it,
That your fair Fulua with her golden hair
Should rub your head, and afterward then horn it,
And al because you see no horns appear:
But in thy mouth another man more sees,
In faith you are hornd: thou want thine upper teeth.
Epig. 10.

-- Nihil his nisi carmina desunt:
Epig. 11. In D. D. Palmer.
Palmers in woods lived only by the Palm,
And gave to passengers the sweetest balm:
In wilderness when any went astray,
Then Palmers set them in the ready way:
So Palmer lives by our fresh Palm the Queen,
(Victorious Palm Tree grow thou ever green:)
And in a wood or wilderness does tell
The passengers which way they may go well:
(For the world is a wilderness of woe,
Like passengers the people in it go:)
Thus Palmer lives and gives the sweetest balm,
To Palmer then of right belongs the palm.
Epig. 12. In Castilionem malum quendam Poetam.
Castilio writes when he might hold his tongue*
Castilio craves, though pardon for his writing,
That Is to confess unto the world his wrong:
Which of the world (at least) deserue's endiung:
Well, thus the world is guilty of his sin,
And the world hangs, how can the world hang him?
Epig. 13. In eundem.
Castilioe's sick upon it,
Jove help him in his anguish,
Lest that worse verse he vomit,
So often as he does languish.
Epig. 14. Ad Philerotem.
A great demean friend Phileros you have,
And seven wives all lying in their grave:
But yet the churchyard far more profit yields,
Than all the revenues of your fairest fields.
Epig. 15. In Stratum.
Forty four pence brought Stratus to a play,
Forty four pounds he carried yet away:
A Coni-catcher who calls him for the same?
A Money-catcher may be Stratus name.
Epig 16. In obitum pi^ssimi, sapientissimi, omnique virtutum genere
cumulatissimi viri Richards Vpeheri Armig.
How Nature triumph*t at this Vpchers birth!
Swore he should be th*ornament of the earth:
In him she placed her imperial throne,
As though mankind remaind in him alone:
All Wisdom, Virtue, Courage in his breast,
As in their fairest lodge should always rest:
But when Death saw this better work of Nature,
And all perfections found in this one creature;
Death likewise triumphed, and was wondrous glad
That such a Champion to assault he had:
Whom if he killd he killd (he killed we find)
All Wisdom, Virtue, Courage, and Mankind.
Epig. 17 In Caluum
Some say that Caluus lately lost his hair,
By Paris garden bayting a white bear,
The wiser sort affirm that he was shaven
In Devils ditch, Knaves acre, Cuckolds haven:
Ask Caluus, he of scripture makes a scorn,
Naked he le die, for naked he was borne.
Epig. 18 In obitum Mirmedomis*
Here lies the man who whilom in a trance
At Tiburne di'de wounded by men of France,
For wading Tiburne there he got a quease,
Which brought the perpendicular disease,
And afterward of rope-seede took a surfeit,
Which causd him be canvast in a hempon bla^ket*
Well, Mirmedon was sure to go to wrecke,
When that red headed Taurus ruled the neck
Epig. 19 In Lollus.
The lurcher Lollus at the Ordinary,
Wiliest of all men's manners in the City,
Another sot applaudes him sitting by
Thus: Sir, by heau*ns, that was wondrous witty:
I ouer-heard* and when I heard the best,
In faith it was but an ordinary jest.
Epig. 20 In eundem
I laugh't aloude to hear this wind-falne man
Say, that he courted (at the play) his whore;
Shall Court run current for a Curtezan?
Were Ladies ever thus abusde before?
Then Jove a boon yield, yield to my request,
Make me a Lady, for his sake at least.
Epig. 21 In obitum sepulcrum Gullionis.
Here lies fat Gullio, who caperd in a cord
To highest heaven for all his huge great weight,
His friends left at Tiburne in the year of our Lord
1 5 9 and 8
What part of his body French men did not eat,
That part he gives freely to worms for their meat
Epig. 22 In Coaem
A nor O will Coa epsy,
Till she ascend up to the cornered P.
Epig. 23 Ad Robertum Dalton Armig.
Kindness it self, and Virtues vicegerent,
Learnings maintainer, Pouerties releeuer,
Valors bright ensign, Honors heir apparent,
Gentleman's behavior, Governments vpholder,
These titls claim, these, more the^ these thine own,
If more may be, or more in man was known.
Epig. 24 In Vertumnum iudicem.
Wicked Vertumnus Perylus redeem'de,
With (T) though (TH) Perilus deseru'de,
For Chion (TH) though it better seem'de
For Chion (T) for Chion never sweru'de:
With (L) Lolus held in law too long,
Thus ` Peril, Chion, Lolus he did wrong.
Epig. 25 Ad Lectorem
Courteous kind Reader, find my meaning out,
Whilst that I go the hemisphaere about,
My wit's in waining, dark, obscure, and dull,
Therefore must change before it be at full:
To Phoebus or be my wit does go this night,
Of him to borrow some transpiercing light.
Finis.
To the right worshipful, sir Richard Mallineux knight, endued with the depth
of wisdom, and all good government.
THe wisest Romans (right Worshipful) delighted in the counterfeit gestures of
Roscius; the grauest Cato would have his festiual day to frolic in: then I
think your thoughts intended to most serious studies, will sometimes take
delight in trifles. And for a preparatiue to your mind-refreshing pastime, here
are a few pills, which will purge melancholy: Provided always this, that
little is their virtue in operation, unless you pardon the giners presumption.

Ioh: Weeuer.

The third week.
Epig. 1 De Interlunio,
The half faced Moon nights gouernesse did cha^g
When in the Crab the Sun was retrograde;
To th'hot dry Lion strait she meant to range,
Till with the Dog in longitude he staide:
So this next week by these signs you may gather
You must expect crab'd, dry and dogged wether
Epig. 2 In Fuscam
Tell me Bollana if thou can,
What means thy Mistress wear a fan?
So fair a fan, so foul a face,
Fusca, or fan, must needs disgrace.
Epig. 3 Ad D. Mounteagle.
Mounteagle, which art now thy cuntries pride,
Unto thy worth would I could tune my verse*
Then Wit and Art, and all I would provide,
To be thy Poet, and thy praise rehearse:
But with my Art I cannot equal thee,
Then thou thy self must needs commend for me.
Epig. 4 De homine in Luna.
When Bunas viewed the wandering plannets seau'n
He spide a knave in Moon all clothed in black,
Who for his theft could come no nearer heaven,
But bore a bush of sharp thorns on his back:
A knave in Moon? what need he look so hie?
When in the Sun a thousand stood him by.
Epig. 5 In Ramistas.
Wisdoms adopted heir say what thou can,
Ramists defend in Moon to be a man,
If please him piss, then he does send us rain,
If drunk, a deluge, and a watery maine:
Come down thou man since Sturbridge fair four year,
Thy pissing made us all drink single beer.
Epig. 6. In eosdem.
From whence does come this root-vpriuing wind*
From the moons man, when he does blow behind
Snow, frost, and hail, be scales in's hoary crown,
And from his nose the mildew drops ydowne:
His Camphire breath does all perfume the air,
Bedews the flowers, and makes the fields seem fair:
Vapors arising from the earth his meat,
And like a glutton he does always eat:
I think those men be wiser far then these,
Who think the moon is made all of green cheese.
Epig. 7. Ad fatorum dominum
Hence Braurons god to Taurominion,
And you leualting Corybants be gone,
Fly thundering Bronsterops to Hyppocrene,
And Mauors to Nymph-nursing Mytilene,
Griesly Magaeraes necromanticke spell
Depart to black nights Acheronticke Cell,
Avaunt transformed Epidaurian,
Unto th'Antipod Isles of Taproban:
Away Cyllenius plumie-pinion'd god,
With thy peacemaking wand, snake-charming rod,
And all the rest, not daring look upon
Vranus blood-borne brood and fell Typhon,
Chymaeraes victor great Bellerephon,
Thou vanquisher of Spanish Geryon,
Stowt Hasdruball Sicilian Lord of yore,
Thou that destroyd'st the Calidonian Bore
Courageous Conqueror of Creetes Minotaure,
Thou pride of Mermeros cloudy Semitaure,
Perseus, whose marbl-stone-transforming shield
Enforced the whale Andromeda up yield,
You Argonautes that scowr*d Syndromades,
And passed the quicke-sands of Symplegades.
Help Demogorgon king of heaven and earth,
Chao's Lucina at Litigium's birth:
The world with child looks for delivery,
Of Canniballs or Poetophagie,
A devilish brood from Ericthonius,
From Iphidemia, Nox and Erebus,
Chide Pegasus for opening Helicon,
And Poets damn to Pyriphlegeton*
Or make this monstrous birth abortiue be,
Or else I will shake hands with Poetry.
Epig. 8 Ad Lectorem.
Say you that I am obscure?
Why this is young men's Rhetoric,
Owls must not judge of Coruus sure,
For he speaks naught but Rhetoric*
Either too high, or else too plain,
And this is now a scholars vain.
Epig. 9 In Battum.
Battus affirmed no Poet ever writ,
Before that Love inspired his dull head wit,
And yet himself in Love had wit no more,
Than one stark mad, though somewhat wise before.
Epig 10. De Ore.
Os of O, a mouth Scalliger does make,
And from this letter, mouth his name does take:
I had been in Scalligers belief,
But that I looked in O, and saw no teeth.
Epig 11 In Fuscam.
Is Fuscaes fan against winter, wind, and sun?
She scorns their force so bright her face is done:
Is Fuscaes fan to flap away the flies,
Dare they come nere her eagle-sighted eyes?
Belike they think she is some Butchers shop,
Her face the flesh whereon they use to lop.
Epig 12 In Byrrham
Is Byrrha brown? who does the question ask?
Her face is pure as Ebonie ^eat black,
It Is hard to know her face from her fair mask,
Beauty in her seems beauty still to lack.
Nay, she is snow-white, but for that russet skin,
Which like a veil does keep her whitenes in.
Epig. 13 In Roderingonem
If Beard can make a good Divine,
Then Rodering is one:
But Beard can make no good Divine,
Then Rodering is none.
Epig. 14 In eundem
Where Ivie-bush hangs out say I,
There you may wine for money buy:
Yet he for all his bushie sign,
Is but a grapelesse dead dry vine:
For take his beard from off his chin,
Both bare without, and bare within.
Epig. 15 In Fucam
In Fucaes face the Graces seem to mart,
So like she is the blushing rose-red morn,
Sure in her shape the Gods all bore a part,
A withered Hermit fiue-score winters worn
Might shake off fifty, seeing her beforne:
Yet Fuca dare not venture in the air,
For fear the water wash away her fair.
Epig. 16 In obitum Gloriani.
First life, then death, next death was life before,
And death gave life, a life for evermore:
Life was not life, til death gave life, life better,
To death for life then Glorian is a debtor.
Epig. 17 In Lycum paedagogum
Many are beholding Lycus for thy pain,
Which with their sons and daughters thou have
Believe me Lycus, I did often wonder
To see the wenches prove so well you under: taine:
If that but once to Learnings lore you win them
This I dare swear, you can put learning in them.
Epig. 18 De Daphnide Apollinem fugiente.
Daphne of Apollo never was afraid,
But of the weapons which Apollo had;
So modest maids of men stand not in fear,
But of the weapons which we men do bear.
Epig. 19 In Brutum
The gallant Brutus iettes it in the streets,
Feign would have all look at his face he meets.
And lest he pass unseen this way does find,
To cut his shoes before broad, and behind
He puts in quills, as if his shoes would say,
(Stand passengers and view me in your way)
And yet the fool what he would have does loose
For none look at his face, all at his shoes.
Epig. 20 Translat. ex Martial.
Sabidi I love thee not, nor why I wot,
But this I wot, Sabidi I love thee not.
Epig. 21 De Georgio Grave non sepulto.
Grave was George Grave, his grauenes causd him die,
Grave should to grave, yet Grave does graueles lie.
Epig. 22 In Gulielmum Covel.
Covel thy mind thou have already seasoned,
With salt of wit, and relish of all Arts,
With Plato often, and Aristotle reason*d,
Seeking all means to beautify all parts,
That twixt thy lips divinity does fall,
Like Berill drops from some fair cristall wall.
Epig. 23 In D. D. Ouerall Reg. profess.
Sad Sisters suited in despairing black,
Curb Cares unrest, sing Carolles now again,
Lean rake-tooth'd Death is like to go to wrack;
Of Whitaker a Phoenix breeds again:
One over Death, moreover, over More,
One over you, nay yet one over all.
Deaths overthrow let Ouerall be therefore,
A Victors praise of you deserve he shall.
And if my pen could Ouerall give breath,
Then Ouerall should still be over death.
Finis.
To the right worshipful, sir Edward Warren knight, graced with all gifts both
of the mind and body.
I Do presume (right Worcester:) to offer up to your good liking these small
endeavors far unworthy the looking over of your so worthy self, yet because I
am altogether destitute of a better present, I hope this small performance will
be as willingly accepted, as zealously offered, and (hereafter) I vow thus to
divide my chiefest studies, one part of the day shall be devoted to your Worships
remembrance, and another of the might, in wishing you all health and happiness.

Ioh: Weeuer.

The fourth week
Epig. 1 Ad auunculum suum Henricum Butler Armig.
IF From the conquest thy antiquity
I would derive, when William gave thy mot.
Or boast the Butlers true gentilitie,
My praises yet augment thy praise would not.
Nay praise would be dispraise thy name to blot,
Ne will I praise; or praise thy self alone,
Or good deeds praise, or praises look for none.
Epig. 2 In Daconem
The Devil and Dacon both by chance did meet,
With congies fair either did other greet,
The Devil would dice, but Dacon had no crowns
Dacon his soul pledged for a thousand pounds;
Dacon could cogge, and so the Devil paid
His thousand pounds, a thousand more yet had:
Is cogging then I pray you such an evil?
Nay, it is a quiddit how to cheat the Devil.
Epig. 3 In obitum fortissimi ducis Io: Vpcheri.
Sound a retrait, ye common soldiers sound,
When captains thus imperious death dare wou^d,
And steal to steel in powders smoakie mask,
Where Valor locked was in his plumed caske:
Nay, spite of Death (like him) yet weeping come,
And set this Verse on his heroicke Tomb:
Here Vpcher lies, who striving Death resist,
Did with the fawchon in his manly fist.
Epigramma
The wise Gramarian reprehends my Muse,
Which In for praisefull Epigrams does use
This Rule; In pro erga, contra and ad,
Will prove your good wise gramarisine bad.
Epi. 4 Ad To: Allot, and Chr. Middleton.
Quick are your wits, sharp your conceits,
Short, and more sweet your lays:
Quick, but no wit, sharp, no conceit,
Short, and less sweet, my praise.
Epig. 5 In Thomam Oxburghe
Fame lost some feathers, yet I imp*t her plumes,
My needle naught, Fame stie*s, but yet the fumes,
Because she can thy praises not vpreare,
Nor with the Falcon fetch a cancelleere.
Why thus it is when Fale'ners have no still,
And yet will show a Falconers good will.
Epig. 6 In Hypocritam fabrum.
I told thee Suitor Faber was a star,
And that he shined bright above compare:
But since he went into the Spanish war,
A rapier for a Bible he does wear:
The Spanish Cut graceth his holy face,
His friend he crosses with a conge or cringe,
His wifes gowne's laid thick with velvet lace,
Her petticorte is furr*d with costly fringe:
So fallen he is, but Stars use not to fall,
He was a Comet, and deceived us all.
Epig. 7. In Bunnam.
A shaue-beard Barber Bunna chanced to meet,
As she was going all along the street;
The Barber swears he is glad they met so right,
She should barb him, or he barb her that night:
What was the reason of this their debate?
Or what is the cause why Barbers Bunna hate?
Bunna, she barbs too cheap, and barbs by the score
And whom she barbes they never need barbing more.
Epig. 8. De Palmone.
Palmo, a Poet, Goldsmith, or a Glouer,
That so with gloves Nans love thou do retain*
A thousand verses of a faithful lover
Could not suffice, but thou must send a chain:
Nan laugh's at thee, and wishes in her heart,
The chain were longer, and the letter short.
Epig. 9 In Eripham vetulam.
Eripha that old trot every day
Wafts ore the water for to see a play,
And there a withered ore-worne face she shows
Beset with Rubies, and stoptfull of Oos.
This water-witch a patch has forth rheum,
Her carkas she with Aloes does perfume;
With musk, ciuit, olibane, myrrh, incense,
Breathing out an aromaticke redolence:
Her soulenesse makes me often mine eyes up close,
Her sweetness makes me wish I were all Nose.
Epig. 10 In Steronem Legislatorem.
Nor do I praise thy heart that's ill intending,
Nor yet thy mouth that's foolish and a lier,
Nor yet thine eyes, thei're purblind still offending,
Nor thy false tongue, that is a burning fire,
Nor hands, for hands take often more than their fees
Nor arms, nor legs, nor breast, nor back, nor knees
Yet Steron give me but one week thy vailes,
And I will praise, thy hair, thy beard, thy nails.
Epig. 11 In Spurium quendam scriptorem.
Apelles did so paint fair Venus Queen,
That most supposde he had fair Venus seen,
But thy bald rimes of Venus savor so,
That I dare swear thou do all Venus know.
Epig. 12 In Hugonem.
Though praise and please does Hugo never none
Yet praise and please does Hugo ever one,
For praise and please does Hugo himself alone.
Epig. 13 In D. D. Plaifer.
Was It heavenly Plato in whose mouth they say
The Bees were wont their home combs to lay;
From whose sweet lips so sweet a sound did flow,
As never Orpheus made in hell below?
Mellifluous Plaifer, so men call thy name,
And why Mellifluous but for Platoes fame?
Thy heavenly Musickes notes charming so well,
Can fetch man's soul fair Euridice from hell.
Since Orpheus Harp thou have, and Platoes Be,
Mellifluous Plaifer, fittest name for thee.
Epig. 14. Ad Mathonem.
Matho I Am told that many do think much,
Because I call you Pillar of the Church:
Matho, you bought a Deanery at best rate,
And two church-liuings now impropriate,
And sold to Gnidus a rich Parsonage;
(For diverse causes) gave a Vicarage:
And now has got three livings at one lurch:
Art thou not then a pillar of the Church?
Epig. 15 In obitum Roberti Shute Just. de Reg. Banco.
Shute did ere-while the Country foster,
No penny now, no pater noster*
O desperate Death, how could thou dare,
To put our Country thus to care?
Could not his Justice set him free?
Nor yet his Law persuade with thee?
Could not his honor stay the fire,
Which was the credit of the shire?
When Death such Lawyers does outface,
Then punies may not plead the case.
When Captain once does fall on ground,
Then Soldiers the retaite may sound:
If Peers to ground do go so fast,
Let pesants know they must at last.
A shoot was shot which lost the game,
And yet the Shute has won the same.
The shoot was shot up very high,
Which from the earth to heaven did fly:
Then praise the Shooter and the Shoot,
Which changed the world for better boot.
Epig. 16 In Robertum Shute fill: Rob: Pre.
How fair young Shute shootes at his fathers aim
A few such shootes, and Shute will win the game:
If Shute shoot on as now he does begin,
With learnings arrow he will cliue honors pin:
He le hit the white which Shute shot at (his father)
He shootes beyond his virtues I think rather:
Thus shootes young Shute, if then his father Shute
For him we changed, we need not ask much boot.
Epig. 17 In Rubrionem and Rullum.
Rubrio, Rullus snout-faire Septimel,
Both loved alike, yet could not bring about,
Their chief pretense, but needs they must apparel
Her breech-torn husband. Now he walks throwout
The streets, to tauernes goes, unto a play,
Never at home save on some feasting day:
At noone, at night, by turns enjoy you still,
Rubrio Rullus snout-faire Septimell.
Epig. 18 In Luciam.
If any marvel why,
Luce selles her love for gold:
It Is she may have to buy
Her love when she is old.
Epig. 19. In Georoium Meriton, and Georgium Mountain.
Your entertain (nor can I pass away)
Of Essex with farre-famed Laelia;
Nor fore the Queen your service on Queens day
When such a Master with you bears sway,
How can Queens College ever then decay?
No. Yet Queens College evermore has been
Is, and will be, of Colleges the Queen.
Epig. 20. Ad Dudlaeum North.
The sparkling lust of a precious stone,
Breeds often wonder to the looker on:
But the resplendance of this pearl is more,
If laid in gold enameld with ore:
Thy noble birth (yo^g North) does shine as bright,
As does a Crystal in the darksome night:
But learning in so fair and young a molde,
Is like a Crystal stone in burnisht gold.
Epig. 21 In Rudionem.
Yon goes a gallant which will get repute,
From head to heel in his Carnation suit,
Slops, dublet, stockings, shoes, hat, ba^d, and fether,
Red yard-long ribbin, see the youth coms hither,
Who lest his Dutchman hose should be unseen
Above his mid-thigh he his cloak does pin:
O that he had to his Carnation hose,
(I wish him well) a fair rich crimson nose.
Epig 22. Ad Gulielmum Shakespeare.
Honie-tong'd Shakespeare when I saw thine issue
I swore Apollo got them and none other,
Their rosie-tainted features clothed in tissue,
Some heaven born goddess said to be their mother:
Rose-checkt Adonis with his amber tresses,
Fair fire-hot Venus charming him to love her,
Chaste Lucretia virgine-like her dresses,
Proud lust-stung Tarquine seeking still to prove her:
Romea Richard; more whose names I know not,
Their sugared tongues, and power attractiue beuty
Say they are Saints although that Sts they show not
For thousands vows to them subiectiue duty:
They burn in love thy children Shakespeare het the^,
Go, woe thy Muse more Nymphish brood beget them.
Epig. 23 In Ed: Allen.
Rome had her Roscius and her Theater,
Her Terence, Plautus, Ennius and Meander,
The first to Allen, Phoebus did transfer
The next, Thames Swans received fore he could land her,
Of both more worthy we by Phoebus doom,
Then to Allen Roscius yield, to London Rome.
Finis.
To the right worshipful, sir Thomas Gerrard knight, Marshall etc. ennobled
with Learnings renown, and Wars dignity.
MAny mean Poets (Scholars chief patron) offered their wel-meaning Poems to
Alexander, whose rudeness he pardoned. Some to Augustus, which he highly
rewarded. Others to Caesar which he kindly accepted: even so (right Worshipful)
as you strive to surpass these in Chivalry, I do not doubt, but you will
equal them in courtesy: and thus (boldly) I refer all to your Worships
clemency.

Ioh: Weeuer.

The fifth week.
Epig. 1 Ad Petrum Leigh de Vnderline Militem
THe ancient acts loved Leigh, yet undergoes
Of his forefathers, Under whose old Line
Have been kept under Englands chiefest foes:
But if Death do not Undergo the Line
Of life; which now so long and true spun, shows
He le ouergo the Knights of Vnder-line:
And under few thus much I do divine,
His name will be called Leigh of Ouer-line.
Epig. 2 In Rufum
Some say the soul within the brain close lies,
Some in the head, in th'hart some, some in the eyes,
Others affirm it harbors in the breast,
Others will have it in the blood to rest:
Against all Philosophers I do suppose,
Rufus red soul lies hid in his red nose.
Epig. 3 In Stellam
Virginity does Stella still commend,
That for a virgin so she may be counted;
Virginity she might though reprehend,
Since she with Rufus in the coach was mounted:
For tell me Stella virgin as thou art,
To bear a virgin, is*t a virgins part?
Epig. 4 In Iscum.
Iscus, invite your friends unto good cheer,
When they before invited are you hear:
But else invite them not in one whole year.
Epig. 5 In Charin vestium ostentatorem.
Charis does change his raiment thrice a day,
Belike because the weather is so hot,
Nay it is to show his needle wrought array,
His golden breeches, and his cordwaine coat:
I have been with him, never saw him sweat,
But once at table when he was at meat.
Epig. 6 Ad Quintum.
Thou asked one thing of me which I denied,
That one thing nothing was, then thou replied,
If it was nothing which thou asked of me,
Then nothing Quintus I denied to thee:
Now yet for nothing, one thing Quintus know,
For nothing something Quintus thou do ow.
Epig. 7 In Braggadochionem.
Did Braggadochio meet a man in field?
It Is true, he did, the way he could not shun:
And did he force great Brundon weapons yield;
Nay there he lies. To untruss when he begun,
He stole his weapons and away did run:
Vain is thy vaunt, and victory unjust,
Thou durst not stay till he his points untrust,
Epig. 8 In Rubrionem.
Rubrio follows learning, follows money;
He follows pleasure, and does follow glory,
He follows goods, would follow God also,
He follows Thetis, Galetaea too:
So let him follow follies journey make,
He may long follow e're he overtake.
Epig. 9 In Cumberlandiae Comitem.
I^'t true which says the Pythagorean,
One soul does animate another man?
Then does Courageous Cumberland enjoy
Ulysses soul the eternal scourge of Troy:
For at his beck the winds commander bends
And on his full sail fortune still attends.
Wherefore his name and his al-conquering hand,
A fatal CVMBER to our enemies LAND.
Epig. 10 Ad Nathanielem Fletcher.
If Judgment, Wit, and Learning I would call,
My simple work of Epigrams to view,
For Judgment, Wit, and Learning, Fletcher shall
Be called to read my Epigrams anew:
But judgment, wit, and learning shall not see them,
Lest judgment, wit, nor learning he find in them.
Epig. 11 In Lippum.
You say he spendes all, nothing means to purse,
Yet for this fault most men excusde will hold him
You spend just naught; he ill does, you do wurse;
And as your neighbors ( Lippus) of late told him,
You spend your self upon an errand whore,
He does spend much, but Lippus, you spend more*
Epig. 12 In Othonem.
I pray you (masters) do but Otho note,
How for his lies he does an Author quote,
Thus he begins; It Is true yea in good faith,
For as They say and as the Fellow says:
But who e're heard of any that could tell,
Where Othoe's (they) or ( fellow) yet did dwell.
Epig. 13 In Galbum.
Who sees not Galbus both to bow and crouch
Unto my Lo. () horses and his coach:
And says (God bless them) when they do come forth,
And thou (fair coach) proud of my L. great worth,
He gives him noght: here Galbus hear we shall
Curse his great horses, coach, my Lo. and all.
Epig. 14 In Pontum.
This golden Fool, and silken Ass you see,
In every point a woman feign would be:
He wears a fan, and shows his naked breast,
And with a partlet his Cranes neck is dressed:
Give him a mask, for certes he is afeard,
Lest sun, or wind, should weather-beat his beard:
Thus when he wears a partlet, mask, and fan,
Is Pontus then a woman, or a man?
Epig. 15 In Naeuium
Great Naeuius still bids many unto meat,
His meat is raw that no man can it eat:
All in a chafe, finds fault and strikes the Cook,
That to his meat he did no better look.
Yet this poor Cook is in no fault I know,
For certes Neuius bade him roast it raw.
Epig. 16 Ad Thomam Holecroft De Veil Royal. Armig.
Does Valorous Holecroft royalize Veil Royal,
Or does Veil Royal royalize his name?
His deeds too great vnuail'd to show his trial,
Then through a Veil I Will royalize his fame:
Thus from Veil Royal borrow I the veil,
To hide his virtues when my wit does fail.
Epig. 17 In Iellam
Thou have a vice if I may call it one,
Nor good, nor honest, yet a vice alone,
To come from London thou will never miss,
Only thy friends to favor with a kiss:
But Iella thou do only that man favor,
Thou do not kiss nor trouble with thy slauor.
Epig. 18 De Rollo.
Perforce ( Roll said) from Sull a kiss he took,
And twixt her lips his soul (not knowing) left him
But then he sent his heart his soul to look,
And her brightey-beams of his heart bereft him:
If with that kiss he had not drawn a breath,
Whereby sustaind his soulelesse body is,
That day had been his dismal day of death,
Wherein he snatched from chased Sull a kiss:
It Is strange her kiss was then so pleasing cold,
When with the best she burnt the boy of old.
Epig. 19 In Vulpem puritanum.
Whose lauish-tongu'd precisme will not spare,
The chiefest pillars of our clergy men,
But to a cast of counters them compare,
Giving no count with Counters nor with pen:
Nor can I count the ways he does abuse them,
Though late he had been in the Counter cast,
If that his chief cast had not bin to use them,
And crave their friendship, for his words over past:
And if cast counters yet he be not giving,
His cast of counters casts away his living.
Epig. 20 De Mella.
From one eye always Mellaes tears do fall,
And what is the cause? She has but one in all.
Epig. 21 In Sippum.
Thou cal'st thy self Knight, Sippus of the Post,
But on the pillor-I say knighthoods lost,
Yet as thou do for six pence cut a throat,
At Westminster be perjured for a groate:
Cheat and Cros-bite, to all men do but evil,
Thou may be knight, and ride post to the devil.
Epig. 22 Ad Gulielmum Grantam.
Suffize it Grantam that I Grantam name
And say young Grantam will keep Grantams fame:
Thy very name Antiquity sets forth,
And Grantam proves a man of noble worth:
Thus do I glaunce at Grantam; Grantam then
Does grant too great a subject for my pen.
Epig. 23 Ad Iohannem Egerton.
He that would garnish with a several light
Thy several virtues, and in praise them dight:
He should not want that witty treasures store,
Which Muses gave to Homer once of yore:
But wit I want, therefore I Will spare my song,
Lest poor in praise, thou count me rich in wrong
Epig. 24 Ad Henricum Porter.
Porter, I durst not mell with sacred Writ,
Nor woe the Mistress fore I win the maid,
For my young years are taskt, its yet unfit
For youth, as eld is never half so staid,
Thy self which has the sum of Art and Wit
Thus much I know unto me would have said:
Thy silver bell could not so sweetly sing,
If that too soon thou had begun herring.
To the right worshipful, sir Cutbert Halsey knight, perfected with the
ornament of Honor, and titles of Nobility.
A Goodwit (right Worshipful) will show his vigor in any subject, and travel
as easily over a mountain as a molehill. But mine (unworthy the title of wit)
tired within three steps of the mountains foot, lay plodding there this
long, and now at the last, has brought forth a mouse: if you chance to ride
this way, you cannot choose but laugh, and the pleasant remembrance of this
strange sight will beguile the times haste, and shorten the ways length: and
(perhaps) when you come home, serve for a boorde-ieast: which if it do, I
shall be satisfied.

Ioh: Weeuer.

The sixth week.
Epig. 1 Ad Richardum Houghton Militem
IF that my pen were of the wing of Fame,
And Gods immortal Nectar for my ink;
Then could I canonize great Houghtons name:
Til the^ my Muse speaks not what she does think
Long shuld'st thou live in thy gold-gilded tower
If that my Muse could keep thee still from death:
Long bathe thy self in that thy blissful bower,
If my waste paper could but lend thee breath:
Yet this my duty do not hold in scorn;
My Muse hereafter may thy praise adorn.
Epig. 2 Ad Lectorem.
Reader, this fifth last week in dead men's praise
I would not spend one line, because I spread,
That more then half the week were fasting dais,
And that thou were already mortified:
Remember yet (kind Reader) if thou can,
Thou art no more than any mortal man.
Epig. 3 In tumulum Thomae Houghton Armig.
Sick sad-fac'd Sorrow mixed with malady,
Upon this tomb now pitch thy cole-black tent,
Heartbreaking groans and howling misery,
Be as Cares canons from Griefs castle sent,
Against Deaths pauilion all make battery.
In Houghtons death, Death long before death went
Unrest, pain, anguish, sighs, sobs, tears be cou^ting
Until some write Dianaes three days hunting
Epig. 4 In Gulielmum Houghton.
Feign would fair Venus sport her in thy face,
But Mars forbids her his stern marching place:
Then comes that heau*nly harbinger of Jove,
And ioyns with Mars and with the queen of Love
And thus three gods these gifts have given thee,
Valor, wit, favor, and civility.
Epig. 5 In Gallam.
Galla with mutton and pottage used to pray,
A month together save one Venus day:
But now her pureness Lenton meat does fast,
Three Venus days in one week found at last:
And yet she says there are too few by three,
Galla would have all Venus days to be.
Epig 6 In Sullum.
Thou have desired me Sullus often indeed,
To thy friend Mat to do thy commendations,
I would do more if that thou stood in need,
Amongst acquaintance these are only fashions:
Yet wish me not commend thee to thy friend,
For I know naught in thee I can commend.
Epig. 7
My Cosens life (I hear) is new out dated,
And all his pounds could not pay for two years,
And two rich Plutoe's, for his goods which waited
Snatched them from me ( a cross that all men bears)
But it is no matter, for goods gotten evil,
Pluto will hane, or else some other devil.
Epig. 8 In tumulum Iuelli.
Here lies Iuell, who knows not the rest,
Is worthy to be ignorant at least.
Epig. 9 In tumulum Ferdinand. Darbie.
Be not so bold to open this dead man's door,
Unless thou come from th'aerie house of woes,
Ne dare thou once upon this Marble pore,
Unless thou pour thy sight out on these roes,
If to fair knighthood thou bearst any zeal,
Unrest, care, grief, sad discontent, and woe,
On these five bells ring thou a doleful peale,
Volies of sighs fast after them let go:
Rest, in unrest, teares-spitting forge be burning,
Until some write The Muses nine days mourning.
Epig. 10 Ad Samuelem Daniel.
Daniel, thou in tragic note excells,
As Rosamond and Cleopatra tells:
Why do thou not in a drawn bloody line,
Offer up tears at Ferdinandoes shrine?
But those that e're he di'de bewitched him then,
Belike bewitcheth now each Poets pen.
Epig. 11 Ad Io: Marston, and Ben: Johnson.
Marston, thy Muse enharbours Horace vain,
Then some Augustus give thee Horace merit,
And thine embuskin'd Johnson does retain
So rich a style, and wondrous gallant spirit,
That if to praise your Muses I desired,
My Muse would muse. Such wits must be admired
Epig. 12 In tumulum Auari.
Here lies he who never aught
To man or woman gave:
And now it grieves him that thou read'st
For naught this on his grave.
Epig. 13 Ad Gulielmum Warner.
Live prince of Poets, thy affections guide,
Where Wit attires her self in Virtues suit,
Whilst Englads fame thy flowing verse does pride
This be thy praise: Thy Albion's absolute.
Epig. 14 In tumulum Abrahami Simple.
Within this place lies Abraham the Civil,
Who never did good* who never did evil:
Too ill then for God, too good for the devil.
Epig. 15 in Asin^^ quendam.
You know (sir Ass) how you did me annoy,
To steal away my little tale of Troy:
And asking for it, you all in a fume,
Twixt two big jaws did wholly it consume:
To be destroyed Troyes fortune sure it was,
Once with an Horse, again now with an Ass.
Epig. 16 In Rufum
Foul red nosde Rufus, favor thou may gain,
If with his children thou would take some pain:
But until Rufus favor fairer be,
He should not give his favor unto me.
Epig. 17 In Zoilum.
Zoilus, thou laugh'st but only when I weep,
And when I laugh that is weeping cheer for thee,
Then weeping Zoilus I will thee keep,
My book and me still laughing thou shall see:
Now quickly Zoilus take up thy four quarters,
And like a knave go hang thee in thy garters.
Epig. 18 In obitum Thomae Fisher a Io: ^ishroc^is.
The Fisher did the fish so dearly love,
That still he gave the fish fresh worms to eat,
O then what should the fish so nearely move,
To give the fisher to the worms for meat?
Epig. 19 In Scyllam
By Lord nor Lady Scylla will not swear,
By God nor goddess nor so great a thing,
Yet she commits a greater fault I fear,
In swearing always by her fair gold ring.
Epig. 20 In Cynam.
Nor you did swear not once since you were born
Yet at each word you say you will be sworn:
A fault you get whilst you a fault would fly,
For when you swear not, Cyna then you lie.
Epig. 21 Liber ad Authorem.
I Am likt of many, many me approve,
Some like me not, for thy sake ne me love:
I do not care: who makes a banquet looks
To please his guests, and not to please the Cooks.
Epig. 22. In Gulielmum Rich: Cantabr: procu.
But that I am too poor to pen thy praise,
I would presume thy glorious name to raise:
Beyond the riches of the Indian land,
Worth more then worthless Tagus golden sand:
But O thy virtues pass my praises pitch,
Thy learnings fame above thy name is rich:
How well then Virtue sorts her with thy same
That art both rich in Art, and Rich in Name.
Epig. 23 In obitum Ed. Spencer Poetae prestantiss.
Colin's gone home, the glory of his clime,
The Muses Mirror, and the Shepherds Saint;
Spencer is ruined, of our latter time
The fairest ruin, Faeries foulest want:
Then his Time-ruines did our ruin show,
Which by his ruin we untimely know:
Spencer therefore thy Ruins were called in,
Too soon to sorrow least we should begin.
Epig. 24 Ad Iacobum Thornton.
Thornton well read, say not I do thee wrong,
In that I have deferred thy praise so long,
Thy gentleman-like parts when as I find,
With thy grave studies, all in one combinde:
Feign would I praise thee, but I see my skill,
Is now defective to my great good will.
Epig. 25 In Ed: Wrightington.
If ventrous youth now in his chiefest prime,
To virtues love be wholly thus addicted,
What does grave ^ld, with milke-white hairs in
Assure us of one vice to be afflicted? time?
For by and by the plant does straight appear,
Which afterward great store of fruit will bear.
To the right worshipful, sir Peter Leigh of Vnderline knight, honored with
all virtue coequall to his ancient worth
FAmes prodigal report (right Worcester.) of your admired courtesy, and the no
less virtuous then valorous disposition of Leighs antique family, (in whose
praise a better Poet might spend whole quiers of paper) persuade me you will
read over these few Epigrammes, though far differing from other wits,
presented to the view of your Worship. And weigh withal well affected good
will: so shall I ^^t^^ne my long desired wish, and the end of this my work.

Ioh: Weeuer.

The seventh week.
Epig. 1 Ad Thomam Gerard Militem
GErard, among the labors of my quill,
Which my glad Muse presumingly has writ,
As one right worthy thee commend I will,
For valor, wisdom, bountihood and wit:
But valiant Gerard, thee or thine to praise,
Is for to praise the star-bespangled sky,
Fame long ago unto the heauns did raise
Thy rare exploits and Mars-like Chivalry:
Since by thy deeds thy praise abroad does fly,
Thy self commends thy self, then need not I.
Epig 2 In carum fictum amicum.
Do thou think Chloes he is a faithful friend,
For who^ this wondrous cheer thou do provide?
No: he but loves so long as thou will spend
Thy beef and brawne, if that the truth were tried
If every day I should so costly dine,
Carus I know would be a friend of mine.
Epig. 3 In Sparsum.
Sparsus you are sick ten times a veere and more,
Yet not thy self, but us, thy sickness hurts,
When thou recouers we look evermore,
For thy relief some Pretour to disburse:
Fie, in one year be sick but once uneath,
And when you are sick Sparsus be sick to death.
Epig. 4 In Pontum
This for a wonder many men have made,
That Pontus house so many chimnies had:
The workmans skill I for the wonder took,
Which made the^ so that few could see the^ smoke.
Epig. 5 In Hugonem.
Did not once thine old familiar friend
Chypus, desire thee ten pounds to him lend;
Sir I have none (said thou) so God me save,
Yet for his horse even then ten pound thou gave:
Thus for ten pounds thou ^t sooner trust a horse,
Than thy dear friend; and be forsworn, that's worse.
Epig 6 In eundem
And do thou think thou offers Claius right,
In causing him ten pounds of debt to pay,
Because that Boscus ran the other night
With twenty hundred in thy debt away:
If thou can lose by Boscus twenty: then
In faith by Claius thou may well lose ten.
Epig. 7. In Lacum
Lacus I saw a cruel Cappe still wear,
(O cruel cap that pulles away his hair)
I wondered much what plague had so him crossed,
That both on chin and head all was quite lost:
A new disease (some said) a dry hot cold;
Yet this disease a thousand year was old.
Epig. 8. In Portianum
Portian is taken for a traveler:
Why? For he wears a gold ring in his ear,
Certes and if a ring may be a sign,
Who better traveler than his mothers swine?
They in their Nose he in his Ear;
Whether then is the better traveler?
Grilliis I wot has deeper gone then he,
If he has further gone, they even be.
Epig. 9
But wodden chalices of yore,
Yet golden priests were then great store,
Now golden chalices we make,
For wodden priests in hand to take:
Lets cast our priests in a new molde,
Or else for wood lets change our gold.
Epig. 10 In Cacum
Cacus is angry he has not a place
Amongst the Worthies of our Faerie land,
Nor does the pesant think himself too base,
Among the brauest of the Lords to stand:
He wears brave clothes; but what wears he within?
An Ass an Ass is in a Lions skin.
Epig. 11 Ad Musam suam, de obitufortissimi insignisque inuenis Thomae Egerton
militis.
Descend my Muse into the bed of Death,
(Embalming first his body with thy tears)
And chide the Fates until they lend him breath,
Because they rapt him in his youthful years;
Yet stay my Muse, Fates offered him no wrong,
In virtue old he was, in years though young.
Epig. 12 In Quintum.
To give a book thou say I may do well,
Yet thou n'ere readst a book, before a book thou sell.
Epig. 13 In Tubrionem
Extramnemers or Watermen give room,
For by his feather Tubrioe's spied to come.
A Sculler sir; here is a pair of Oars:
Ift please your Worship, I did speak before:
I Am your first man; he lies, here is my boat:
Your Worship lands at Paul's wharfe, does it not*
No, Westminster; O fool, do thou not know*
That against the wind thou cannot Tubrio row*
Epig. 14 Ad Cordredum.
O impudent! a living! for whose sake?
This means to my Lord () do thou make?
Fie; thus to beg thy self, One of rare parts
I am (my Lord) beside Master of Arts,
And: Go no further; thou art too short legged,
And beg no more, lest thou thy self be begged:
Yet ( Cordred) thou shall have (do not despair)
The Vicarage of Saint Fools at Steeple fair.
Epig. 15 Satyricum in Audriam laenam.
Look to your self, I Will whip you mistress Audrie,
For keeping such a brothel house of ()
Is It true indeed? has Sulla learned thy skill?
Dri'de veins and arteries with pure blood to fill;
In drinking cordialls fearing to be too old,
Of Ambergris prepared pearl and gold:
Mandrake, Eringe and Potatie roots,
Five pound a week in Poticaries books:
Oh stay, no more; for Audria I hear tell
Is new become a bride, but in Bridewell.
Epig. 16 Ad Richardum Houghton Militem
O chide me not, for that I do enroule
Thy worthy name here ( Houghton) in the end,
For now I hope none will my book control,
Lest thine heroicke spirit they offend,
Close with thy Virtues then this seely scroule,
That praise on thee, and it, may ever tend:
Which if it do I will adventure then,
To take a task fit for a golden pen.
Epig. 17 Ad Lectorem.
If in the first thou count me worthy blame,
Yet pardon me, thus Homer did offend,
If in the midst, then Pedo I can name,
Chaerill in all, Getulicus in the end*
Thy favor (Reader) then obtain I shall,
I am but bad in the first, midst, end, and all.
Finis.

