Verus Pater, OR A bundell of Truths. Containing a Prognostication, necessary
at all times, showing Physical precepts, and rules of good husbandry, with
some other Astronomicall rules fit to be observed.

And dedicated to the ancient memory of old Erra-Pater, and his honest meaning.



Printed at London for T. L. dwelling on snow-hill. 1^^^

Verus Pater, Heath of Body.
Part. 1. The Natural Composition of man's Body.
EVery man's natural body is compounded and made of seven natural things,
that is to say, of Elements, of Temperaments, of Humors, of Members, of Powers,
of Operations, and Spirits.

Exposition of Elements.
AN Element being a first beginning, is a thing pure and simple, of which all
things are made, and into which all things are resolved, and not discernable by
the outward senses, being the least part of the thing made thereof; and of
Elements there are only four, as Fire, Air, Water, Earth.

Fire, is next the Moon, and of operation hot and dry, but most exceeds in
heat; and the virtue is to move matter to generation, to separate things of
diverse kinds, and to join things of like kinds together: it does ripen,
digest, mix, and open.

Air, is next the fire, it is hot and moist, but especially moist: The virtue
is to make things receive shape naturally or accidentally; it cools the
burning of the heart, and makes al mixed bodies penetrable and light.

Water, is next the Air, it is cold and moist, but most cold: The virtue is
to join together things of diverse kinds, to cool the violence of the fire,
and to gath^r together things which are dispersed.

Earth, is next unto the Water; it is dry and cold, but most dry: The virtue
is to harden bodies, and make them retain shape.

Exposition of Temperaments.
TEmperaments (which are the mixture of the Elements beforesayd) are nine, that
is to say, eight unequal, and the ninth equal: Of the eight unequal, four
are simple, and four are compound. The four simple ace, Hot, Cold, Moist,
Dry; the first two being active, the latter passive. The four compound are,
Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, Cold and Dry. Now the ninth equal
Temperament is either general or special; if general, then it is when there
is an equal proportion of the four Elements, and no more of one then of
another: If special, then when the Elements are proportioned as every kind
does require, be it man, beast, or plant. To these you may add the second
qualities, which are divided into two branches, either touchable or not
touchable: if touchable, they are softness, hardness, smoothness,
roughness, toughness, bricklenes, lightness, heaviness, thinness,
thickness, smallness, and grossness. If they be not touchable, then they
appertain to the senses, as noises to hearing, colors to seeing, odors to
smelling, etc. which truly marked, will discover any sickness.

Exposition of Humors.
THe humors in man are four, first Blood, which is of the nature of the Air,
and sweet in taste. Secondly, Fleame, which is of the nature of water, and
wallowish in taste. Thirdly, Choler, which is of the nature of fire and bitter
in taste. And lastly, Melancholy which is of the nature of the earth, and sour
in taste. Now though these are generally over all the body, yet they have their
particular places, as blood about the heart, fleame in the brain, choler in
the Liver, and melancholy in the spleen; Blood nourishes, fleame moves,
choler emptieth, and melancholy fills.

Exposition of Members.
MEmbers are of two kinds, either Semblable, or Isntrumental; if Semblable,
then being divided into parts, each part is alike in substance to the whole,
and have but one name with the whole, as Flesh, Bone, Senewe etc. If
Isntrumental, then being made of parts semblable and divided, the parts are
not alike, nor have one name with the whole; as Head, Hand, Foot, etc. And of
these isntrumental members four are most principal, as the Brain, the
Heart, the Liver, and the Genitals: the first three preserving the particular
body, the last, the whole kind; also from the Brain spryngeth the synewes,
from the heart the arteries, from the Liver the veins, and from the genitalls,
the vessels of seed.

Exposition of Powers.
THe powers ruling in man are three; The first Animal, and proceeds from the
brain, giving by the synewes, feeling and moving to the whole body; The
second Vital, and proceeds from the heart, giving by the arteries, life and
spirit to the whole body. The third Natural, and proceeds from the Liver,
giving by the veins nutriment to the whole body: and from this power natural
issues four other powers, as the power Attractiue which draws sustenance to
nourish; the power Retentiue, which keeps it received; the power Digestive
which digesteth it; and the power Expulsive whereby it auoyds excrements.

Exposition of Operations.
OPerations are the actions proceeding from the powers, as from the power
Animal proceeds the operation to discern, to move, and to feel: from the
power Vital proceeds the operation to restrain and to loosen the heart: and
from the power Natural proceeds the operation to engender, to increase, to
nourish, to desire, to drain, to change, to digest, to retain, and to expel.
Now these operations are either voluntary, or not voluntary: The voluntary are
those which a man may further or hinder at pleasure, as going, standing or
lying down; and those not voluntary, are they which depend not on the will of
man, but are done of their own accord, and naturally, (...) the moving of the
heart, passage of the blood, beating of the pulse, and such like.

Exposition of Spirits.
A Spirit which is the fine, pure, clear, and ayerie substance of man, is
divided into two kinds, the Spirit Animal, which gives feeling and moving
unto man, and has his palace in the brain, being continually watered and
nourished with the caul thereof; and the Spirit Vital, which is the cause of
all the natural heat in the body, and has his palate in the heart, being
nourished and preserved partly by breathing, and partly by blood. And these
seven thus treated of, being preserved in their true force and virtue, man is
ever sound and perfect; but corrupted or troubled, the body falls into most
mortal sickness.

What impayreth man's health.
THe things which impair man's health, are accounted not natural, and they are
fire, as Air, Meat and Drink, Moueing and Rest, Sleep and watching,
emptines and fullness, and the Affects of the mind: any of which disorderly
applied, bring sickness; but orderly used, they do preserve the body. To
these may be added other three, as Causes, the Sickness, and Accidents. The
causes are evil affects going before, and promouing sickness; and they are of
two kinds, as internal, which breed within the body, and external, as those
without, as heat, cold, or wounds.

Sickness is an evil Affect against nature, and is of three kinds, the first
in parts alike, the second in parts isntrumental, and the third in both. The
first is simple, as when one quality abounds; or compound, as when diverse do
exceed.

The second is an evil constitution, known by the shape, number, quantity, or
site of the member diseased.

The third a division of the unity, as a fracture in the bone, a wound or ulcer
in the flesh, a rupture in the veins, a convulsion in the synewes, and an
excoriation in the skin.

Again, some sickness is called long some short and sharp; the first is
tedious but hopeful, the latter dangerous.

There is Sickness by it self, and sickness by consent; the first troubling
the member in which it is, the other going from one member to an other, as from
the stomach to the head, or from the head to the eye, etc.

To every Sickness belongs four times, the beginning of the sickness, the
increasing, the state, and the declination.

Lastly, for the signs of sickness they are known four several ways; as
first by inseparable accidents, as shape, number, quantity, and site of the
part diseased: Secondly, by alteration of quality; thirdly, by the hindrance or
trouble of any action; and lastly, by the urine and excrements.

Use of Physic helps.
FIrst, it is to be understood that the cure of all diseases consists in
Bleeding, Purging, Bathing, and Giving Fire; and in any of these consider
whether it be to keep the body in health, or for the present cure of any part
diseased.

If to keep the body in health, then consider the state of the body, as
whether it be in youth, at man's estate, in age, or else old age, then the
complexion, as hot, and dry, cold, and moist; then the constitution, as
grossness, or leanness; and lastly, the time of the year, as the spring
which is the best, the Summer evil, Harvest indifferent, and Winter naught.

Of Bleeding.
TOuching bleeding, it is meet the body be ordered and prepared thereunto, as
by a preparatiue given by the counsel of the Physician, to prepare the
humors; which if time will not allow, then give a Glister over night, and open
the vein in the morning, and fasting, an hour or two after the rising of the
Sun, avoiding by all means possible, the hours of Saturn and Mars. As for
the quantity, the melancholy man may loose most blood, the Sanguine less then
ye Melancholy; the Chollericke less then the Sanguine, and the Flegmaticke
least of all. After bleeding drink a hearty draught of claret wine with a
tossed, and use meats of light digestion for three days after, and in that
space abstain from riding, running, and leaping, vaulting, wrestling, fencing,
tennis, bowling, bathing, and venery.

If you will bleed according to age, then let blood from the age of 14. to 26.
years, in the first 7. days of ye age of the moon: from 26. to 38. in ye
second 7. days of the age of the moon: from 38. to 52. in ye third 7. days
of the age of ye Moon: from 52. to 64. in ye fourth 7. days of the age of the
Moon.

If to bleed after complexions, let the chollericke blood, when the Moon is in
Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces; the Flegmaticke when the Moon is Aries, Leo,
Sagittarius; the melancholy when ye Moon is in Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius;
the Sanguine in Taurus, Capricornus, or any sign before named.

The second preparation for health, which is purging, is used three several
ways, as by electuary, by potion or pill, which generally may be done when the
Moon is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, but particularly to purge by
complexion, let the melancholy purge when the Moon is in Gemini, Libra, or
Aquarius; the chollericke or Flegmaticke, when the Moon is in Cancer, Scorpio,
or Pisces: and for the preparing of the body let it be, 3. 5. or 7. days
before, kept warm, close, from air, and stir up and down in ye chamber,
till the medicine have done working.

To these may be added other euacuations, as neesing or gargarismes, which
would be taken when the Moon is in Cancer, Leo, or Scorpio; vomits, which
would be taken when the Moon is in Cancer, or Aries; and glisters which would
be administered when the Moon is in Aries, Taurus, or Capricornus, and the
planet not retrograde.

The third preparation for health is bathing, which if it be for cleanliness,
let ye Moon be in Libra, or Pisces; if for grossness of body, let the Moon
be in Aries, Leo, or Sagitarius; if for dryness of body, let the Moon be in
Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces. After bathing go to a bed with warm and dry
sheets, and let the body be well chafed with dry clothes. To this bathing may
be added sweating, with the like observations in every circumstance.

The cure of bodies diseased must carry all these considerations, the age of
the party diseased, his strength and complexion: then in the disease consider
the beginning, the increase, and the declination: whether it be universal over
the whole body, or particular in a member; then the nature of the disease, the
quality of the medicine, the manual operation and the inward administration.

Lastly, in case of every desperate cure, outwardly Fire is to be given, and
the giving of fire is called Cauterizing, which is to be done two several
ways, the first actual, the latter potentiall: the actual cauterizing is
done by instrument or hot iron, made according to the member offended, either
sharp to sliue, or round to open: this stops corruption of members, and
stancheth blood, provided the synewes, cords and ligaments be not touched; and
the best instruments for the same are of gold, or silver, ye next copper, and
the worst iron.

The Potentiall cauterizing is by medicine, as medicines corosiue, putrefactiue,
or causticke: for corosiues they are either simple or compound: simple
corosiues are Roch-allume burnt or unburned, Lyme, red Corrall, powder of
Mercury, etc. Compound are Vnguentum Apostolorum, Vnguentum Aegiptiacum,
Vnguentum Ceraceum, etc.

Medicines putrefactiue are Arsnicke, Refalgar, Crysocollo, Aconitum, etc.

Medicines Causticke are strong Lie, Vitrioll, Aqua fortis, etc. and of these,
Corosiues are weaker then Putrefactiues, and Putrefactiues weaker then
Causticks: Corosiues work in the soft flesh, Putrefactiues in hard flesh, and
Causticks break the skin.

The number of bones in a man's body.
IN the head be nine bones, in the nose two, in the upper chap eleven; in the
nether chaps two, behind the chaps one; the teeth are thirty, in ye chine are
thirty, in the breast seven, in ribs twenty four, in the neck two, in the
shoulders two, from the shoulder to the elbow in each arm one, from the elbow
to the wrist in each arm two; in each hand eight, above the palm four, in
the fingers of each hand are fifteen; in the huckles two, in the thighs two,
in each knee one, from the knee to the stobbe in each leg two, in each anckle
one, in each heel one, in each sole four: in the toes four and twenty: so
that the whole number, excepting gristles and appendixes to the greater bones
are two hundred forty four.

The number of all the principal veins in a man's body, which may be opened on
special occasions.
IN the midst of a man's forehead is one vein, behind his ears two; in the
temples two, under the tongue two, in the neck two, in the arm four, one
leading to the head, another to the heart, the other to the Liver, and the last
to the milt: between the fingers one, in the sides of women: bathe often in cold
water the hands, face and mouth, and sometimes the whole body, and by use of
sugar candy, break and avoid all fleagme morning and evening.

In Autumn or Harvest, be clad as in the Spring, and let blood or purge as
you have occasion; eat all wholesome and strong meats, and drink strong wines
with moderation, abstain from fruit, bathe not at all, and sleep not after
dinner; keep the head warm, the stomach reasonably filled, and the body from
violent labor.

In Winter keep the body as warm as may be, eat strong meats and lusty,
drink strong wines and full, use now and then spices, sleep moderately, and
labor soundly.

Verus Pater. Wealth of Fortune, Or Rules of good Husbandry.
Particular seasons to do Rural business in.
THe particular observations for any husbandly business, is to know the state
of the Moon, and in what signs she is under, for so the work prospers or
decays. Therefore every careful man or woman, must sow their seeds or
grain, in moist ground when the Moon is decreasing, and in dry ground when
she is increasing, and under Aries, Cancer, Scorpio, Libra, Sagittarius,
Capricornus, or Pisces.

Plant and graft trees when the moon is under Taurus, Leo, or Libra, either in
March or April, October or November, the weather open, and the Sun shining.

Dress your Vines in the same months, when the Moon is at the full, and
under Taurus, Leo, or Scorpio, but not earlier or later, for fear of bleeding,
which is most dangerous.

Geld your Cattle from the last quarter to the change, and either in the
spring or Fall; for the Summer breeds the magots, and the Winter causes
swelling and impostumations; and let the moon be under Aries, Sagittarius or
Capricornus,

Sheare sheep from June till the end of July, and the moon increasing.

Mow hay in June and July: reap Corn in July and August, immediately after
the full moon.

Fell Timber for building, in April and May, when the Moon is in the last
quarter; and fuel in any time of the Spring or Fall, and the Moon increasing.

Plash hedges, or cut the vndergrowth of any young wood in the spring or fall,
the moon increasing, and under Aries or Libra.

Put your Stallion to your Mares in the months of April or May, and the Moon
increasing, and weane your Foales in the full only.

The particular duties of every Month.
IN January let out the Plough, either to fallow light earthes, or to plow
stiff bean earthes; cut down timber that it may not chinke or r^^e; Stub up
rough pastures, and lay smooth your meadows? dig your gardens to prepare the
mould; and trench in your meanuce: upon your hiues and trim them, bare the
roots of fruit trees from the earth, break up your lay ground, and have a
careful eye to the sheep fold, for Ewes of the Fallowes are now yeaning and
in danger.

In February sow your beans and mixed great pulse, cleanse your trees of moss
and your hedges of Caterpillars, proyne your fruit trees, lay quicksets, plant
Roses, or what else bears pricks, graft trees, slip branches, and set
them, and plash and proyne quicksets.

In March sow fitches, and small pulse, oats, and in name, barley: in the
beginding plant and grafte fruit trees, renew those roots that were bared in
January: with fresh earth; at the latter end begin to sow barley, and if the
season serve, carry out your meanure. Now begin your kitchen Garden, sow your
earliest seeds, and remove the slippes of those flowers that were planted in
September and October.

In April make an end of your Barley seed, sow Hemp and flax, make your
Garden perfect, and sow all sorts of pothearbes, slip herbs and set them, set
up your Vines, and plash and trim all your curious fruit trees: it is now good
to graft all outlandish fruit, and to plant and sow their strange flowers.

In May sow Barley upon hot sand ground: plant Cowcumbers, Gourds and Mellons,
slip your Gilliflowers, and set them in a bed thick and close together: now
Summer-stire all such land as you fallowed in January, and fallow such land as
was not then to be plowed; now apply your meanuring, and as the season will
serve, bring home fuel, Timber and Lynsell, and be sure to make good your
fences.

In June sheare your sheep, mow your low meddowes, plant, graft, or set any
herb, flower, or fruit that is tender: make an end of Summer stirring, and
turn all your meanure into the mould; now fould your sheep, and be sure to
make them beat off the dew with their feet, before they begin to feed in
the morning.

In July cut down your high meddowes, re-plant herbs you would not have
seed, begin to foil your Summer stirring, and stir your latter fallowing;
gather flowers and preserve them: look upon your Rye, and if the ears begin
to hang downward; sheare it, and by all means cleanse your Barley from
thistles, weeds, and other anoyance.

In August make an end of foyling your land, gather your plums and summer
fruit, sheare your Rye and wheat, and gather in your Oats; also at the end
begin to mow down your Barley: now geld your Lambs, and make sale or cut
down the wood you may spare for that winter.

In September reap your Beans and pease, slip all sorts of garden flowers and
replant them. At the later end begin to sow Wheat and Rye, and winter rigge
that fallow land which is for Barley: Now break up al Innam land for Barley
the next year, and meanure it: now fould your sheep where you mean to sow
Wheat and Rye, and cast up and cleanse all your draines, to keep your lands
dry all winter.

In October make an end of your Wheat and Rye seed, and an end of Winter
rigging: Scowre ponds and diches, and carry the soil to your Corn field that
is fallowed: set pears, plums, and Apples; graft, plant, plash or set any tree
or quick goweth; remove all sorts of trees, especially all such as bear
kernels, and gather roots and seeds at pleasure.

In the beginning of November you may sow Wheat or Rye in warm places, and
do any work to be done in October, whether in the field, the Orchard or the
garden, especially if the soil be warm and of an hot te^per. Now is the best
time to provide plow timber, to rough hew it and fashion it, and then lay it up
to season, of which the Yew tree is the best, the Elm next, and the Ash last.
In this month take your Cattle into the house; malt for the whole year
following, and be sure to make your Lenten provisions.

In December thrash out such Corn as you may exchange for other household
provision; feed Brawnes, Poultry, and whatsoever quick food is meet to be
eaten in Christmas; make your greatest slaughter of swine, and vent away the
profits of your summer Dairy: now keep open your draynes, and avoid
Inundations, and apply well either for profit or recreation the Art of
foulling in all natures; for both land and water are now most abundant, and the
birds soonest deceived.

General preseruations of Corn whilst it is upon the ground.
THe evils which anoy Corn whilst it is in the earth, or growing upon the
earth, are twelve in number, to wit, six natural, and six supernatural.

The six natural offenders and slayers of Corn, are Moales, Myce,
Field-Rats, Pismires, Snailes, and Worms.

The six supernatural offenders of Corn are, Lightning, Thunder, Frost,
Miste or Fogs, Hayle or Tempests, and lastly Blastings or Plannet stroke.

To cure these in general, observe to sow your grain as early after the
change of the Moon as is possible, for as the Moon grows, so corn waxes
and becomes full, big and sound; and as the Moon waineth so corn
decreaseth, and grows, small, dry, and little yielding.

But for the particular remedies, you shall understand that to prevent Moales
(which do dig up the ground and eat the roots of the corn) when the time
of the year is past for the ordinary taking of them (which is spring and fall)
you shall with the smoke of Gunpouder or Assafoedi^a perfume their haunts, and
it is a present remedy.

If your corn be anoyd with field mice or those shrews which have swine heads,
take Arsnicke, honey, and lime, and make it into paste, and scatter it here and
there, about, and in the lands.

For field Rats (because their holes and haunts are to be perceived) take
Poppey seeds bruised, and Crysocollo mixed with crushed wheat, and therewith
bayte their holes, or the dryest parts about the land, and it destroys them.

If Pismires offend you, take the roots of Gentian, and boil them to a
decocttion, and therewith sprinckle the places where you see them begin to
build or resort, and they will be destroyed.

Where snailes are offensive, whether they be black or gray, take the corrupt
dregs of the strongest Train oil, and mix it with ye ashes of holly bark
burnt, and sprinckle it about or upon your corn, and no snaile will come near
it; and yet the grain will be the better, and the soil the fatter.

As for worms, if they trouble your corn, the first and chiefest prevention,
is to Summer-stirre your land in the greatest drouth or driest season you can
find in the summer; and though the ground be never so hard, rather adventure
your plow breaking, then the abstaining from that order; for it both kills
worms, weeds, and thistles. Or if not this, then take the in need of further
help, then take Arsenicke and Mercury sublimate, and sew it close and fast in
a leather bag, and hang it in or else near your garner, and no corruption
will at any time approach it.

Oil lees sprinkled on corn will do the same, so will the powder of chaulke,
dried Wormwood, the earth of Olinthus, or Cerinthus, or the dried leaves of
Yewe or Cypress; lastly vinegar, and Lacerpitium, mixed and sprinkled in a
moderate manner, infinitely preserves all manner of pulse whatsoever.

As for vessels to keep grain in long and without putrefaction, your salt
fish barrels inwardly well dawbed with plaster, is the best, or pitched barrels
sprinkled with vinegar; so are Oil barrels dried and dawbed as aforesaid, or
for want of plaster to dawb them with pitch and soap ashes, or lime vinegar and
soap ashes. Lastly, the dry hutch, chest, or bing of dry Oak wood, being well
seasoned, will keep corn an hundred years without putrefaction: and where
they are not to be got, there if the soil be dry and without moisture, as in
rocks, sands, or where springs abound not, there handsome and close caucs made
in the earth, and covered so as the air may not enter, will keep corn long
and sound without taint, and as well as any art before rehearsed.

A general rule to perfect all manner of works in Husbandry.
THe ancient Fathers or Masters in Husbandry, have appointed for every work in
husbandry his especial time, and season, as at plow-day and not before to
fallow, at S. Valen^ines day to sow Beans, at S. Chadds day to sow all sorts
of small pulse and Oats; a fortnight before our Ladies day in March, and a
fortnight after to sow Barley at S. Georges day to fell great timber, at
Ascension day to plant herbs and flows, at S. John Baptist to cut down
meddowes, and sheare sheep; at S. James day to reap Rye, at Lammas Wheat, at
S. Bartholmewes day Barley, and at the nativity of Mary, Pease: also to sow
Hemp and flax on S. Wilfreds day; to carry it to the water on S. Margarets
day, and to begin to ripple and brake at S. Mathewes day, with a world of such
like other obseruatious, which the Husbandman might by no means either go
before or come after. Now let every one understand that the best time to
undertake any of these works, is five days at least before any of these
feasts and seasons, if the weather be constant and fit for the purpose. For the
years having gone on so long, and every year losing certain minutes, we
cannot choose but to have lost in our computation diverse days at least: and
though not so many as the Roman computation would have us, which is ten, yet
doubtless five may be well suffered in any of the Husbandmans works and
labors, and in his observations he shall find both the increase and profit. As
touching the laying of Meddowes, or dryning of your grounds for meddow, it
matters not though you keep the old form of the ancient Husbandmen, which is,
to lay your vpland or high meddowes at the annuntiation of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and your low and more fruitful meddowes at the feast of Phillip and
Jacob, commonly called May day: for the seasons are fit, and the time long
enough for the growth.

Ordinary signs of fair weather.
THe flying of night bats early in the evening, the next day will be fair: the
moon appearing in the West, fair, and clear without vapors about her, three
days before the opposition, and three days after the conjunction, shows
long fair clear weather to ensue: the flying of Kites together, the declining
of clouds downwards, the rising or setting of the Sun clear without any
clouds: If any mist fall either in the spring or harvest time, shows that a
fair day: the hooting of an owl in rainy weather, the gaping of Dawes in the
morning, Ants, or Mites remoouing their eggs: the rising of any steame or mist
in the morning, before the Sun over any waters, pooles, martish or meddowes,
the appearing of a white circle about the moon in the form of a crown: The
swarming of bees, a red sky in the evening, shows a fair day to ensue. The
gaping of Ravens and crows in Sun, the flying of humble bees, droanes, beetles
or any such flies in the evening, also when it lightneth the day being clear,
sudden showers of rain after any great winds, the circle or circles about
the Sun, if they be clear and no continuance: Look for fair weather, also
in the Winter, if in the euenings the firmament be full of stars, and the
wind easterly, judge frosty hard weather: the moon being in Aries, Leo, or
Sagittarius, in Winter you may judge fair weather, but in Summer immoderate
heat. And to conclude, when all shrewes have dined, and the cloudy substance
of their anger be dispersed, their brows smooth without wrinckles, their
countenance smiling, you may well hope then for fair weather.

Ordinary signs of windy, rainy, and other tempesteous weather.
THe rising of the Sun, thinly ouercast with a cloud, if at the setting the Sun
be of diverse colors or clouds like water: you may judge of rain to follow. If
at his setting, it be a mist or rain in the evening, it is a token of rainy
weather to ensue: if the circles about the Sun be dispersed and broken, and are
thick and black, look for cold wind or snow. Also, the moon being pale or
somewhat too black or thick, rain follows: and the earth sucking up the
rain extraordinarily, the bubling of springs, or old springs flowing faster
then they were wont, the appearing of the rainebow in clear weather, the
extraordinary biting of fleas, ye moistnes of stones in any cellar or pauement,
the falling of soote from chimneys, also a violent heat in summer: The Clement
cloudy and of a dark dusky substance, the wind in the south, or northwest, the
rainebow appearing in the south, shows much rain to ensue in those parts,
and the greener the rainebow is, the greater rain it does signify: the
extraordinary feeding of cattle, the moistnes of salt, the weather
extraordinary hot at sunrising or setting; if it thunder when the wind is
easterly, or westerly, belles being heard further then they were wont to be,
without the help of wind, also thunder in the south, and worms coming out of
the earth in great quantity in the evening, also woodlice walking, the croaking
of frogs, sowles bathing themselves in hot weather, mouldwarpes turning up ye
ground, especially, if the earth they turn up be small and dry: when the
moon is 5 days old, mark the tipps of her horns, if they be blunt it
signifies rain, if the 4 day after her change she have a red circle about
her, it does signify winds and rain. The clouds dispersed seeming like to
flocks of sheep: if the moon be in any of these signs, Cancer, Scorpio, or
Pisces, in winter judge wet weather, but in Summer a pleasant temperature: all
these aforesaid are tokens of rain. If the moon be in any of these signs,
Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius, much wind ensues: the conjunction, opposition, or
quadrat aspect of Saturn, with the Sun or Moon shows great alteration in
the air. Jupiter, with Mercury, or the Sun, shows raging and tempestuous
winds: the meeting of Mars and Venus, or Jupiter and Mars, enforces fearful
thunders, lightnings, and rain. Lightning from the north, south, or southwest
shows wind to come from those parts: the diuing of Moorehens, or dap-diuers
shaking their wings, is a token of wind: the sparkling of the fire, or the
noise of the flame, the rising of the sea about the shore, the cakling of
geese, duckslor other fowls: the beams of the Sun being red and broad,
pearcing the clouds like darts, all these foretell of wind. The Hedghog has
two holes, or vents in his cave, the one toward the north, the other toward
the south, look which of them he stops, thence shall great storms and
winds follow. Great store of spider webs flying about: as also Thunder in the
morning, shows winds to ensue. Those winds that begin by day time are of
more continuance then those that rise in the night. The northern winds are
ever more healthful then the southern winds: small store of water in winter,
does signify a moist and wet spring to follow, and an extraordinary hot
summer, foretells of a moist winter to follow: the breaking of music
strings made of guts, cats licking their forefeete, and therewith washing their
heads, show rain. If old people are troubled with corns, toynt aches, or any
other aches in their bodies, it is a sign of rain. The crying of Hearnshawes,
and the extraordinary crowing of Peacockes, is a manifest token of rain; the
bleating, playing or skipping of sheep wantonly, as also if swine do carry
bottles of hay or straw to any place and hide them, is a token of the same:
When cattle, horses, swine, or sheep, being upon any great common make have
home, it is a manifest token of a storm to come presently. If any vessels of
glass or any white wall, or any thing of wood or iron, grow moist and dampish,
and yield any water without manifest cause, it is a sign yt it will rain not
long after. If ye the clouds in summer, it signifies foul and stormy weather,
so is it when small worms creep to ye three leaued grass. Thunders in the
morning signify wind, about noone rain, and in the evening great tempest. If
it begin to freeze with an easterly wind, it is a token the cold weather is
like to continue long. If the moon rise or appear with 2 or 3 clear circles
about it, it is a sign the air will be very cold. It is a manifest sign
(...) cold weather, if the dew fall not in the ^orning, especially being not
hindered by ^e wind. If the stars in winter time ap^eare more bright, and
cleerer then ordinary ^hey are wont, or if they seem to send ^orth some little
sparkles, it is a sign of ^treeme cold weather. If sea-birds for^ke the sea,
or water fowls do the like, as ^ucks, drakes, mallards, wild geese, or such
like be seen in the beginning of winter, to seek for great and broad waters
which freeze not, or that they fly to she sea, it is a sign of very long cold
weather. If for 2 or 3 days together the ^louds be very whitish toward the
evening it is a sign of much snow: if when it raines the air be troubled and
ouer^ast, and ye the clouds be more whitish then they were wont, it is a
manifest token of snow, and so much the more if the air be warm or soultry.
If the summer be moist, wet, and cloudy, it is a sign that all fruits, corn,
and all kind of pulse will be in danger to be blasted and corrupted. If the
Springtime be very cloudy, and full of mistres and hoary frosts, namely when
trees do budde and blossom, and that the feilds war green, it is also a token
to be feared the fruits of the earth to be blasted, rotten, or destroyed: great
store of snow in winter signifies a plentiful year: also, if great store of
snow fall on the plain, and champion fields, it is a token that the frost
cannot continue long, and that great plenty of fruit, herbs, roots, and
corn, and pasture will be; which God in his mercy grant unto us.

The cause of the Sun Eclipsed.
THe Eclipse of the Sun is nothing else but the interposition of the body of
the Moon betwixt us and the Sun. And note this, that the Sun is never
Eclipsed, but at a new Moon, for then the Moon is just underneath the Sun:
for the further the Moon goes from the Sun, the more her light increases:
Yet the Sun is not Eclipsed every new Moon, the reason is because she is
sometimes on one side of the Sun, and sometimes on the other; and when she
happens just under yt Sun, then does she eclipse and hide her light from us.

The cause of the Moons Eclipse.
THe Eclipse of the Moon is nothing but the interposition of the body of the
earth betwixt her and the Sun: for the Moon her self, as also all other stars
whatsoever, the Sun excepted, are dark and have no light of themselves, but
that the Sun shines on them continually, and so makes them to cast a light;
and the earth being between the Sun, and the Moon, shaddoweth the light of
the Sun from the Moon; and further observe, that as the Sun is never Eclipsed,
but at a new Moon, so is the Moon never Eclipsed, but when she is just at the
full, for then she is farthest off from the Sun, and just over against him, but
the earth is betwixt them.

Of the 4. principal Winds showing their nature and effects.
THe East wind is hot and dry, being temperate, sweet and healthful,
especially at the rising of the Sun, which makes it the purer, expelling all
infe^on gathered into man's body, causin^ fair sun shine weather; yet sharp
wind^ especially in the winter, frosts and suc^ like cold weather.

The West wind is temperate, hot an^ moist, making all flowers, grass an^
herbs, as also trees, plants, and the lik^ to spring, dissoluing hard frosts
and snow especially the Sun shining fair and cleen

The North wind for the most part is cold and dry, bringing extremity of cold
weather, being very wholesome in aspect it draws away noisome contagious
infectious airs; yet is an enemi^ to a forward spring, in the nipping of the
fruits of the earth.

The South wind is hot and moist, provoking in the general rain, thick^
cloudy weather, and sickness.

What Thunder and Lightning is.
THunder and lightning is a hot and dri^ exhalation mixed with moisture,
attracted into the middle Region by the extraordinary heat, and beams of the
Sun^ closed in the body of a cloud, where being ^o contraries fighting together,
break (...) substance of the cloud violently, ma^ng that extraordinary
terrible noise ^armed by us thunder: and the sudden ^e that comes before it
to our visible ^ht (though both break the cloud at an ^^stant) is termed by us
lightning, which ^th many strange effects, as hurting and ^rning the intralls,
the outward skin ^pearing fair; killing the child in the ^ombe, the mother not
hurt: melting the ^ony in the purse, and the sword in the ^kabberd, when the
purse and skabberd are ^ot burned: betwixt these two contrarie^es of thunder
and lightning is ingen^ed betwixt them in the cloud a gross ^ubstance, or
stone termed by us the ^hunderbolt, which at the breaking of the ^oud is
violently cast out, and where it ^oth light it much indangereth.

A necessary rule fit to be observed in good husbandry for the avoiding of
unnecessary expense.
A Penny a day is by the year one pound, one half pound, one groate, one penny:
which in all comes to one pound, te^ shillings, five pence.

Two pence a day, by the year is tw^ pounds, two half pounds, two groats* two
pence, which put together comme^ to three pounds ten pence.

Three pence a day, by the year comes to three pounds, three half pound^
three groates, and three pence: which being put together, comes to four^
pounds, eleauen shillings, three pence.

Four pence a day, by the year comes to four pounds, four half pounds,
four groats, and four pence^ which being put together, comes to six pounds,
one shilling and eight pence.

And thus may you do of any other^ some of five, six, seven, eight, nine,
ten, eleauen, pence the day, comes by the year, observing to reckon as
before: as twelve pence the day, say, twelve pounds* twelve half pounds,
twelve groats, and twelve pence, is in the whole year eighteen pounds, and
five shillings: and thus I leave you, and rest always your loving friend,
Verus Pater.

FINIS.

