A DISCOVRSE PLAINLY PROVING the evident utility and urgent necessity of the
desired happy Union of the two famous Kingdoms of England and Scotland: by
way of answer to certain objections against the same.

woodcut of coat of arms with an anchor AN CHO RA SPEL



LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Thomas Chard. 1604.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT Majesty, James by the grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.
YOUR most excellent Majesty being graciously pleased to read and approve
the written Copy of that J have now printed, and withal to declare your
princely pleasure (sufficient warrant) for publishing the same, J have thought
meet in all humbleness of duty to your Majesty, and in all truth of zeal
to my country, by this means to endeavor to resolve them which doubted, to
persuade them which denied, and to confirm them which applauded the most
happy intended Union of your Highness two most famous kingdoms of England and
Scotland. J was not ignorant that the copies of the objections against it, were
this Term carried into most parts of those your Majesty's Realms (and I
suppose also beyond the seas) which might in time without answer seem to
prejudice your Majesty's honor unjustly with scandale abroad and murmr at
home. Therefore though I be most unworthy to publish to the world my mean
understanding in a matter of such grave consideration and great consequence,
yet have I rather chosen to hazard my poor credit subject to each sensure,
then suffer a cause in its own worth so precious, to sustain wrong by
general silence: for objections are of force, where no answer does refute.
Only I humbly crave your Highness pardon for my bold presumption, and will
evermore with hands and heart lift up to heaven, pray to God for the
preservation of your gracious Majesty, and of your royal issue, in all honor,
health and happiness.

Your Majesty's faithful subject, and humble servant, Ioh. Bristol.

A Discourse plainly proving the evident utility, and urgent necessity of
the desired happy union of the two famous Kingdoms of England and Scotland:
by way of answer to certain objections against the same.
IT was long before the Objections against the intended happy union of both the
Realms came to my hands: but having read them, I could not hold my hand from
writing to remove and clear them; esteeming them only as great show of big
logges laid in the way, between the two eminent marks shot at by the
sovereign Vnitor, namely, honor and happiness: the one inseparably inherent
in his most royal person: the other, assuredly intended for Subjects benefit:
which things in apparent utility, or urgent necessity the Obiectors desire to
be showed them: for whose satisfaction, I have briefly examined, and answered
every objection. The Obiectors find no president at home nor abroad, of uniting
or contracting of the names of two several Kingdoms or States into one name,
where the Union has grown by marriage or blood: and say, that the examples
which may be alleged, are but in case of conquest. But I remember, that
Charles of France the eighth, as Comineus Proof by marriage.
mentions, taking to wife the heir of little Btitaine, annexed it to the
Crown of France, ruled it by laws, customs, and privileges of France, and
gave the Nobles thereof place in Parliament in France: for union is a strong
keeper of imperial Sovereignty, and is the very sinews of weal public.
But as Tacitus says, by diverse laws, over diverse nations subject to one
King: Quicquid est authoritatis crebris destruitur contradictionibus. Charles
the fifth united in the common name of Spain diverse other his kingdoms, whereof
two of them; namely Aragon and Castile, Proof by blood.
descended to him in right of blood. For he well knew, that the most eminent in
dignity is most honored by Unity: and that this is truly called Prudence,
even the electing, or rejecting, the continuing or changing of forms, and
uniting kingdoms, according to time, place, or persons: which great virtue is
not always contained in certain and the same bounds, but alters it self as
occasion serves, in respect of forenamed circumstance. But the Obiectors
acknowledge uniting of kingdoms in case of conquest. I marvel they do it not
much more by right of blood: for in that union of constraint, there is ever
doubt, and dread for continuance thereof, as is well said: Malus custos
diuturnitatis metus: but in this by right of blood, God gives blessing to
natures work: first, in the greater majesty of the high and supreme governor,
where one mighty Monarch is of more command and power, then a king of diverse
distinguished kingdoms.

Secondly, in the more facility of the government, where people under like
laws, are more easily ruled, then under diverse laws. And thirdly, in the more
security of the governed, who being led with like equity of laws, will one
love and strengthen the other: but being divided, do oftentimes undermine, and
practice subversion one of the other. Vires imperij in consensu sunt
obedientium: toll Liuy.
vnitatem and omnis imperij contextus in multas parts dissidet. Which
consideration made king Henry the eighth rightfully assuming the title of King
of Ireland, by voluntary Vote in Parliament of the Lords and Commons of that
kingdom, (albeit the Kings of England were before that time, but called Lords
of Ireland) yet now changing his Style, to endeavor by just laws to cause the
Irish change as well their apparel, as language, and diverse their old forms
and former laws, and to reduce them into form of English fashion, even
against their former customs and conditions. It is then a matter not only of
vtility and necessity, but also of reason and justice, that a King in right of
blood holding two kingdoms or States, do unite and contract them into one name
and nature, specially kingdoms of one continent, and which in ancient times
were but one, till ambition and contention divided them. And this may stand for
answer to the Obiectors first maine head of matter of estate inward.

Now where it is farther alleged, that the alteration of the name of the King,
does ineuitably and infallibly draw on an erection of a new kingdom, and a
dissolution and extinguishment of the old: herein verily I think the matter is
much mistaken, for the change of name, is not so rightly to be termed
alteration or new erection, as restitution and reparation both of name and
honor: for diverse his Majesty's most noble Progenitors, have heretofore been
entitled (as Chronicles tell us) Kings of all Britain: as Henry the second
King of al Britain, Duke of Gascoine, Guien and Normandy, whose son king
John had also in his coin stamped, as is to be showed, Johannes Rex Britonum.
And before the conquest of the Saxons, it is certain that the whole I Will was
called by the name of Britain. But Saxons entering at disadvantage of that
mighty nation, consumed by death and famine, conquering the remnant of people
of famous Britain, enforced them to distinguish and divide themselves by
flying into mountains and fortified places. And afterward king Egbert, utterly
to root out the remembrance of great Britain, commanded that the Land
should be called no more by that name, but England, and the people, Englishmen.
But Egbert is dead, his power weak, nay none at all: let none therefore fear
to restore his country to his old name, and ancient honor: for Egbert I say
is dead, and king JAMES lives, and viuat and vincat Rex Iacobus.

This I say and enforce again, is a matter also reasonable, just, vtile, and
necessary, seeing the Sovereign brings in no innovation of a new name, but
restitution of the old, no dissolution, but fortification, whereto I know none
will subscribe, which either envy the Kings greatness, or kingdoms happiness.

But let none marvel, why it has not this long time been reduced into his
former name: for the diversity of kingdoms, being made diverse by war and
conquest, and having heretofore diverse kings, could not in reason or justice
endure it, nor under any color of utility, or necessity undergo, or conclude
it.

But now seeing our sovereign Lord the king, being rightfully descended of all
those kings and princes, which heretofore reigned and ruled in England,
Scotland, or Wales, as he only has power to restore all into one to former
title and dignity, so let none think this his princely and just pleasure, a
new erection, but restitution of old, where it is more reasonable and just, to
extinguish the name of lesser continuance, then the name which had continued
and been famous by the space of 1137. years before Christ, and 688. after his
incarnation, which whole computation comes to 1825. years. And where it is
most honorable by just descent in right of blood, not only to change, but to
abolish the name imposed by a Conqueror to the dishonor of a Nation: and where,
for ought I understand, the matter is not so difficult, nor of that
inconvenience and danger, but may with much ease and safety be done with saluo
iure, or other reservation and explanation, as the wise and learned in the
laws can at large devise, when they lift, sieve noua excogitent, sieve antiqua
restituant.

But for example, I bring the uniting of Dane-Lex, and Mercia-lex, by Edward
the Confessor, which was not prejudicial to any, that ever I could read, but
profitable and needful to all, in the abolishing of diverse old laws, and
ordaining diverse new, and making laws to all, all one: done no doubt with due
respect to weal public, with needful limitation and due consideration of
men, matter, time, place, and other circumstance. Neither does any new erection
and extinguishment of old, so necessarily conclude inconvenience full of
repugnancie, danger of construction and confusion as is pretended: but may in
this case (vbi beata omnium vita moderatori est proposita) as easily be cleared
and avoided, as it was when the principality and country of Wales was by
Parliament incorporated and united unto the kingdom of England, and all the
inhabitants thereof made equal in freedoms, liberties, rights, privileges,
laws, and in all other respects to the natural subjects of England, and all
inheritances made of English tenure, to descend without division or partition
after the manner of England: and the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of the
Realm of England, commanded to be executed and put in practice within the
country and Principality of Wales. So as now in this new erection and
dissolution of the old, the Welshman with us and we with them acknowledge
joyfully, one only Governor, and one only government, where the majesty of
the Governor is equally supra nos, and the justice and equity of the
government equally pro nobis: where is certus ordo in iubendo and parendo.
Which certain and the same course and order of commanding by the king, and
by his laws, and of obedience in subjects, is a strong tie, and as it were a
vital spirit, holding in one infinite thousands: where Regere as the
Philosopher speaks, is reckened inter necessaria, Arist. 1. Pol. cap. 3.
and Regi inter vtilia.

Again, could seven kingdoms of Saxons be reduced into one, and in good time,
all their diverse Laws, whereby the diverse subjects of those seven diverse
kingdoms were diversely governed, be brought into one form of civil government
without repugnancie, ambiguitie or danger: and shall we think it a matter of
such difficulty, to unite only two kingdoms, which do not much differ in
manners, laws and customs; saving such laws and customs, as were formerly
ordained on each part one against another, when they were enemies, or scarce
friends one to the other? Which laws doubtless all will say, must be
abrogated, that in further proceeding to union, wise men, with grave
consideration may conclude it, for good of both nations, without offense, as in
former times much more has been done with less ado.

An Empire of many kingdoms thus reduced into one, is not unlike the firmament
of heaven, which God has adorned with the two great lights, the Sun and
Moon, and other Stars, even the whole army and harmony of the heavens in
one firmament. Who so throws a stone against heaven, says the Wise man, it
will fall upon his own head. And if any one standing alone from the rest,
speaks against and oppugneth this Union, better it were (saving my charity)
that vnus ille periret, quam Vnitas.

Touching the enumeration and recital of the special or several confusions,
incongruities and mischiefs, which in the Objections are in the second place,
of matter of Estate inward, pretended, I briefly answer, that there is no
fear of confusion in true and perfect Union. Which thing the mighty
Alexander, renowned for fortitude and policy, well knew, who is much
commended by Plutarke, that Plut. de fortuna Alexandri.
(where Zeno chief of Stoickes framed an Idea of best Common wealth, such as
was not divided by countries and contrary customs, but was as all one, of
one kind of life, and as one flock feeding in one pasture, under one
shepherd) Alexander I say, put that in practice which Zeno but imagined: for
says Plutarke: Not as Aristotle Alexanders Master taught him, so did he,
living as a father to the Graecians, and cruel Commander over Barbarians,
respecting some, and neglecting others: but he reconciled all into one, mixing
men's lives, laws, names and marriages together, and persuading that none were
Aliens and strangers among his subjects, but such as were evil men, accounting
all good men, as one man.

Now I conclude this point, that there is no confusion, incongruitie, or
mischief to be feared in that Union, where our most rightful King sits,
not by conquest of sword, but by right of royal blood in the seat of his most
noble Progenitors: and not as Alexander, who by conquest sat in the seat of
Darius among Persians: nor as Xerxes Herod. lib. 7
who joined Asia and Europa together with a wooden bridge over Hellespont: but
as al other most mighty Governors, and the best Kings have (by a golden bridge
of likeness, of love, of equity, of laws, and of common comforts of society
and joy, (all which were both profitable and needful) joined together two or
more kingdoms, for their own greater honor, and subjects more undoubted
happiness.

Which thing likewise that noble and valiant Trojan Aeneas long sithence put
in use, who by Union, even of diverse nations, Omnes Liu. lib. 1.
eodem nomine, and eodem iure Latinos vocauit. And thereby as Liuie reports
of him, he made many and diverse nations as one people, most familiar, and most
friendly together.

Do not diverse Sun beams come from one Sun, and all they of one nature?
Are not diverse lines drawn from one Center, and all they of one fashion? Are
not diverse boughs from one tree, and all they of one and the same substance?
And may not diverse people under one Prince, though they are divided in persons,
yet be united in laws? and though they be sundred in Countries, yet be knit
together in hearts, specially if emulation cause no incongruitie, nor disorder
confusion, nor strife mischief, only with saving each man's honor, with
continuance of each good custom, and with furtherance and establishing the
common good of weal public?

The King is the countries Parent, who by Union, non seruos, sed ciues cogitat:
and as Jupiter was said to be Rex omnibus idem; so would his Majesty be idem
omnibus, one head to one body. Wherefore if he desire to unite the two
kingdoms, and to account them one, and as one beloved son, (whose life is
dear, and whose happiness joy to him) that all subjects as one son, in common
apparent utility, might participate common patrimony of just Laws for Weal
public, let none be so hardy (with the harlot in the days of Solomon) to
say to the king our common parent: Divide the child, and cut it into two parts;
least such division part that into two, which God in nature first made one: and
now in his greater goodness has restored, in the royal person of our
gracious King into one: what God has so joined together, let no man put
asunder. For her of may arise plain incongruitie, and fearful inconvenience,
which may farther grow into confusion, and mischief.

Only I pray them, which object against the happy Union, to set before their
eyes, and to consider with their hearts, the grievous contention between the
diverse people of the kingdom of Israel and the kingdom of Judah: for albeit
the two kingdoms were united in the person of David their king, yet for want of
more perfect Union in 2. Sam. 5.
laws and love, there arose heart-burnings on both sides: for Israel
complained: The men of Judah have stolen the king from us: and they of Judah
challenged, that the king 2. Sam. 19.
was nearer in blood to them, then to Israel: and Israel again replied, that
they had ten parts in the king, and therefore had more right to him. But what
in end grew of this contention and emulation, consider I pray, and prevent such
inconvenience and mischief: there was not any one among the Tribes in the
second generation that followed the house of David, but Judah only: Omen
auertat 1. King. 12.
Deus.

When I was but a young scholar, I learned to call that aequiuocation, which
was corpus monstrosum, under one name of diverse forms: as homo pictus, and
homo viuus agree in the name of man, but not in the same reason, definition,
and nature: so I can call the agreement of English and Scottish only in
subjection to one Sovereign, but without farther Union of laws and true love,
not lively and indeed, but painted and in show; not substantial, but
aequiuocall; not real, but nominall: namely, in the King, as in the head,
which is but one: but not in themselves, as in the body, which likewise is, or
should be but one. This is true incongruitie, whereof may arise such farther
fearful inconvenience, as I wish may be to them that hate the State, and the
experience thereof unto the kings enemies.

Touching the particulars of confusion, etc. surmised by the Obiectors, I
briefly answer: first, that exception taken of summoning future Parliament, is
not worth answer: for the style and title of the king changed, may change also
in future Writs.

Secondly, the changing of Seal, is only charge of a new cut.

Thirdly, the great old Officers of the kingdom, when they (yet most worthy
of office) do hereafter wear out, the kings Majesty shall afterward by this
Union, have more choice to prefer the worthiest: for his Majesty by this
Union shall gain more choice for all the public services, to be performed
either at home or abroad. Neither may it be reasonable for any man, for
private or particular respects to repine thereat: like to Cato his son, who
feared lest by his fathers Plut. Cato.
marriage he might leese somewhat of his patrimony, and therefore murmured lest
his father should beget mo sons: but had his answer with a sound reply
unanswerable: Son, I desire to have more sons like thy self, good Citizens,
and serviceable for the Commonweal.

Fourthly, touching laws, customs liberties, and privileges, it is to be
wished that the rigor of ours were somewhat qualified, and the liberty of
theirs somewhat restrained: neither is it a new thing, in so large a kingdom,
that some should be more enabled and honored with privileges then others,
according to the Kings good pleasure, in whom dwells, and from whom is
derived all true honor.

Fifthly, the fear of residence, or holding in Scotland such Courts as follow
the Kings person, is the self same, as if we feared, that without Union the
King would hold personal Courts in Cornwall: or as if we doubted that such
Courts, when our former Kings were personally in France, were not for all that
kept at Westminster. The seat of judgment is the seat of the house of David,
thither the Tribes go up, and there the peoples feet stand, even in the gates
of Jerusalem; which Jerusalem is a city that is at unity in it self: at
unity concerning matters of religion, at unity in matters touching public
justice and government: therefore the king began his Psalm. 122. I was glad when
they said to me: We will go, etc.

Lastly, the exception taken against Union because of the kings oath at his
Coronation, which is never iterated, is grounded on the self same reason: as
if it were also alleged, that because his Majesty swears to mainetaine
ancient and fundamental laws, therefore upon circumstance of time and
occasion he might not alter any law: but let it be remembered, that the kings
oath concerns the laws and not the title, and we know the laws may be
preserved, though the title be altered.

And as for Subjects, I doubt not, but they may without danger, at the pleasure
of the king, swear their allegiance and do homage and obedience after
restitution of title, reformation of law, and Union of kingdo^s.

And ancient Records do no more leese their force by the change of England
into Britain, then by change of Queen Elizabeth into king James.

And there is no more incertaintie of pleadings, instruments, and writs, then
when a plaintiff deceasseth after seven years suite, his heir is put to
begin, and commence his suite anew, and in other name.

The heart of objections against Union being half broken, let us enter into
the third consideration of matter of State inward, where is objected a
possibility of alienation of the Crown of England to the Crown of Scotland,
in case his Majesty's Line should determine. But blessed be God, our gracious
sovereign King is blessed with a plentiful issue, and has yet much farther
hope. And I hope (for which I pray night and day) that his Majesty's royal
Issue shall not fail, so long as the Sun and Moon indureth. Nevertheless, if
some will not labor of the common bane of good wits, which is rather to
dispute, then obey; and rather to reason beyond reason, then yield to reason,
(more magis quam iudicio) they may herein also easily answer themselves, that
in uniting the two kingdoms, the second place in style may be rather drawn to
the next of blood in our Land, then the kingdom of England be transferred to
one farther off from this Stem.

Which thing, neither Henry the seventh nor Henry the eighth doubted, the one
seeking to marie his eldest daughter Lady Margaret to king James the fourth of
Scotland, hoping if his heir male failed, by that means to unite Scotland to
England. And the other having his whole drift, to match his son Prince Edward
to Queen Mary, foreseeing in his providence the inestimable benefit of
uniting the two kingdoms: for which cause many of the Nobles of Scotland, gave
faith to do their best endeavors. But it is a strange doubt, and cast beyond
the Moon, to imagine, that Union of the two kingdoms does so confound the
State, and change the tenure, to bring it so into case of purchase, as it will
necessarily subject England to Scotland, especially if his most excellent
Majesty, of his singular tenderness and love to this his realm of England, be
pleased to effect and establish, that in case his royal Issue (which Almighty
God of his infinite mercy defend) should fail, that then by this happy
intended Union, the Realm of Scotland should for ever be and continue
indissolubly united, and annexed to the lawful and rightful inheritance, and
succession of the Crown of England, in the blood royal of the same.

Now touching matter of State foreign, in answer to the first objection: I am
well assured, that our foreign affairs were at worst in the opinion of all,
at the decease of our late Queen, and our intercourse utterly decayed with
many Princes: so as we need a kind of present renewing, which may be concluded
as well under title of King of all Britain, as of England.

To the second it is easily answered, that the King loses no precedencie of
place, as is imagined, specially antiquity (as in the Objections is alleged)
guiding it, and not greatness. For the Successor to king Arthur of Britain,
will be worthy in the opinion of the whole world, of better place, then king
Egbert of England.

To the third, that if the name of England (as is imagined) be obscured, the
name of famous and great Britain will be illustrate, memorable in times past
to all the then known nations of the earth.

Touching matter of Honor, it is certain and evident, that the name of
England, though it has been worthily most famous and great, yet is not equal
to the title of great Britain, when England and Scotland are reunited, either
by reason of honor, or of power. All Histories remembering unto us, that the
Britains long time resisted the mighty force of Romans, Lords, and
Conquerors of the world. And albeit some fathers can be content to disinherite
their own daughters, to continue their names: (as is inferred in the
objections) and therefore enforced, should be much more in States, specially
where the name has been famous: yet for my part, I account such parents unkind
and unnatural, where self love of their name, makes them forget themselves,
and forsake their own flesh. I will not urge here the law of God, of nature,
and of most nations where daughters inherit, and names grow extinguished. But
this is a vain respect only of name, whereof is spoken; to get a name on
earth, and to think their name should never be put out: whereas so many
countries, so many people, so many persons, have either lost or left their
former name, and most willingly have been called by another name. Gaudet
cognomine Virg. Aen. 6.
terra: that country rejoiced to be called by a new name: how much more should
our land embrace this name of Britain; and yet not new, but indeed his old
proper name renewed, and as it were rediuiued and restored from the dead. Or be
it simply loss only of a bare transitory name; yet as the Prophet Isay Isa.
56. 3.
speaks: Let not the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree, my name shall
perish with me. Let us rather regard that name which God promises to them that
serve him, saying: Isa. 56. 5.
Even unto them will I give in my house and within my palaces, a place and a
name better then of sons and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name
which shall not be put out.

The Argument of Oblivion deserves no answer, but silence and forgetfulness:
and yet I doubt not, but famous acts of Noble English men, will as well by
Chronicle be remembered to posterity, as the glory of renowned Britain Record
remains to this day, neither will either be forgotten to the worlds end.

The Style of England now placed before Scotland, does no way prejudice the
Union by loss of precedencie: for when all is one, there is no subsequence:
only Honor is due to him, who is to be honored; and much honor to him, that is
much to be honored: which thing in the Union may easily be provided for, and
other pretended inconveniences prevented.

Lastly, the Preiudicating the popular opinion, to whom (as is objected)
change of name will be harsh and unpleasing, is in mine opinion a wrong done,
and imputation laid upon the people, who I know (for the most part) being a
wise nation, and (I am sure) most loving subjects to the kings Majesty, have
learned obedience and duty, and will therefore rather joy in the content of
their good and gracious King, then any way murmr at his demand: knowing, that
the Empire, (as Liuie speaks) is firmi^ssimum, when eo gaudent obedientes,
who doubtless with one voice and heart submit themselves, and say to their
Sovereign: Esto nobis solus arbiter rerum iure, and nomine regio.

And as for Harshnesse of the strange name, use will easily make it familiar.
He said: Multa renascentur quae iam cecidere cadentque, Horace.

Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet vsus.
This pretended unpleasing harshnesse is no more, then the niceness of a
virgin, who is as loath, and makes it dainty to leave her fathers name, yet
afterward married to a husband, takes greatest comfort in the name of her
husband, in whom she glories, and by whom she enjoys all her worldly joy.
And yet need not England be so nice as if she were a virgin, who like a widow
has so often changed her name: but may take pride as widows do, to be
called by her most honorable and most glorious name.

Thus having briefly run over the objections, and withal carried in open view
in mine answer due consideration both of evident utility, and urgent
necessity, I will be bold with additions of more reasons, yet a little farther
to proceed in the persuasion of this desired happy Union. God, always
blessed, and to be honored for evermore, who is Trinity in Unity, and Unity
in Trinity, three persons, and but one God, does by influence of his holy
Spirit, give diverse gifts and graces to believers, of what country, or
condition soever they be, and governs them by one holy law, and unites them
in the same faith, though diversely scattered among all the nations of the
Christian world: that hereby the gods on earth, whom he has placed to rule
over many and diverse kingdoms upon earth, might learn by the same laws in
things humane, and same religion in matters divine, to preserve Weal public,
and Christian Society among men.

But the ambition, and frowardness of many, desirous rather to be distracted
into diverse names and countries, and to be ruled by diverse laws and customs,
do often times hazard the common good and peace of the Weal public: where two
kingdoms so divided under one Sovereign, are not unlike the rich treasures of
pearl and gold, laid up in one ship, by contrarieties of diverse winds to be
driven upon rocks with extremest danger: as is said in Tully, of dividing
Defin.
and distinguishing desires into several parts and members, in such diversities
and differences: Hoc est dissipare, and non distinguere, frangere, and non
diuidere.

Which thing is to be feared by not uniting, but keeping the two kingdoms
still in parts, when upon every discontent in Scotland, as at a back door
passage may be given for foreign enemy, soon to weaken a divided power: as
Cyrus the Persian soon emptied Herodot. 1.
that great and deep river, otherwise impassable for his soldiers, by drawing
it into diverse channels. And why should not we fear such and greater evils, if
as Virgil laid infamy upon us, calling us, toto diuisos orb Britannos: so we
be content to add greater infamy to our selves, and become toto in orb
diuisi, divided within our selves in the sight and view of the whole world?

But I hope and wish for better things, that by Union in name of Britains, we
may leave to be any longer divided into English and Scottish; as rivers of
diverse names meeting in the sea, receive one and the same name: the rather,
because the elements of fire and water, of earth and air, being of repugnant
qualities, yet joined in one body, do agree in one form, as in a medium,
uniting and mixing them together: much more diverse kingdoms often times
heretofore at war and discord, yet now being united into one body, of one
name and nature, qualified by equal mixture, of law, manners, honors,
marriages, and such like, may be made perfect in one form, and have a being not
as English and Scottish, but as Britains, knit together in that third and
renowned name: that the Maxim may be verified in us: Quae in aliquo tertio
conueniunt, optime conueniunt.

I confess, that some laws of ours may be thought too straight for them, and
some liberties of theirs unfitting us: but let all be wrested alike, pulling
some up, and letting some down, and in pleasing harmony we shall find, as
Tully says: Commune and aequabile inter omnes, ius: where will be no strife,
as was between Esau and Jacob, undermining and deceiving one the other of
blessing and patrimony; but all love, and unity, and concord, and content, as
if all were not twins, but one man, even one heart in one body.

And now if I phicrates, that valiant Leader Plut.
were again living, and asked, whether he were under the now imperial
Majesty, this or that, English or Scottish, or among, or over them, an
horseman, an archer, or a Leader, he might truly answer, as sometimes he did in
like case: No, not any of these, but I am he, who knows under him whom I
serve, to command and govern all these, as if they were but one man: Vnius
Ducis imperium simul Sen. Epist.
sentiunt omnes copiae. Thus in war and tumult, much more in quiet peace, may
it be said: Diverse subjects ad nutum vnius Regis, and eiusdem legis omnes simul
respondent.

So powerful is the force of Union, that vna Via being director for law, and
Cor vnum performer for obedience: the law enioyning obedience, and obedience
executing law, the Prince cannot command what the people will not obey: and
the people will obey what the Prince commands, and Unity among them will
uphold all: Vnum imperij Tacit. An. 1
corpus vnius animo regendum videtur: and so likewise, Eiusdem iuris esse
debent, qui sub eode^ Rege victuri sunt. Q. Cur. 10.


But rule of two kingdoms without uniting them, is to give occasion to either
part to look back for an old grudge, Vbi antiqui odij pertinacia in publicum
stimulat exitium: which I fear would be, as the going back of two Rams,
more fearful to butt at, and beat one the other: where held both together in
like yoke, one cannot easily offend or force the other. Sic enim immensa
multitudo authoritatis Seneca.
quasi spiritu regitur.

And where it is of the nature of man not to endure all servitude, nor all
liberty, but to strive to shake off the one, and to be weary of the other; it
is certain, that equity and equabilitie of like laws to a diverse people
united in one, will make them (which otherwise fear servitude) to enjoy
freedom: and those which seem most free by former privileges and immunities
to fear servitude, if they transgress their bounds: for such Union and
equity is communis custodia, and principatus and reipublicae. But faction and
ambition, are the father and mother of intestine calamity, civil war, and
deadly feud.

Who so loves this, will never like that; neither is he of the body, but of
the toes and feet of that image which Nabuchodonosor Dan. 2.
dreamed of, whose head was of fine gold, whose breast and arms of silver,
whose belly and thighs of brass, whose legs of Iron, and whose feet, part of
iron and part of clay. Silver, brass, and iron are metals easily mixed, but
iron and clay will not by any means melt and join together. Kingdoms divided
are prefigured in the iron and clay, they are partly warlike and well governed,
and partly weak, factious, and seditious: they agree not to the king their
golden head, and though they (as the Text says) mingle themselves with the
seed of men, yet join verse. 43.
not one with another, but are as iron and clay, which will not be mixed
together. The Poets call this latter age Ferrea: let us which live in it prove
them Poets, and not Prophets, that so being joined to our golden head in all
obedience and duty, in all love and zeal to our country, and in Unity among
our selves, we may live a blessed life in the golden age of this our happy
time, and show our selves well tempered, not of brittle but of better clay:
Queis (as the Poet says) meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.

Therefore let Aristides and Themistocles joined in one Commission, consult
upon the point, some for England, some for Scotland, and for the Weal public
say one to the other: Vis vt hic deponamus inimicitias? why do Plut.
we strive together, for we are brethren? and they cannot but conclude, that
the Weal public was never well administered without Union and amity:
namely, Union in the government, and amity among the governed.

Joh. Bristol.

FINIS.

