Scrutamini Scripturas: THE EXHORTATION OF A SPANISH CONVERTED MONK: Collected
Out of the Spanish Authors themselves, to read and peruse the holy
Scriptures; Contrary to the Prohibition of the Pope, and Church of Rome, whose
Tyranny in this point plainly appears to every man's view.

With other occurrences of no small importance.

printer's device of Thomas Harper

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER. M.DC.XXIV.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, and Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel.
Right Honorable, My singular good Lord:
AS it runs in our Spanish Tongue: Quien a buen arbol se arrima, buena sombra
le cobija; He that retires himself under a good tree, finds both good shelter
and shadow: This I have found most true by my own experience, in that since my
voluntary banishment out of my native Soil, for the peace and liberty of
Conscience, into this flourishing Kingdom, like a poor stranger, being in a
Labyrinth of worldly cares and necessities: It pleased your gracious Lordship,
not only to vouchsafe me the protection of your Honorable house, but (though
most unworthy) further to confer upon me many great and important benefits,
joined with Noble promises, of my more preualent preferments, when fit
opportunity served, that I cannot but apply my self in all the humblest
offices within my poor power, to manifest therefore some due and unfeigned
gratitude. Seeing (as learned Seneca says) the best return of a benefit, est
grata beneficij memoria: Wherefore, as it has pleased your gracious Lordship,
to countenance, and succor the Author, extend the same honorable protection
and defense, to this his poor labor and work, exposed to the deprauations,
and malignities of so many powerful adversaries. The Subject is Divine, the
Testimonies sincere, and the End Religious and profitable; the beams therefore
of your honorable and favorable countenance will soon dispell these fogges
and vapors, Gods true worship and service will hereby be advanced, and my
unworthy self most highly satisfied, if under the shadow and safeguard, of your
honorable wing, I may but live and die,

Your Honors most dutiful, thankful, and faithful poor affectionate,
FERNANDO TEXEDA.

TO THE NOBLE AND RELIGIOUS English Nation.
THis present Treatise, which here I mean to publish and diuulge, I first writ
and penned in the Spanish tongue, with an intention to have benefitted herein
my own Nation, and such as were in a way, to embrace Gods sincerity and
truth; which notwithstanding could take no effect, by reason I wanted fit
means and conueniencie, to print it in the Spanish: and then on the other
side, some special friends both moved and persuaded me, to Translate it into
English, and publish it in my own name, for the better satisfaction of this
Noble and Religious Nation, both in regard of what they may fear and doubt of
in me, as also in regard of what I desire to manifest, and make known and
impart to this whole Nation; That as God has vouchsafed me the singular grace
and favor, to discern and embrace the truth of this Apostolical Church and
Doctrine; so I hope, the same mercy and grace, will ever be ready at hand, to
fortify and strengthen me against all humane debilities, that if just occasion
be offered, I may most constantly persevere in the same to the end, and be
prepared (if God so ordain) to seal and confirm it with my dearest blood.
And though there have been some, who after their illumination, and profession
of this Tructh, have with the dog, returned to their vomit; yet the like
ought not to be censured and judged of all: For Judas his being wicked and a
reprobate, were no just reason to condemn the rest of the Apostles; and so
though one Englishman should be the occasion of the untimely death of another,
yet were it no reason hereupon, to bear a general hatred to the whole Nation:
Wherefore, it must needs argue either a weak, or depraved Judgment, by the
apostacy of one, to presage and expect the like from all others. Considering,
that though there have been some, who have revolted, yet many likewise there
have been, who have perseuered constantly even to death. From whom, being good
men, we should rather presume of others stabilitie and perseverance, then from
the other to conclude ill of all, by reason of the error and leuitie of some:
Since Christian charity (quae non cogitat malum) obliges us to the same: and
in that it is only God, who affoords the special grace of perseverance (even
as he was the Author of a good beginning) whose power is no less amongst
Italians and Spaniards, then it is over other Nations; and who alone is able,
and willing, ex lapidibus, suscitare filios Abrahae: whereunto let me also
annexe this farther, (that I may modestly affirm somewhat in behalf of my
own particular nation) very few Spaniards at any time have been found, (I
speak of those that are learned and understanding) that ever renounced the
Christian faith, which they have once entertained and embraced, as it may most
apparently be auerr'd and proved by many zealous and learned men, which have
been and daily are tormented, and exposed to the fire by that cruel and
tyrannical Court of the Spanish Inquisition, for maintaining and defending
Christian verity and truth, so fearful and terrible a death, together with
the injury herein done both to themselves and their friends, having no power to
shake their constancy, in a Religion which they have professed and undertaken.
That this is true and infallible, it may be observed in more then a few
Churches of Spain, wherein many Sanbenitos are hanged up (which are not like
those Sacci benedicti in the primitive Church, imposed upon true and devout
penitents, but rather Sacci maledicti) which are certain written Tables,
wherein are registered the death, and punishment of such good Christians, whom
they have exposed to a reproachful and shameful death for this Religion, which
they term Caluinian, or Lutherane. And were it not for this bloody and cruel
proceeding of the Inquisition, the Pontifical Religion would at this day be
soon banished out of Spain, and in stead thereof, by Gods assistance and
furtherance, true Religion planted and established; as Doctor Yllescas plainly
auerres: while he much laments and grieves, for the small number of Christians
at this day. In Spain (says he) what should we now have been, if thirteen
years since, the diabolical conspiracies of Cazalla and Constantino had not
been discovered. Yllescas enlae prefacion y argumento sobre el vlt. lib. de la
historia Pontifical, y Catholica.
These infernal conspiracies, whereof this Author speaks, were (to the great
heart-griefe, both of himself and all other Papists) the pure and sincere
profession of true Christian Religion. This Cazalla (of whom this Author so
infamously reports, every one speaking as he is himself) was a Doctor of
Divinity, of singular virtue and understanding, who in the year 1557. was
burnt in Vallodolid, for the Protestant Religion, together with his mother,
brothers, and sisters, and a Knight of special good quality, called Don
Carlos, as also the Marquis of Poza son, and many others, were exceedingly
afflicted and persecuted: the house, whither they used daily to repair to
hear the word of God, was rased down, and sowed with salt, that it might
never be reedified: and in the midst of this house, This Column I have
seeene with mine own eyes.
they set a marble pillar, for a memorial, that there faithful Christians
(whom they call Hereges Lutheranos) were wont to assemble. Constantino also
was a Doctor of as profound and great learning, as Spain in many ages had
brought forth. He was preacher and Confessor to that renowned Emperor Charles
the fifth, and by this means, if he had affected it, he might have risen to
very eminent dignities; but all this he rejected and contemned, (as a man that
made no account of these worldly honors) and went to Seuilla, where he was
taken by the Inquisition, and dying there, his body was afterward burned by
order of the same Inquisition. His followers (whom this Author specifies) were
very rare men, both for their learning and lives, who opposed themselves, and
in Pulpits publicly preached against the tyranny, doctrine, and proceedings of
the Pope, and the Inquisitors; explaining sincerely to the people, the truth
of Christ's sacred Gospel, to such wonderful benefit and emolument of all the
faithful, that in the same time, above eight hundred were taken and imprisoned
for this cause, by the Inquisition, only within the compass of the City of
Seuilla. Some of them were rich people, and of very good quality, both men and
women; among which number, was Don Iuan Ponce de Leon, brother to the Count de
Baylen, and cousin to the Duke of Arcos, a Gentleman questionless of singular
piety and integrity; and the Lady Ioana, wife to the Lord of Higuera, whom,
presently after her childbearing, the Inquisitors exposed to a torment called
del Burro, in the castle of Triana, and the torment was so great, that she died
thereof: for the cords pierced even to the marrow bones of her arms, her
thighs and legs; and in this her affliction and torment, they carried her
back again to prison, in a manner dead, she vomiting blood out of her mouth in
great abundance, her very entrails being rent and torn: in the end, some
eight days after these torments, she died, having no body near, or about her,
no not so much as a damsel, who a few days before, was cruelly handled and
tormented as her self was. Many of this number thus imprisoned and taken, were
afterward burned, which they did, by twenty and twenty at a time; the rest
were most barbarously and inhumanely entreated; the house where they
congregated was defaced, and used after the same manner as that of Cazalla was
in Valladolid. Let the courteous Reader peruse that religious and learned man's
work, Cyprian de Valera, in his peculiar Treatise of the Authority of the
Pope, where he relates these persecutions more at large: And to a book
entitled, Inquisitto Hispanica, written first by a Spaniard in Latin, and
afterward translated into English, where both these, and many other sorts of
torments are described, wherewith they persecute the faithful in Spain. But
that which has been delivered, shall suffice me at this time: whereby it may
appear, that if it were not for the strictness of that rigorous Inquisition,
there would exceeding many and faithful good Protestants, daily manifest and
reveal themselves; and yet notwithstanding the same, and all their cruelties
used, there are in many parts some: all which may justly excite a charitable
and favorable construction of those, that leave those Kingdoms, and repair
into other Dominions, that they may there, with all Christian liberty, truly
worship and call upon Gods holy Name. And let none be ready to reproach us (as
many use to do) with a Bishop of Spalato, or some other famous Impostor, and
subtle Spy; for God forbid we should all be made of the same metrall: for as
the Spanish proverb says, Todos los dedos de la mano, no son yguales; There Is
difference betwixt one man and another. Besides, the many and singular
commodities we have been ready to leave and forsake in our own Countries, and
the innumerable troubles, pouerties, discontentments, and distasts that we meet
withal in foreign parts, yield no weak nor slender testimony, that God does
graciously intend to finish the good work he has already begun in us. And in
my opinion, a man has no reason to forbear the doing of good to another, in
that he is fearful and mistrustfull of his doing ill; because in this case we
ought not so much to respect the person whom we benefit, as him, for whose
cause we are moved to any commiseration or pity; and this is God. Neither in
like manner, is it a good and commendable course, for the attracting and
bringing of a man to any good, and to abett and uphold his perseverance
therein, to draw back our hands from his relief and succor; for this were
enough in them unstable, and not inured and habituated, in afflictions and
calamities, to make them murmr with the Israelites in the wilderness, and to
cry out again after the fleshpots of Egypt: Although for my part, I am
confident by Gods affistance and grace, notwithstanding all worldly
contrarieties, that I shall never consent or yield to so odious a Renunciation,
as being, I thank God, well instructed and prepared and practiced, and hope so
to continue in this maine point and masterpiece of Christianity, that, per
multas tribulationes and calamitates, oportet nos ingredi regnum Dei.

To the Christian Reader.
ALl the beatitude and felicity of man, consists in the not failing to choose
aright that, which most concerns him, and to discern what it is he
relinquisheth, and what it is he imbraceth; and this the Philosophers call
prudence, which is defined to be recta ratio rerum agendarum, and teaches a
man to order all his actions by the rules of reason: There is a worldly
wisdom, and a celestial wisdom; the first has the earth for its scope and
object; the second aims at heaven. Some men's lives are full of errors and
blurres, both in corporal and spiritual matters; other men's comportments are
discreet and commendable: the difference flows from the quality of the
persons, whereof some are prudent, others are imprudent: the one sort fasteneth
on that which is good, the others grope even as blind men at midday. If a man
err in temporal things, the damage is not great; for all sublunary
occurrences are of small consequence, and to miscary in a slight affair,
imports little. For his error is repairable, in that there is another life;
but if a man err in matter of eternity, which is for ever permanent, and
incapable of any amendment or alteration; this is the greatest detriment a man
can incur. For the declining whereof, God has given the sacred Scripture,
the only means to know, understand, and distinguish which is the true, and
which the false Religion, what kind of worship, and manner of service and
honor he enioyneth and approoues of, and what he inhibiteth and detesteth:
but Satan, the father of lies, and author of darkness, perceiving that by this
way alone, his fraud is disanulled, his darkness dissipated, and the vanity
on which his kingdom is grounded luculently detected, whence results his
eminent ruin. Finding by the long experience of his losses, that such
miserable men as he has captiuated unto death, and bound with the chains of
ignorance and blindness, being irradiated with this heavenly light, do escape
out of his prison, and are transported into the liberty of the sons of God.
Hence it comes to pass that though by the quality of his perverse and cursed
disposition, he abominates and persecuteth all the means that ten^ to the good
and salvation of mankind, yet with more singular diligence, and extraordinary
violence, he has ever opposed, and will never intermit to resist (until God
altogether bridle him up) the books of sacred Writ. Now amongst all the
persecutions and wars which he has stirred up against it, that which the
Church of Rome by the interuention of his trusty Agents, the Pope of Rome and
the Inquisitors of Spain, does at this day prosecute against it, is, without
all comparison, most transcendent and cruel. For (to omit those other infamous
aspersions they cast upon it) there being allowed, in those countries, where
the Inquisition reigns, an infinite number of books repleate with a thousand
blasphemies, superstitions, delusions, lies, dishonesties, and turpitudes, to
the great prejudice and destruction of numberless souls, they prohibit the
reading of holy Scripture unto the common people, quite exiling it from them,
and most shamefully calumning it to be the cause and occasion of errors, and
the instigatrix to vice. It is true, that Pius the fourth gave order to the
Bishops and Inquisitors, that with the consent of the Parson, or Confessor,
they should license the reading of Scripture in the vulgar tongue, to such as
could read it with fruit: Hereby intimating, and that not obscurely, that his
meaning was not, that they should read it, who were incited thereunto by a
desire of knowing and inquiring into the truth, but only such as by auricular
confession, their course of life, and behavior, had given sufficient
testimony, that they were most obstinate Papists, and such as had sworn unto
the Popes words. But let the beneuolent Reader observe, that all that was
granted by Pius, were it much or little, yet so much as he permitted, has
been all abrogated and annihilated by a Bull of the most ungentle Clement the
eighth of infamous memory, as may be seen in Castigatione indicis librorum
prohibitorum; conformably whereunto are interdicted all the holy Scriptures in
the vulgar tongue, in the Catalogue of prohibited books made by the Cardinal
Quirogua, in his sixth rule; as also in that recent one compiled by the order of
Cardinal Bernardo de Rojas and Sandoual, in the fourth Rule: and yet not thus
content, the said ministers of Satan, send into all parts their familiars
(which are other incarnate devils, of inferior authority to them, but of no
less cruelty and sagacitie) who night and day go from house to house, and
from company to company, pretending themselves to be friends and familiars
withal, being in truth enemies and familiar devils. And by this means they
know and discover, if there be any, that flying the contagion of dissolute
books, betake themselves to the Sanctuary of the holy Scriptures, laboring to
read them in the vulgar tongue, because they understand not the other
languages in which they are composed, if they take a Layman that is skilled
only in the Spanish with this Divine book in his hands, it were better for
him, they had surprised him coining false money, or machinating some notable
treason against his Prince or natural Country, for that his offense and
rebellion should be less cruelly chastened, then the reading of holy Writ in
the mother tongue is wont to be.

This great truculency and unheard Tyranny of the Pope and Inquisitors, the
deplorable blindness, and the lamentable servitude of those that are subject
unto them, especially of those of my Nation, have caused me to take up my
pen, to do that in my own language, which many grave and religious Doctors
have happily accomplished in other tongues, to the wondrous and plentiful
benefit of the faithful; to wit, to euince and point out as with the finger,
the precise necessity and obligation that all sorts and conditions, both of
men and women have to read and meditate on the holy Scriptures, whether they
be rich or poor, learned or unlearned, small or great ones; and that not only
if the Prelates permit it, but also though they should all inhibite it. The
reasons and arguments which I will allege for this purpose, are either drawn
word for word, or collected by necessary consequence out of Spanish books (two
or three Latin books excepted) all which are imprinted in Spain with
privilege, and (as you may see in the Frontispice of all of them) have been
examined and approved, not by one, but by man Doctors, and not by the less
but by the most learned men, and not by those that were the least, but the
greatest Papists; so that every good Catholic Roman, especially if he be a
Spaniard, may read and peruse this my book without any scruple of conscience,
and cannot choose but give credit to what he reads in it. My intendement
herein has been to gratify my Nation, as also that foreign nations, which
profess the true Religion and faith, and particularly the Noble English
Nation, in which it flourishes more then in all the rest, and to which I stand
more obliged then to all others, may see, that the strength of the truth we
maintain, is so forcible, that maugre all the power of Hell, Pope and
Inquisitors, it is manifested and diuulged by the mouth of it is enemies. And
this will be more perspicuous in those other Tractates, which if God vouchsafe
me his Divine grace, and my necessity and poverty afford me time, place, and
tranquillity, I will bring to light. In which I will prove, by authorities I
have already gathered out of Spanish Authors and Books, the principal points
of our English Religion against the Roman. God grant it may all be to the
honor of his holy Name, and edifying of his Church, which shall be the maine
remuneration and guerdon I most desired of the labor I bestowed in this Work,
and the residue I purpose to imprint hereafter; which how great it has been,
iudicium sit penes doctos.

That all the faithful, whatsoever be their profession and condition, are
precisely obliged to Read and Meditate the Divine Scripture.
THis Truth first appears in that God would have it so, and commands it, as
the ensuing authorities out of Scripture it self auerre, the which are
alleged by the Spanish Authors cited in the Margin. Blessed (says the
Psalmograph) are they who diligently meditate upon divine Scriptures. To know
God by the testimony of them; Read, and search (says Christ our Lord) the
Scriptures, for they testify of me: Hereunto alludes that of Deuteronomie,
Aluarado to^^ primero del art de bien viuir, fol. 1091.
Chap. 22. Ask thy father, and he will declare unto thee; thy Ancestors, and
they will tell thee. For as Father Serpi cloquently teaches, The writings and
Scriptures whence we should know and learn, are no other then the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles, whose Books we all enjoy. And to these, says S.
Paul, Serpi en el tratade ^e Purgatorio, page 1.
(as Father Serpi observes this saying) we must approach to gather learning
and profit from them. But that of Moses transcendeth all these testimonies (as
Father Luys de Granada notes) as the most Illustrious and pregnant one,
Granada en el preambulo de la 2. P. de la introdu^^ion del Symbelo.
to convince all understandings, who having propounded and declared the Law of
God, says on this wise; These words which I now set before thee, shall be in
thy heart, and thou shall teach them to thy children; and shult think of them
when thou art in thy house, and when thou iournyest; when thou go to bed and
when thou risest up again, thou shall fasten them as a signet to thy hand, and
they shall be, and move before thine eyes, and thou shall write them in the
galleries and portals of thy house. With what other words (we may say with
Granada) could the consideration and study of the Law have been better
exemplified; and as if all this had been little, in the 11. Chapter of the same
Book, he again recommends it to us in the self same words, (a thing which
seldom happens in the Scripture) so great was the care of this heavenly man
(who spoke with God face to face) desired we should have to be assiduous in
the Law of God, as who well understood how much we were bound so to do, and
the inestimable fruits and benefits that would follow of it. The same God that
without making difference of Sex, age, or quality, enjoined all to read the
sacred Scripture, did likewise ordain that it should be diuulged in all
languages, that all might have the fruition of it. Leon en el prologo de los
nombres de Christo.
So does the learned Father, Luys de Leon, confess it in these words, That God
compiled the holy Scriptures with very plain words, and in a language which
was vulgar and familiar to them, to whom he first gave them. And when from
them, together with the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, this treasure was
transferred and communicated to the Gentiles, he caused them to be explicated
into diverse tongues, and almost into all those which at that time were most
general and common, that they might be obuious and familiar unto all. And to
ratify the truth hereof, we read that S. Hierome translated it into his
mother tongue, Prades en el prologo de la adoration delas imagines.
which was the Dalmatique: And John Chrysostom into the Armenique tongue.
Vlphilas a Gotish Bishop into the Gotish tongue, as Doctor Prades relates of
all the three. John, Prelate of Seuill, translated it into the Arabique, as
Father Mariana storieth; who says, that the said Prelate did it with
intendment to promote the increase of all Christians, Mariana en la historia de
Espanua lib. 7. ca. 3. tomo primero.
and help the Mores, for that the Arabique tongue was of ordinary use among
all. And he adds that there are some copies of this translation which have
been propagated to our times, being yet extant in some places of Spain. And
the same Mariana says, that the King, D. Alonso the tenth, Idem ibidem lib.
14. cap. 7.
procured the holy Books of the Bible to be translated into Spanish. Would to
God the most mighty Philip the fourth would command the like work now. Holy
Scripture has been imprinted many other times in the Spanish tongue, and
sometime in the Valentian tongue, as the reader may see in the exhortation
which the most learned and religious Cypriano de Valera made, inducing to read
it; which accompanies the version which he with great labor and study made,
and caused to be imprinted, which is the last time (that I know) it has been
printed in our tongue. I would it might please God that it were turned into all
languages, as also into our Spanish, he, in whose hands are the hearts of
Kings, can move the Catholic Kings, to permit unto our Country men the
Spaniards, the fruition of this inualuable treasure, for the foresaid pious
Gentleman, for the good of our Nation employed twenty whole years labor in
the said translation, which in the judgment of all the learned is a very
excellent one.

Also the truth of the former proposition appears (to wit, that all the
faithful are obliged to read and ruminate the holy Scripture,) in that the
holy Doctors and ancient Fathers exhortes all thereunto. Puente en la guia
espiritual fol. 291. Prades en el prologo de la historia de la ad^racion de las
imagines.
Father Puente does clearly teach this, as you may see in the place quoted in
the Margent. So likewise Father Prades does openly confess it, though he
add that notwithstanding this, the Catholic Church, to wit, the Roman, did
prudently and holily in prohibiting the vulgar to read the Scripture, that you
may see how the Papists esteemed the authority of the holy Doctors, when they
speak (which they often do) against their errors and tyrannies. Granada en el
preambulo de la 2. part. de la introduecion del Symbolo.
Luys de Granada approoues our proposition; and in proof of it alleges that
which S. Hierom wrote to a Virgin, by name Demetria, recommending to her the
reading of sacred Scripture: Hiero. ad Demet.
and gives the same advice to S. Paula, and yields this reason of it, that the
true nourishment of the soul, is to meditate day and night on the Law of the
Lord, and S. Bernard writing to his sister, persuades her to this study,
Bernard ad soreremde modo been viuendi, c. 50.
declaring unto her particularly the fruits and effects of this good reading.
And S. Paul counsels his disciple Timothy, who was full of the holy Ghost,
that till he came, he should be exercised in reading the holy Scripture,
which Timothy had learned from a child. Father Torres is of the same mind
with Granada, Torres lib. 25. ca. 2. de la Philosophia de Principes.
and brings to ratify his opinion almost the self same examples and
testimonies which the other did; and adds that S. Fulgentius recommends the
foresaid study of Divine Scripture, unto Theodoret the Senator. Fulgent. epist.
6. ad E.
Of S. Hierome Father Gusman records, that he wrote to a Father, and in
another place to a mother, Guzman en su libro de los bienes del Innesto
trabajo, fol, 24,
that they should enure their daughters to read and understand the holy
Scripture. Gregory Nazianzene (says Father Reynosa) advised out of his great
experience, Ad laetan de institutione filiae.
that the Bible should never part out of the heart, nor out of the mouth,
Reynosa fol. 87. del maestro Christiano.
nor out of the understanding, nor out of the tongue, by reason of the
admirable benefits which redounded from the assiduous use of it.

S. Chrysostom amongst all the rest of the Fathers, is very admirable in this
point, and particularly in his third Sermon that he made of Lazarus, where he
answers to all the objections that the Papists at this day make against the
free and vulgar use of the Bible. The Reader may please to peruse the
Exhortation, which most learned and godly Cypriano de Valera made, to persuade
men to read continually the holy Scriptures, where he shall find the maine
and principal sum collected, of whatsoever S. Chrysostom delivers in that
place.

Besides that formerly delivered, we do prove, the precise necessity and
obligation, wherein all the faithful stand bound, to read the holy
Scriptures, because in the Primitive Church and many ages after, all sorts of
people did so, and it was counted a great offense, not to read them: and that
this reading was very behoouefull and profitable for them, the most learned
Doctor Leon affirms most clearly, saying; Leon en el Prologo de los nombres
de Christo.
In the first ages of the Primitive Church, and many years after, it was
esteemed a great fault in the faithful, not to be often conversant in the
perusing and reading of the Divine Books: and Ecclesiastical men, and those
whom we call Secular, both learned, and unlearned, for this reason, treated so
much of this exercise and study, that the carfulness herein of the vulgar
sort, stirred up in Bishops and Prelates, a greater study and practice in the
same; who ordinarily in their Churches, in a manner every day, expounded the
sacred Scriptures to the people, because the particular reading of them by
every one in their houses, by the light of that public doctrine, being
illuminated, and governed as it were by their Masters and Teachers voice, might
be free from error, and be a cause of the greater and more important benefit;
which in very deed was so great, as that order and government was religious and
zealous, and the fruit was answerable to their sowing of the seed. And Master
Prades confesses as much in this point, as Leon, in these words; In ancient
times the holy Scriptures were propounded to the people in the vulgar tongue,
that so all sorts of people might read them; the which was very profitable,
and as such approved of many holy and very learned men.

That the said Reading of the holy Scriptures, proved very profitable, Prades
en el Prologo de la adoracion de las imagines.
many Spanish writers affirm and confess: but amongst all therest, Father
Torres auerres the same admirably, with wonderful examples of many who were
cured and reformed by the same. The which I will here express and set down
with all possible brevity, Torres lib. 25. de la Philosophia de Principes.
Cap. 2.
that the propounded verity may more evidently appear. The first example
produced by Torres, is of the Eunuch, servant to Candaces Queen of Ethiopia,
who by the means of reading the Prophet Esaias, attained to the knowledge of
Christian verity. The second is, of S. Eugenia, who desiring to be assured of
the infallible knowledge of her salvation, the Epistles of S. Paul came to her
hands, (this would not have happened to her if she had been in Spain) upon
the doctrine whereof she considering and meditating, she in such sort grew to
discover the falsities and deceits of the Gentiles, and the verity of
Christian wisdom, that she was not only converted to the faith and belief
of our Lord, but further, she was martyred in defense, and for the confession
of the same. The third example that he propounds is, of that illustrious
Domina, who was a Martyr of Jesus Christ; who being a Gentile, no less prudent
then honorable, and being brought up in the Palace of the Emperor Maximian,
by chance she met with a book of the same Epistles, and with the History
written by S. Luke, of the Acts of the Apostles; in whose doctrine, she
discovered the errors of Infidelity; and so becoming a Christian, she
embraced a cruel death, to keep possession of that she had undertaken. To
the former examples he adds this other, of that most illuminated S. Augustine,
who being plunged in a thousand doubts and ambiguities, it was said unto him,
Toll and lege: Take and read: and he obeying this voice, not knowing from
whom, or whence it came, he took the Epistles of the Apostle, and opening
them, the first which presented themselves to him, were those words written to
the Romans, Chap. 13. Not in eating and drunkenness, but put ye on our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. And these reasons so far prevailed with him, that
presently abjuring his heresy, he was converted to the Lord. The last example
propounded by this Author, is incomparably beyond all the rest, and sufficient
to move us, never to be without the holy Scriptures in our hands; which is,
the same of the most holy Virgin, the Mother of him that is Lord of heaven and
earth, who at the same time, when she felt in her sacred entrails, the most
divine mystery of the Incarnation, by the coming of the Angel, S. Ambrose
says, that she was reading and meditating on the Prophecy of Esaias, Chap.
7. Ambros. lib. 2. in Luc. cap. 1.
Ecce Virgo concipiet, and pariet filium, etc. whereunto Torres adds, That we
may conceive, how the reading of the holy Scriptures, was a singular
preparation for the receiving of such a favor and grace; the which he
confirms, and this renowned S. Augustine observes in the blessed Virgin;
amongst whose many excellencies, he specifies one, namely, that she was very
well read and conversant in the Prophets. Many other examples the same Father
Torres mentions, which here I omit to avoid prolixitie; and because these
above declared, evidently demonstrate, that the use and reading of the holy
Scriptures, has ever been common and commendable in all the faithful; and
that the perusing of them, has brought forth wonderful effects; which is the
same we aimed at in the beginning, and which for more efficacy, we now briefly
confirm by the example of S. Gertrudis, with whom (if we may believe the
Papists blasphemous fiction) our Lord did marry; and moreover that our Savior
Christ said Mass on the day of his nuptials, that they might be the more
solemn and authentical: For this blessed Nun, is wonderfully exalted by
Master Granada, Granada en el li. de la insinuacio^ de la dinina Pedad, fol.
22. Note that this Book is approved by the grauest Doctors in all Spain.
in that she was very perseuerant in reading of the holy Scriptures, and in
that she confirmed whatsoever she spoke, out of the Texts, both in the one and
the other Testament; who, if she were now in Spain, I make no doubt but she
would be reputed a Lutherane. We also proved more in particular, in what an
obligation all the faithful stand bound to read the divine Scriptures,
because it is Gods pleasure we should know and understand him by them. Lorenzo
Iustiniano teaches as much, who^ Fray Joseph. de Jesus Maria follows, Fray
Joseph. cap. 12. del libro de las excelencias de la castidad.
and alleges in these words: By means of the holy Scriptures, our Lord meant
to illuminate and instruct our ignorance, inform and direct our faith, and
fortify and strengthen our hopes. The very same, Father Arincan openly
confesses and maintains, saying, that the holy Scripture, Arinzano en su
Rosario, fol. 138
is a Book plain and delucide, without danger, which God imparted to us, that
by the same we might know him. But above all these Testimonies, that of S.
Augustine, conferring with God in prayer, and speaking of himself, propounds
unto us, and Father Lewys of Granada auerres and confirms the same: Whereas I
was weak and insufficient (says S. Augustine) to find out truth, with naked
reason, and therefore stood in need of the testimony and authority of the
holy Scripture, Granada en la segnuda part de la introduccion del Symbolo.
I began then presently to conceive, how it was not possible to believe, that
thou (O God) would give so great a divinity, and power to these writings in
the world, but that by their means thou would be believed, and by them
sought out. Saint Augustines words extend thus far, the which the Bishop of
Tortosa also alleges, to prove, what we have formerly propounded: and he
adds, That God gave us the Scriptures especially, by them to find out Christ,
whom (as S. Augustine says) the Scripture sounded in his care. From this, it
must needs infallibly follow, that whosoever takes away the use of the holy
Scripture from the vulgar, together with them, they take away the only means
and instrument which God gave them, to know himself, and his Son Jesus
Christ; and so consequently they shut against them the gate of eternal life,
which wholly consists in this knowledge, and the same Jesus Christ testifies,
speaking to his heavenly Father, from which also we may collect, how deeply we
stand bound and obliged to the reading of the same holy Scripture, if we mean
to know God, and obtain everlasting life.

The said obligation and bond, is also made more manifest, wherein all
Christians stand bound to read the holy Scriptures; for as God will be
believed out of them, so he will likewise by them be served and reverenced:
because in them he reueales unto us his Divine will and pleasure, and he sent
amongst us his holy Law, which the vulgar can no ways observe nor keep, if
they be not permitted to look into it. They will peradventure allege, how
this reason only proves, that every Christian ought to know, and understand
the Law of God; but hereof it does not necessarily follow, that the reading of
the holy Scriptures is requisite for all in general, because it is sufficient,
that the Doctors and great Masters propound to the vulgar, whatsoever is most
necessary and requisite therein to be known. First, I answer this objection,
That Gods will is not, the people should only hear and understand, what their
Teachers and Pastors think good, but that all and every good Christian and
faithful man, should search and look into the Scriptures, as formerly has
been sufficiently proved: As also it is further auerred, because as S. Basil
teaches, and next to him the Bishop of Tortosa, ^rena, in Isa^og. in totam
Scripturam, ^ol. 7.
all Scripture is divinely inspired, and written by the holy Ghost to this end,
that as a common medicine of the soul, all men in general, and every man to
himself in particular, might apply a fit and proper remedy. Conformable to
this, S. Basil teaches, whom Doctor Fonseca cites and follows; For as the
eyes which behold all things, and cannot see themselves, except in some glass
that represents them to our sight; so likewise our soul, viewing and beholding
all things, cannot see nor discern her self, but only by looking into the
glass of the holy Scriptures. Hereupon it follows, that the reading thereof
is requisite and expedient for all men, in that it is befitting, that all men
should both see, and know themselves: But the Pope of Rome will not permit the
vulgar people to see and behold themselves in this divine glass, that they may
not discern how odious and abominable the false doctrine he professes, makes
the Christian soul in the sight of God: imitating herein the Ape or Monkie,
who breaks the glass, because it lays open his own ugliness and deformity:
and herein also resembling that ancient Lays, who cast away her glass; whereof
Ausonius made this Epigram: At mihi, nullus, in hoc vsus, quia cernere talem,
Qualis sum, nolo, qualis eram, nequeo.
All which (as by his daily works it appears) the Pope alleges of the
divine glass of the holy Scriptures, for the use he makes of them is but
small, or none at all. Most true it is, that there is this difference between
the Pope and Lays; for she hated her own deformity, and not the glass; but
he loves his own deformity, and abhorres the holy Scripture: for he reueales
and manifests it to all the world. But let this suffice for this time; and
secondly let us answer the reason propounded to us, for in that we are
commanded, to prove and try the spirits, because Satan many times transformes
himself into an Angel of light: from hence it comes to pass, that the reading
of the sacred Scriptures is necessary for all men; which teach us, how we
should discover masked and hollow enemies, and those inwardly deceitful;
showing us also what we should retain, and what to avoid, as S. Augustine
affirms, and next to him Father Jesus de Maria. Fr. Joseph. en el cap. 12. del
lib. de la castidad.
And questionless, if it be not lawful for us to look into the Scriptures,
we shall so hardly be able to distinguish between bad and good, the fair and
deformed, what God commands, and so what himself prohibits, as a blind man
can judge of colors, because it is only the Scripture that represents unto us
all these things without any error or deceit. If it be not so as I say, let a
Papist tell me that never saw the Bible, how can he try the spirits whether
they be of God, or of the devil? how can he discern between Gods and the
Popes commandments? By the word of God he cannot, because he never read it,
nor heard it read, but only in a tongue he understood not; which is as much as
if he heard it not at all. It may be he will reply, that he knows
sufficiently, because the Pope and his Prelates have so taught him. But thus I
answer, He is subject to a thousand errors and delusions; for how can he but
be deceived, who suffers himself to be led by the nose, by those men who are
deeply interessed in the same things they command, Gueuara segund part, del
monte Caluario, fol. 702.
seeing (as Antonio de Gueuarra notes) no man observes loyalty and fidelity,
where peculiar interests do distract him; and the same Gueuarra said, The Lord
is only he, that opens our sight that we may clearly see, and who points out
unto us the way wherein we must walk, and remooues the stones that they annoy
or offend us not, and advises us what we are to do in all things. Now
therefore, such a Papist as never looked into the Bible, must needs be ignorant
and indiscreet, and therefore he cannot avoid the running into innumerable
errors; and therefore his safest course is, to repair to the holy Scriptures,
which, without any deceit or ambiguity, will inform him in whatsoever he
ought to believe, or stands obliged to be; for they are the most approved and
authentical instruction, leanning to no falsitie, and therefore they are
called Canons or Rules, because conformable to the same, Vt per Lydium lapidem,
fidei dogmata sunt examinanda, as the Bishop of Tortosa proves out of S.
Augustines authority; Tena. ibid. fol. 4.
and as the same Bishop said, The Scripture is called the old and new
Testament, quia sicut in Testamento, men's and voluntas Testatoris continetur,
ita in sacra Scriptura, men's Dei qui illius verus est Testator. As also it is
like a Letter or Epistle which God writes to all the faithful, wherein he
reueales unto them his will, and what he requires from every one, Puente, Tom.
3. tratado 7. c. 1.
as both S. Gregory and Father Puente teach. Whereupon I conclude, that all the
faithful in general, none excepted, stand precisely obliged and bound, to
read and meditate in the holy Scriptures: Because it is requisite for all men
to examine whether their faith be true or false, all men must needs understand
the will of their heavenly Father, expressed in this letter and Testament; and as
he should be accounted an ungrateful and inhumane son, that did contemn to
read and peruse the deed and Testament of his Father, to know thereby his
Will, and to put it in execution; so with far greater reason, he ought so to
be esteemed, that regards not the Divine Scriptures, because they are the
letters and writings, wherein our eternal Father, the King of kings and Lord
of lords, has declared his will and pleasure, and what he requires from us. If
any one, Puente en la Guia spiritual. fol. 298.
says S. Gregory, and next to him Father Puente, should receive letters from
an earthly Emperor, he would not cease till he had read them, and understood
what they comprehended, to fulfill it: how therefore can thy slothfulness be
so great, that the heavenly Emperor, having sent thee his Letters and
Certificates for thy good, thou should neglect and not read them. Study
therefore, I pray thee, every day, and read and meditate continually on the
words of thy Creator, conceive and understand Gods meaning in his own words,
for in them his divine meaning and will is expressed, there you shall perceive
his sublimity and condition, the love he bears thee, and what he would have
thee to do, to give him contentment: What Gregory and Puente speaks to all
true Christians, I tell it now to you, noble and discreet Countrymen, (and let
it be lawful for me to speak freely and ingeniously) I beseech you,
affectionately to tell me, what would you think of a man, upon whose life it
stands to know the will of his father, to put it in execution; and having
means to understand the same without ambiguity or doubt, by his last Will and
Deed, he yet desires to be informed of another, that goes about to delude and
deceive him, would you not hold such a man for the greatest fool and sot
living? Certainly if you do thus, you cannot but perceive, that you commit
the same and a greater folly: and therefore when you know that your heavenly
Father has left you his divine Will, manifested and revealed in his Testament,
and the Letters Patents of of the holy Scripture, and that on the knowledge or
ignorance of it, your everlasting glory or damnation depends, you nevertheless
making small account of this divine Testament, and letter, repair to the Roman
Bishop, to be informed of your heavenly Fathers Will, being true, that the
Pope is but a man, as others are, (if peradventure he be not a woman, as Pope
Ioane was) given to deceive and to be deceived, whom it so nearly concerns
that you should not know the will of God; for your knowing of it evidently and
perspicuously, would but cause his ruin and perdition. In a word, dear
Contrymen; open your eyes at last; and seeing you are so subtle and advised
in the fluxible and momentany things of this life, give not occasion to all the
world to say, that you are fools and indiscreete in matters that shall for
ever be permanent in the future life; and whereas without sparing any labor,
you go environed with a thousand perils unto the remotest parts of the world,
induced by I know not what pride and ambition, which ever swayeth in you, (and
are detested and misprised by other Nations) to subiugate those who never were
in subjection, and to impose your yoke on the necks of such as never
underwent it; be not so senseless and so cowardly, that for fear of the
Pope of Rome, you omit the perusing and scrutiny of the Testament and Letter
which the Emperor of heaven has dained to leave you, by the reading whereof
you shall expedite your selves from that deplorable servitude, into which the
Romish Antichrist has plunged you, and shall exempt your selves from infinite
tribute which you pay to him and his Minister: and which is more, by Gods
assistance, you shall attain the knowledge of the true Religion and Christian
faith, and be able to judge between good and evil, that which is seemly,
and that which is unseemly, between virtue and vice, and finally betwixt the
commandment of God, and the Popes Iniunction, which you shall never be able
to do, if you read not holy Scripture, and which therefore are exceeding
behoouefull to you, and to all that desire to serve God as they ought.

Besides that before alleged, Puente en la guia spiritual. fol. 401
we may prove the precise necessity of reading the holy Scripture by the
faithful, in that God meant by them, to enlighten our ignorance, (which is a
cause of all evils, as those Authors noted in the Margent, most learnedly
prove and testify, Marquez, en su Tesoro en la Epistola dedicatoria.
and indeed the thing of it self is so clear and manifest, that it needs no
proof nor testimony.) Father Jesus de Maria, confirms this truth in the same
words propounded. Father Albarado is of the same opinion; Granada en el
preambulo, de la segurda part, de la Introduccion y en el prologo del memorial.
Amongst those books (says he, which we are euioyn'd to to read) the holy
Scripture has the first place, which was dictated by the holy Ghost, to
illuminate our understandings and to make them holy. Father Serpi confesses as
much, saying, The divine Scriptures, Fr. Joseph. en el lib. de la caflid. ad.
cap. 12
dissipate the darkness and cloud of ignorance, and therefore the reading of
them is expedient for all men, in that it concerns all men not to be
ignorant. Albarado tom. primero del arto de bien viuir, fol. 390.


And seeing you, beloved Countrymen (that in charity it may be lawful for me
to exhort you) are inuolued in the palpable and Egyptian darkness of
ignorance, as daily experience teaches us, Serpi de purga. torio, cap. 1.
which all godly and learned men (whom God raises up amongst you) do lament;
be no more rebellious and opposite to this divine light of the holy Scripture,
for whosoever are so, they will have ill success, and one of your great
Doctors learnedly notes. Granada ibidem.
He that goes out of his house in the night, he caries with him a Torch, or a
Lantern, and he that does not so, Marquez ibid. fol. 1.
is in danger to fall or stumble; and in the night and darkness of this life,
the Scripture must be the light, Vascones en el desterro de ignorantia en la
Epistola dedicatoria.
to guide and conduct us, except we mean to trippe and stumble at every
step, as the same Author sets down: wherefore, most dear brethren, you
shall do exceeding well, if according to the counsel and advise of the
Apostle S. Peter, you be intentive and obseruant of the divine Word, confirmed
by the Prophets, as one that is conducted by a resplendant and bright Torch in
an obscure and dark place, while the light of the true day break forth,
Fonseca 2. p. del amor de Dios cap 2.
and that the Author of light, may rise and shine in your hearts: but so you
do wonderful ill, if according to the Injunctions and Mandates of the Pope,
you do not hearken and give ear to the same.

And if you would know why that same successor to S. Peter (as he boasts
himself to be) teaches doctrine quite contrary to that of S. Peter in this
particular point, I will plainly and briefly express it to you; The word of
God explained in the holy Scriptures, is, (as before we said, Psalm. 119.
and David affirms the same) a lantern that gives light to our steps,
wherein we may plainly conceive the property it has to distinguish good men
from bad. Fowlers when they follow their game by night, use to carry burning
lights, with which they dazell the foul, who perceiving the light, fall into
the Fowlers nets; so they catch Partridges: and of Doves the Prophet Hosea
says, comparing the captivity of Ephraim, to the Dove or Turrle, taken by
this delusion and stratageme. Birds properly seek after the light, though
thereby they lose their liberty; but on the contrary, wild and savage beasts
are enemies to the light; for the Lion, or Wolf, and so all other beasts,
perceiving the same, they shun it, as they would do a consuming fire, and
being astonished, they fly to their Caves, and Dens. In the same manner, the
Internal light of the sacred Scriptures, discouers which are the birds that
raise their flight toward heaven, and who the wild and savage be that run
and hide themselves in the Caves of the earth: Peter (that we may come to the
point) is a bird that bends his flight up toward heaven, and so he imbraceth
the light of the Scriptures, and he would have us guided thereby; but the Pope
is a wild and savage beast, (as S. John testifies in his Apocalypse) and
therefore he abhorres and shunnes this divine light, and loves darkness, in
which like to other beasts, he commits his rapine and robberies, and because
this may not come to your notice, he prohibites you the holy Scripture: But if
you affect the salvation of your own souls, and would not be ensnared with
the delusions and subtilties of the devil, but have the dark fogges and
mistes of ignorance taken from before your eyes, though the Pope and hell it
self combined together do prohibit, yet you ought to lay hold of this divine
light, and not to go one step, in the dark night of this life, without the
same.

Also the necessity and obligation that all the faithful have to read and
meditate on the sacred writings, and euicted from afflictions which cannot be
wanting in this life; Seeing (as holy Job says) all this life is but a long
affliction: Job 7.
and Saint Peter says, that our adversary as a ravenous Lion goes about every
where seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.
And the Apostle S. Paul magnifieth the strength and great power of this
enemy, and furnishes us with diverse kinds of spiritual weapons to foil him
with. Granada en el preambulo de lae 2. part de la introduccion del Symbol.
This argument which I have abridged, Father Luys de Granada uses to
demonstrate, that the books of sound and good doctrine are altogether requisite
to the common people. Amongst which reasons, if this be of validity, who will
be so blasphemous, as to deny it, to be good in the sacred and Canonical
books. For what doctrine in the world can be paraleld with that which God
himself inspired his servants the Prophets and Apostles withal, to enlighten
our understanding, and sanctify them, as we said elsewhere, and of which the
same God said by the Prophet Esaias; I am the Lord thy God, Esa. cap. 44.
teaching thee profitable things, that is, things which in an eminent degree
deserve the title of profitable, Puente en la guia espiritual. fol. 292.
as Father Puente elegantly observes. So that this argument might suffice
without farther explication, to authorize our purpose: Howbeit, we will not so
leave it, but will compendiously show, that in the sacred Scriptures most
effectual remedies are found for all dangers that can assault us in this life,
and that without it a Christian cannot extricate himself out of them; and
thence it appears, that the reading of it, is precisely necessary unto all.

First holy Scripture is, Puente ibid. fol. 292.
as Father Puente faith, with Origin, a shop of all wholesome things, to care
every sick person that comes to it: and Puente adds, that in it we shall
find sufficient remedy for all evil, Fonseca 2 part del tratado del amor de
Dios, cap. 2.
wherewith to heal the soul: It is (as Fonseca observes) not only a gener
all antidote against the griefs of the soul, but also a lenitiue and ease for
the evils that befall the body: Granada en el preambuio. de la 2. part de la
introduccion.
And also (as Father Luys de Granada auerreth) it is that celestial Manna
which had the relishes of all meats, because there is no taste or effect which
a soul can desire to have, which it may not sind in it.

Yea, it is (as the same Granada notes) that royal table furn^sh^d with all
meats, of which the Prophet speaks, Thou O Lord have prepared a table before
me, which gives me strength and subsistence against all my enemies: Fonseca
ibid. fol. 64.
It is (as Fonseca formerly alleged, teaches) an armoury against all the
force of the devil, and against the snares of hell; and a tower, as that of
David full of all manner of weapons, against all kind of temptations, Puente
ibid fr. Joseph en su libro de castidad. fol. 160.
as Father Puente affirms. It is armor to defend us, and weapons to offend
our enemies, says Father Joseph, Jesus Maria. And he adds, that therefore S.
Bernard writes to one of his sisters, that she should fence her self with
divine Scripture, and that she should endeavor to ruminate in her prayer,
that which she should rea^e therein, because it would serve her not only for
a defense in this life, but also for a particular help to obtain the life to
come. Estella 1. part del libro de la v^^idad del mundo. fol. 96.
And Father Stella says thus, That nothing besides God in this life is more
sweetly received, nor relisheth more deliciously, nothing so much segregateth
our soul from the love of the world, and nothing so comfort and fortifieth
the soldier of Christ against all temptations, as the frequent reading of the
holy Scripture. If then the excellency and value of the weapons of the sacred
Scripture, be so great, as well in defending us against our adversaries, as in
offending them, who can be so shameless as to deny, that the reason which
above we alleged out of the Father Granada in favor of books comprising
good doctrine, is not much more forcible, and that without comparison in
Scripture.

Seeing therefore we formerly mentioned that whereof the Apostle S. Peter
puts us in mind, that our adversary as a ravenous Lion enuironeth us on
all sides to devour us: and the Apostle Saint Paul sets before us the might
of this adversary, and provides us with diverse sorts of weapons to vanquish
him, and play the conquerours. It will be fitting that we consider what these
weapons are, whether they be only the devout books, and not the Canonical,
or profane books not tending to devotion, which as we shall hereafter see, are
at this present flourishing in the Papacy, or the sacred and Canonical; of
which my Argument treats. This, one Brauo a Spaniard will show us, whose
authority may not be undervalued, seeing in matter of Arms, that of the Brauo
was ever in repute. This Spaniard Brauo tells us, That the Apostle S. Peter,
Brauo en la vigilia magna, fol. 89.
who observed the manner of arguing with the devil used against us, gave us the
form of answering him; Cuiresistite fortes in fide: Who^ resist ye, being
steadfast in the faith and doctrine of Christ, etc. And a little after, the
Apostle S. Paul says, Sumentes scutum fidei in quo possitis ownia tela
nequissimi ignea extinguere: For he opposes to this fire the doctrine, etc.
But what doctrine is this? perhaps its that which occurres in the books of
Amadis and Belh^nise; or in the books which the Pontifical Doctors bring to
light; or in the Canonical ones of holy Scripture. Let us here attend to this
Doctor, for he will tell it us. Not (says he) the doctrine which is
inspersed in pernicious books, in amorous letters, in sugared complements, which
some out of curiosity through their depraved inclination make their study,
(for this is to add fire to the devil, and to strengthen his enemy) but
sacred, spiritual, and holy doctrine, which is of greater force. Psalm. 118.
Whereof David says, Ignitum eloquium tuum vehementer: Thy word is very fiery,
and if we have recourse to the truth of his Gospel, to his counsel, to the
Commandments of Gods Law, and be firm and irremooueable in them; This divine
fire is such, that it will consume all the artificial and deluding fire of the
devil. Hitherto are Brauos words. See ye not, that the holy Apostles send us,
not to assume weapons against the temptations of our enemy, from books of
mere devotion, much less from profane ones, but from the Canonical of holy
Scripture? And why should they not direct us unto it? Granada en el preambulo
de la segunda part de la introduccion del Symbolo.
for as the same Granada says, What are the weapons of the Christian
warrefare, what the spiritual sword that cutteth off vices, but the word of
God? And as he observes, With what other weapons did our Captain fight in
the desert with the enemy, but by infirming every temptation by some word of
Scripture? August. lib. 4. de Trinit. c. 13. Puente tem. 2. de la perfecion,
fol. 255.
Teaching us with his example, to draw from it the trueths and remedies
wherewith we are to overcome all our temptations, as does note with Saint
Austin Father Puente. And from it only did the Church in the time of the
Martyrs, draw matter of constancy; in the time of the Doctors, knowledge; in
the time of heretics, the confutation of their errors; in time of
prosperity, humility and temperance; in time of supinenesse, matter of
feruencie, Reynosa en el maestro christiano, fol. 86.
as the Father Reynosa notes: of what else but that, said famous S. Austin,
whom the said Reynosa cites and follows; that, quicquid homo extra
didicerit, si noxium est ibi damnatur, si vtiles est ibi inuenitur: Whatsoever
a man learneth out of it, if it be hurtful its there condemned, if it be
profitable, its found there: and we need not go seek it elsewhere. And that
we may not defatigate our selves, of what but the holy Scripture spoke S. Paul,
that it is profitable to instruct the ignorant, to refute error, to reprove
sin, to teach righteousness, to perfect a Christian, and make him complete
in every good work? which is as much as if he should have said, that it
comprehends all things necessary to our salvation; as forthwith the most
learned Father Puente will demonstrate eloquently and copiously.

We will conclude from what has been said, that seeing the Apostles
themselves, that inform us of the ambushes and temptations of our enemies, do
send us to holy Scripture, thence to take weapons wherewith to fortify us, and
withstand them, because it is the armor of the Christian warrefare; that to it
all the faithful should repair, because all are obnoxious to temptations, and
that if the Pope dispoile the common people of these divine weapons, it is that
he may war against them, and sell them at his pleasure: whereof I will
elsewhere discourse.

In confirmation of the precedent Argument, I thought good to prove more at
large, the sufficiency of the sacred Scripture in all things necessary to our
salvation, that it may appear the better, that its worthy to be frequently
conuersed in by all, seeing it compriseth all that is necessary to all.

The holy Scripture contains all things whatsoever is necessary for Salvation.
DOctor Aluarado clearly teaches this truth, Aluarado tomo primero delarie de
bien Viuir fol. 454.
who, when he affirmed that God had constituted in the Church the necessary
and fit means to obtain the same, and these means are reduced to seven
special heads, he sets them down in order, saying: The first is true faith
and the knowledge of the true God: and our Mediator and Redeemer Jesus Christ.
The second means is his holy Law, which comprehends all the commandments of
things requisite and necessary, to enter into eternal life, and all the
instructions which may assist us, to attain unto it, with security and
perfection. The third is Religion, and the sincere worship of God, with such
external rites and ceremonies as are belonging to God. The fourth mean, are
the Sacraments. The fifth, are seven rare and excellent virtues, faith, hope,
charity, prudence, justice fortitude and temperance, together with seven
special gifts and endowments of the holy Ghost. The fixed, is internal
doctrine, and the light of inspiration, and illustration from the holy Ghost:
and for the exterior, it must proceed from learned Masters and Doctors, who,
both by example and doctrine, teach whatsoever is expedient to be known or
understood, for to raise souls up to heaven. The seventh mean, is the divine
and sacred Scriptures, wherein are revealed all things by us formerly
mentioned. Whatsoever has been delivered comes from this Author, who, though
he were a black Monk by Order, and profession, yet herein he hit the white
of Christian verity and truth, and of the sufficiency and validity of the holy
Scriptures: As also Father Torres, Teetino (which is a lesuite) delivered this
truth: I te atino (which in Spanish signifies as much as I embrace this
truth) when he said: that S. Paul referred Timothy to the Scriptures, wherein
he might learn whatsoever was fit and convenient for him, the which if the
Pope would preach and teach to his disciples and followers, all those
traditions which he sels unto us for necessary faith, and are not to be found
in the Scripture, would be superfluous, and of no moment at all. For if in the
Scriptures we meet with all things necessary, there is nothing out of them
that can be esteemed necessary. As a philosophical Axiom plainly proves
which says: qui totum dicit, nihil excludit. Brauo en la Vigilia magna. fol.
78.
Doctor Brauo manifestly acknowledges the former truth propounded in these
words: The holy Scripture is a glass wherein a man may clearly and
perspicuously discern whatsoever is requisite in an humane life, for the true
service and worship of God. But, beyond all these Authors, Father Puente is
admirable upon this subject (and as in other arguments, Puente toro 3. de la
terfecion. fol. 711.
so in this more especially against the Church of Rome) for not in one, but in
many places, he auers and proves this verity with words very significant, and
most preualent reasons. I mean not here to set down all that I have read and
observed throughout his books, about this particular point, in that I would
not willingly be prolix, as also because I conceive, that what I shall
hereunder mention, will be more then sufficient. And in the New Testament (he
first says) that all the Law Evangelical was fully declared. Whereupon it
must needs of necessity ensue, that in the New Testament is comprehended
whatsoever is necessary for salvation. For of this, there is no doubt to be
made but that the Law of the Gospel is sufficient in it self to salvation.
This Author in another place says, Idem en la guia espiritual. fol. 291.
The sacred Scripture, is the clearest glass where we may best see and behold
those countenances which we have set down: that is to say, the glorious
countenance of God, that of our Savior Jesus Christ, and then our own.
Because in the same are revealed, all those virtues which appertain to the
perfect knowledge of these three things. Moreover it prescribes us remedies
against vices, arms against temptations, advice and resolution in doubts,
consolation in sorrow, ease and relaxation, from labors and troubles, and due
Means, whereby to attain to the perfection of all virtues. For as S.
Dionysius says, that is, the table which divine wisdom placed in the Church
plentifully furnished with Bread and Wine. For on the same is set the bread of
life, and of understanding, which are the solid and firm truths, from whence
the virtues take their life and essence, and the knowledge of things eternal,
as also, there is the wine of ardent and zealous affections, mingled with the
water of wholesome knowledge, to give salvation, vigor, and joy unto the heart.
It is the Pantry of the King of Heaven, and the Cellar of his most precious
wines, whereinto he brings his elect, and there he quenches the hunger and
thirst they have of Righteousness. It is an open shop, full of medicines,
for all manner of spiritual infirmities: and a tower, like that of David,
replenished with all manner of arms, against every kind of temptation. For in
that it is a table full of delicates, Psalm. 22.
it is placed as David speaks, to defend us, against those that vex and
persecute us. For which cause S. Paul said, that all Scripture inspired from
God, 2. Tim. cap. 3.
is profitable to instruct, to convince, correct, and enable to every good
work; that every man of God may be perfect, and well instructed in every good
work: as if he had said: It is very effectually to teach us necessary truth
for our salvation, and to convince such enemies, who with false and colorable
reasons pretend and seek to deceive us, and to correct our vices, and
exorbitances, and to fortify us in the exercise of virtue and good works; that
so we may attain to that perfection, whereunto we are called, and to the end
thereof, which is eternal life, which is said to be found in the holy
Scriptures, which manifest him, who is our eternal life, and the means left
unto us, to purchase him. All this above mentioned, is set down by Father
Puente, the which, though in it self it be much, yet is it but little in
respect of that he writes in another place, explaining the same place of the
Apostle, his reasons translated word for word, even as the present citations
were, are these which follow.

Another excellency of the sacred Scripture is, Idem 4. toma fol. 560.
that the same is very beneficial to salvation, and that perfection, which we
pretend. Because the holy writings (said the Apostle) Possunt te instruere ad
salutem; They can inform thee in whatsoever is requisite for thy salvation.
And a little after, they are not only profitable for every one in particular,
but further they are good and behoofefull for others: and in this reason S.
Paul recounts five great commodities for one of the five ends. The first is, ad
docendum, for the teaching of men all that is requisite for salvation, and
perfection, that so through ignorance they may not be deprived of them; and it
does not only explain the trueths therein mentioned, but also other
verities, appertaining to natural Sciences: for that corrects and directs many
things, and if it were not for the light we receive therefrom, we should
repute many things for true that are but counterfeit and falfe. The second end
is, ad arguendum, that is, to confute and convince, those that follow and
uphold heresies, and contrary errors: For the Scripture, sets down such strong
reasons, and arguments, as are sufficient to subdue them, and to refell their
vain arguments. Even as we may plainly see by the reasons, wherewith Christ
our Lord, reprehended and convinced the Jews, and in those, produced by S.
Paul in his Epistles, against many Heretics, and Schismatikes. The third end
is, ad corrigendum; that is, to correct vice, and rebuke the guilty, because
the same prescribes rules of correction, and points out those things that are
to be corrected, together with a means to reform them. The fourth end is: ad
erudiendum in Iustitia, to instruct them in righteousness and equity, because
it does not only teach such verities, as enlighten the understanding, but also
further the doctrine of virtue, which mooues and excites the mind to love and
embrace them, propounding all those motives, means, and benefits, which stir
up a man to put them in practice: and finally ratifying after an excellent
manner that formerly uttered, saying; Vt perfectus sit homo Dei, velomne opus
bonum instructus: For it remains not satisfied, in the simple teaching of any
virtue, but in deciphering an high and complete perfection in them all: that
the man of God may be perfect, and well instructed in all manner of good
works, and in the exercise of all virtues, from the meanest to those which are
most excellent, and supereminent. A little underneath: The fullness of all
wisdom is found in the two Testaments, the New, and Old. Thus far proceeds
the same Author: and thus, with that formerly alleged, I have sufficiently
expressed the propounded truth, of the validity and all sufficiency of the
holy Scriptures: from whence we also gather (to return to our purpose) how
precisely and strictly Christians are bound to read, and be often conversant
in the holy Scripture: For, what can be more necessary for them, then that
which comprehends and contains all that is behoofefull and requisite, to live
here a life of grace, and afterward to obtain a life eternal, which in the
same is expressed and manifested.

And now it is time we should come to the objections of our Adversaries,
against the use and free reading of the Bible in the vulgar tongue. Their first
reason is; that as Christ himself taught, Holy things must not be given to
dogs, nor pearls to swine, whereby they conclude, with a strange and
deprau'd subtilty, that the precious Margarite, Matthew. 7.
or Pearl of the Scripture, should not be committed to the handling of the
vulgar.

First of all I answer thus to this reason, that the obligation and bond in
this case is very great, wherein Princes stand bound to the Pope and his
Ministers, seeing they honor them with such a glorious, and Illustrious title,
as that of swine, and dogs. Secondly I answer, that whereas there are diverse
that term themselves Seculars, to whom many Ecclesiastical persons are not
to be compared, for sanctity and purity of life; yea, who many times are
worse then the most reprobate Seculars, (as in another place we will prove)
therefore the Pope and the Inquisitors (if they would only communicate the
Scriptures to men holy and devout) they should rather take it from bad
Ecclesiastical men, and permit them to the good Secular sort; but seeing they
do not so, but freely grant them to all Ecclesiastical persons, both good and
bad, and contrariwise detain them from all both good and bad indifferently, if
they be Seculars, it is a sign, that they do not prohibit the Bible to the
vulgar, because they are as swine, but because they should be so, even as
indeed they are, for the most part under the Papacy. Thirdly I answer, that
to be holy it is not sufficient to understand Latin, neither can the
ignorance of it be any cause of not being holy, and therefore, if the Pope
think that it is not just nor reasonable, to permit the Scriptures to any
other but such as are holy, he herein manifests himself to be most unjust,
allowing it only to all those, that understand the Latin, (as he thinks) and
prohibiting all such as understand it not; as if to understand Latin, and to
be holy were einsdem ambitus and co^uertibile. To the fourth I answer; in the
same words, with which Doctor Gratian, satisfies them that oppose the said
place of S. Matthew, against the common and vulgar use of the Books of Mother
Teresa: Gratian en sus obras, fol. 7.
These books (says Gratian) are certain to come into the hands of swine,
which are carnal and sensual men, who trample and tread upon God: For they
will neither spend money in buying of them, nor time in reading of them, neither
wear out their wits to understand them, being content with their own
wisdom, in the pleasures and delights of the world; because, for our sins,
such men delight rather in books of Cheualries, and vanities, then in Books
of spirit and devotion. And if any man read, and then contemn or calumniate
the same, (as if they were an Instrument to salve and work some good effect in
a Christian soul) he would be content to suffer as well as he that made them,
calling to mind, that the Lord, for the salvation of souls, would himself be
contemned, ill entreated, pesecuted, and crucified, of the most base, abject,
and abominable people of the world: And if any for want of understanding, or in
malice of heart should err, or show scandal in this spiritual doctrine, let
him lay the blame on his own malice, or ignorance, and not on the Books which
give a light to those that have good eyes: but they that will read them with
eyes dazzled through philartie and self-love, such are not blinded with the
doctrine of Spiritual Books, which are no more in fault for their blindness,
then the Sun is in fault, that the Batte is blind, even as the fault is not
to be imputed to the Sun, that the Bat is blind, but to the defect of its
eyes; sithence the Eagle beholds it directly, without any detriment of sight.
Many heretics patronize their heresies by a misinter pretation of sacred
Writ, and yet nevertheless we may not say that Scripture hurts, and ought
not to be read. All these are the words of Doctor Gratian, to whom the Pope and
the Inquisitors owe many gratulations, seeing here with admirable grace he
stops their mouth, that henceforward they may not open it, to grunt as hogs
do, and bark as dogs (according to their custom) to authorize the
prohibiting of the holy Scripture in the vulgar tongue, in regard of the hurt
they pretend to ensue, upon the reading of it, (whereof I shall speak
hereafter) and that they may forbear to transfer their faults on others;
endeavoring to confirm and make good the said inhibition with the place of S.
Matthew, chap. 7. in which Christ teaches us only thus much, that he would not
have time spent, and pains taken in preaching to such of whose amendment we
can have no hope, as Chrysostom here expounds it; and this makes no whit
against the reading of holy Scripture in the vulgar tongue, unless the Pope be
so evil opinionated of all that are not Clergy men, as to censure them all as
profligate and obstinately reprobate; and that in them there is no hope of
amendment, and so consequently repute them as members of the devil, and heirs
of hell: and summarily, if the Pope esteem them such, he should not only
inhibite them the reading of the Bible, but also the partaking in the prayers
and Sermons of the Church, seeing Christ speaks of such. But I do not believe
that the most holy Father will pronounce so hardly of them, for charity will
not permit him to do it, especially of his own children. For the Father being
most holy in the superlatiue degree, at least his sons should be holy: and
though they were wicked, (as to speak freely the truth, they are not very
good) he therefore ought the rather, not only permit them, but also persuade
them to read it. The holy Scripture being (as I have formerly euicted) an
universal Apothecaries shop, which has powerful remedies for every sort of
infirmity and grief; to what better place can the Pope renuoy such as are
enfeebled with the wound of sin? For what thing is more proper and fit for a
sick man, then Physic; and for a wounded man, then that which will heal his
wounds? The Pope if he were a Father and not a tyrant, ought instantly to
license to his sons and the faithful holy Scripture, and chiefly to those
that are faint and weak: for, he that is well needs not the Physician or
Physic, but he that is sick. This is evident; Torres lib. 25. cap. 2. de su
Filosofia de principes.
and yet that it may be the more clear, let us hear what Father Torres says
on those words of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. All Scripture is divinely inspired,
etc. After he has said that, S. Paul sends his disciple Timothy unto the
Scripture, in which he might learn whatsoever he stood in need of: He further
adds, If he so earnestly enjoin a man replenished with the Spirit of grace,
the reading of holy Scripture, what would he say to one full of the malignant
spirit? he would have said to such a one, as the Redeemer of the world said to
the Scribes and Pharisees, who perceiving the crudity of their stomachs, and
that their apostumated bosoms could not be mitigated by any lenitiues, he sent
them to the divine Scriptures, as to a public hospital for the wounded and
maimed, Search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5. that they by reading and perpending the
same, might know that he preached all the truth to them. All this says this
Author: And the Pope should do so, herein imitating Christ our Lord (whose
Vicar he says he is, though indeed he be his enemy) seeing Christ desires
that his very enemies should search the Scriptures, and examine by them the
doctrine he preached to them: and this he did, because he was assured, that it
held correspondencie with them. But the Pope would not have his doctrine
brought to any trial, much less to the touchstone of holy Scripture, because
he knows it to be repugnant thereunto; and therefore in the Countries subject
unto his tyranny, to wit, where the Inquisition has place, he suffers none
to enquire which is the true Religion, and which the false; but contrariwise if
any be desirous to find out and receive the truth, and to this end search
the Scripture, he causes such a one to be burned, and not so satisfied, does
further declare all his kindred and allies living, and his posterity to be
infamous, and incapable of obtaining offices and dignities of honor and trust:
Though it be certain, that God would not the son should sustain the blame
of the fathers sin, much less be punished for that wherein his father was
not blameworthy, but rather commendable. But herein, as also in the rest, the
Pope is guided by the same infernal spirit, that the false prophet Mahomet is,
who well knowing that if his doctrine should be disputed of, and the truth
debated by good reasons, of necessity the falsenesse of it would be descried:
The first thing he commanded was, that under pain of death none should be so
presumptuous, as to canuase the ground and truth of his Law, but rather that
his disciples should be obliged to maintain it by way of hostility against
any that would impugn it, this precept is fully practiced in those kingdoms in
which the Inquisition is established; and for that purpose the Pope would it
were in all the world. But referring this to some other place, I will close
with the saying of Doctor Yllescas, who after he has recited what is said of
Mahomet, Yllescas en la historia Pontifical. fol. 205.
speaks as follows; Wherein if those who gave credit unto him, had not
been so blind, they might have seen that be was an Impostor, seeing he
would not have it controuerted, whether that he taught them were good or evil.
Oh how much I desire, beloved countrymen, that you would consider, that for as
much as he constraines you to believe and hold, whatsoever the Church of Rome
believes and holds, without permitting you to examine whether it be a true
or false Church, his scope is no other then to deceive you; and if you be not
totally blinded, you must of necessity perceive it. Look well unto it, for it
imports and concerns you more then it does me, and I discharge my duty in
admonishing you of it.

Secondly, our adversaries object to us, that the holy Scripture is obscure:
and that therefore it should be reserved from the vulgar. This is a mere lie
and untruth, and a manifest impiety, because the sacred Scriptures (as the
Papists themselves preach, and teach) is like an Epistle or Letter, that God
writes to all the faithful, wherein he expresses his will, and what he
requires from every one. Whereupon it must needs follow, that in things which
of necessity we are to learn out of the same, it is most clear and
delucidant. For otherwise, God had not performed so much as his own part, in
that he pretended, which is, to reveal and make manifest unto us his holy
will, which can not be auerred without great blasphemy. Wherefore, let us give
ear to the most learned Doctor Leon, Leon en el prologo de los nombres de
Christo.
who with his accustomed erudition and learning, confirms what I have said, in
these words he speaking thus: It is a very apparent thing, that the holy
Scriptures were inspired of God, that they might be a comfort unto us, in the
molestations and troubles of this life, and in the darkness and errors of the
same, a guiding and directing light, and that for the wounds which sin and
evil passions make in our souls, we might have a peculiar and healthful
remedy for every one of the^. And because he writ them for this end, which is
universal, it is likewise evident, that he meant the use likewise of them
should be common to all; and so, for his part, he constituted and ordained
them, for he writ them in plain and perspicuous words, and in a tongue that
was natural and vulgar amongst them, to whom he first gave them: Arinzano en
su Rosario, fol, 138.
afterward he appointed that they should be translated into other languages,
etc. Father Arinzano thought and affirmed as much as Leon, though in fewer
words; The holy Scripture (says he) is a plain and manifest Book without
danger, which God gave unto us, that by the same we might know him. Doctor
Brauo speaks with S. Gregory, that as the looking-glass is a thing which most
distinctly, Brauo, en la Vigilia Magna, fol. 78.
and to life represents things to the eye, so the Scripture contains all that
which any ways is pertinent for our instruction. And he adds, that holy
Scripture is a glass of the understanding, and an information apt and
requisite for all ages, Reinosa, en el Maestro Christiano, fol. 86.
for all kind and manner of people. Father Reynosa affirms with the same
Gregory, that the holy Scripture, with the obscurities thereof, exercises the
strong and intelligent, and with it is humble phrase and style, applies it self
to the capacity of the simple, and that it is not so intricate, as we need to
fear entering into the same. Puente en la guia spiritual. fol. 29.
Father Puente is rare and excellent in this point, and first he says; the
sacred and holy Gospels do fit themselves to all qualities and conditions of
men; for as Manna, being but one only meat, comprehended the sancur and taste
of all other, and was pleasing to the relish of him that eat it; so the word
of God, expressed in the Gospel, bends it self to the apprehension of the
hearers and Readers, yielding to every one, Idem ibidem fol. 293.
that spiritual refection, which his own necessity and will requires. In
another place he says again, with S. Gregory, (out of whom he also took
all the rest he delivered) In the Sea, or Ocean of the holy Scripture, the
Lamb may wade, and the Elephant may swim. Because the simpler sort like
Lambs, may there meet with many verities, which they may read and meditate
upon with security, wading through this deep Ocean by the bank or shore, and
so they of more sublime wit and apprehension shall encounter with many deep
mysteries, of such profunditie, that they know not where to find any ground:
but they shall be in no danger if they swim with humility, and with a demall
of their own judgments, reuerencing always those secrets, that they cannot
conceive, and enter into; and thus both the one sort and the other, with their
reading and meditation on the holy Scripture as they ought to do, shall
obtain the same fruits and benefits. Furthermore, Idem ibidem fol. 394.
this self same Author, speaks in another place, That the holy Gospels are
unto us eyes wherewith we may discern and understand the divine Mysteries,
distinctly and apparently, and without the veil of Figures, and that they
impart a resplendant and sovereign light to those that read them, revealing
unto them such things as they are to believe, the rewards they are to attend,
the punishments they should fear, and the sins they ought to shun, and
avoid, etc. He also says in the same place, That the holy Ghost assists those
that read and meditate on the holy Scripture, raising up their understandings
and wills, that they may discern love, and practice that which therein is
comprehended. And hereunto he adds, That this divine Spirit opens our
apprehension in the reading, that in the reading we may understand: But those
that deprave the holy Scipture, alleging that it is obscure, and not
intelligible, herein they likewise defraud the holy Ghost, the Author thereof;
imputing unto him (O infernal and diabolical blasphemy) the note of
Imprudence, Impotencie, and ignorance, that being willing (as this Author
speaks) to open the sense thereof to them that read it, cannot do the like
to the vulgar sort.

The third Objection of our oposites, the Papists, is, that by the too common
reading of the holy Scriptures, many take occasion to err, and that therefore
they are not to be published in the vulgar tongue. To this so frivolous and
common objection, and calumny, I first answer: that the holy Scripture is so
far from being a motive and ouerture to errors, that the same rather curbes,
Serpi de purgaetorio, fol. 1.
and corrects them, as Father Serpi, together with Thomas de Campis teach; And
there is nothing that does so strengthen and fortify our minds and
understandings against errors, as the said perusal, and reading: As with
Laurentius ^ustinianus, Friar Joseph de Jesus Maria affirms, Fr. Joseph cap.
12. del libro de la castidad.
and none will doubt of this, but such as have no shame, neither before God nor
men. Secondly, I answer: that though for our sins there are many who abuse
the holy Scripture, to ground and erect their own errors, yet ought they not
for all this to be prohibited, Fr. Leandro de Granada en el prologo del libro
intitulade luz de las marauiilas.
as Father Gratian formerly declared unto us, and two more do now affirm: The
first is Father Leandro de Granada, in these words; No man will forbear to
minister wholesome physic, though some weak person may peradventure convert
the medicine into poison. For both God and natural reason instructs us, that
we should not neglect the great fruit and benefit that may accrue to many by
avoiding the desparate malice of some, that put themselves to death with their
own hands, and blind themselves because they would not behold the Sun: for
this were a denying of that which is good to the good man, to whom properly it
belongs to prevent an evil man, of that ill himself seeks. Thus far the
same Author proceeds: whereupon he concludes, that though many abuse the book
of the Revelations of S. Gertrudis, and other such like, yet should they not
for all this be prohibited in the vulgar tongue. Now if this reason be of
force in such books, which are replenished with palpable lies, and most
impudent blasphemies, as that is which we formerly mentioned of the espousal of
Gertrudis with Christ, and that which ensues of her; that is to say, when
Gertrudis was drawing near to the hour of her death, Christ appeared to her,
clothed inglorious garments, the ornaments of an heavenly spouse, accompanied
with his blessed Mother, and S. John Evangelist, and an innumerable multitude,
both of men and women Saints, of Celestial Courtiers and inhabitants; and in
particular, the resplendant Army of virgins, all clothed in white, who for
all the day long continued in the Monastery; and that in the same Monastery,
the Saints men and women, conuersed with the Monks and Nuns of the
Monastery; and that the Lord, coming to the bed of his spouse, and beloved,
Idem c^p. vltimo del libro 4. de la insinuacion de la diuina piedad.
he beheld her with an amorous countenance, and showed to her many favors,
and kind entertainements; and she bent her head to Christ, who leaning and
resting himself upon the bed of the sick party, with both his hands he
opened his breast, The Reader must observe (as he may perceive in the Chap.
36. of the same Author) that the same was written by the instinct of the holy
Ghost, which promises to them that shall read it, admirable benefits.
and manifested it to her, and said: I will now free thee, from the bands of
the flesh, and present thee to my self, as the treasure and joy of my heart,
to enjoy thy sweet and pleasing company etc.) Wherefore as I said, if this
reason be of force in such like books, who can be so shameless, as to
deny, but that it must needs be much more preualent in the books of the
holy Scripture, which the holy Ghost himself inspired into his servants the
Prophets and Apostles, who writ them to open our understandings, and make
them sacred and holy.

And now it is time that we come to the other Granada, who as it seems, has
converted his sweet and pleasant grains, into fearful and thundering bullets,
not so piercing and mortal to us, as to the Roman Church it self: For he
applies himself purposely, to refute the vanity of that propounded calumny,
with as much vehemence and spleen, as if his own life therein concurred.
Granada en el preambulo, de la segurda part, de la Introduccion del Symbolo.
This Author says, how others object, that by good reading, many take an
occasion to run into many errors: To this I make answer, That there is
nothing so good (...) perfect, which humane malice may not deprave and abuse.
What doctrine can be more exact and infallible, then that of the Gospels and of
S. Paul's Epistles? and yet notwithstanding all the heretics that ever have
been, both modern, and of ancient times, have pretended to ground their
heresies upon this so perfect doctrine: whereupon the Apostle S. Peter, making
mention of S. Paul's Epistles, he says, that there are in them many very
difficult things to be understood, so that many wicked men took occasion out
of this, to plant their errors. And further he adds, that heretics labor
to maintain themselves, out of all the books of the holy Scriptures,
wreathing and wresting them to color and cloak their errors. And besides
this, what is there in humane life, so necessary and profitable, but if we
forecast some inconveniences that may ensue, we may think it fit to be
rejected? Thus fathers should never marry their daughters, because many wives
die in childbed; and other some, are cut off by the cruelty of their husbands:
let there be no Physic, nor Physicians, because many times, both they and
their medicines kill: there must be no swords nor arms, seeing men every day
kill one another: men must not cross the Seas, in that there happen every day
so many shipwrackes both of men and goods: all study in Theology must be laid
apart, because all heretics abusing and adulterating of the same, take
occasion to ground their heresies and errors thereupon. But what do I speak of
earthly things, seeing even those heavenly are not exempted from their
inconveniences? What can be more expedient and requisite for the use and
government of this world, then the Sun? and yet how many men have dyed and
grown sick, through the immoderate heat thereof? But why do I insist in
these things? when even from the goodness, mercy, and passion of Iesues Christ
our Savior, (which are the fundamental causes of all our happiness) evil
men presume to persevere and continue in their sins? Unto all that, formerly
delivered, I will annexe this one thing of great consideration; and therefore I
demand, What more efficacious and piercing motive can there be, to convince all
understanding, and reduce them to true faith, then the resurrection of Lazarus,
who had lien buried four days, and stunke, whom the Lord raised up again
with these words; Lazarus come forth. And this was sufficient, that neither
the gates of death, nor the ligatures and bands wherewith he was bound, could
keep him in his grave. What heart can there be so hard and obdurate, that will
not be mollified, and yield to the faith and belief of that Lord, by means of
this so inexplicable a miracle? But O the incredible malice of humane hearts!
this so wonderful a miracle is not only not preualent, to subdue the hearts
of the high Priests and Pharisees, but further here-from, they were excited to
condemn to death the worker of so renowned a miracle: wherewith not being
content, they sought to kill Lazarus, because many by his means came to
believe in the Savior. Wherefore, if humane malice be so implacable, as that
it here-from assumed a motive and stimulation to so great a wickedness, who
can produce any argument from that abuse, wherewith wicked men alienate and
adulterate good things, wringing and wresting them to their corrupt and
profane wills, that hereby a good should be prevented and cut off? To this
demand made by so famous an Author, (whose reasons all these I have delivered,
were) I would feign have the Roman Antichrist make answer, who prohibites the
reading of the sacred Scriptures to an innumerable sort of the vulgar,
depriving them hereby, of infinite many benefits, which from the reading of the
same do accrue, in that some abuse and alienate them. This Author still
prosecutes, let all this be spoken, that men may discern and understand, that
there can be nothing so good, but it is exposed to some inconveniences, yet
procured rather by the abuses of men, then out of the original nature and
quality of things. And yet for all this, there is no reason, that through the
disorder and misprision of a few, many and good men should loose the fruit and
emolument of wholesome doctrine. All which our blessed Savior plainly
intimated unto us, in the parable of the Cockle, where he says, Matthew. ^^.
that the other servants demanding of their master, whether they should weed
out the bad weeds or no, that so they might not be prejudicial to the good
seed, he answered them, that they should let them alone, because it may well
be, that in plucking up the weeds, together with the, they might irradicate the
good ears. In which parable he points out unto us, that the privilege and
immunities of the good ought so tenderly to be reserved, that many
discommodities are to be digested, rather then that good men should be hurt or
damnified. If Christ himself taught us thus much, why does the Pope, who
vaunts himself to be his Vicar, both teach and practice the contrary? Why
does he deprive good men of the divine Scriptures, and therein of a treasure
inestimable, in that some particular bad men use them ill? seeing he is not a
vice god upon earth, (as with a brazen face he entitles himself) but a
vice-deuill of hell, whose works he performs, and whom men obey in every
thing; whereof (except he speedily repent) he shall one day receive the just
reward and recompense. But yet, let us proceed a little further with this
Author: Unto all this I add (says he) that sound doctrine is so far from
being a motive and stimulation unto error, that rather it is the means to
confirm and strengthen us in our faith: wherefore I thought good, here to
insert a thing, which a certain Lord of the holy Inquisition of these
kingdoms of Portugal related to me, the which is very behoouefull to prove
the benefit of good and discreet reading, and the discommoditie that grows
from bad and iniudiciall perusing of books. This Lord therefore, reported to
me, that a man came to that sacred Court, to require mercy, who freely
confessed, that applying himself to read corrupt and vicious books, his true
faith was thereby so shaken, as that he firmly believed he had no more to
answer for, but to die like a beast. But afterward, upon a special occasion
that fell out, or rather in that it was so ordained by divine providence, he
began again to read and peruse books of good instruction; by means whereof,
he was released of the blindness wherein he formerly stood. This very Author
still annexeth another example of a Moore, whose eyes God opened by the help
of good and commendable reading, even as it happened to the Queen of
Ethiopia's Eunuch, by reading in the Prophet Esaias. Wherefore if the benefits
growing from good reading be so divine, and that of corrupt and vicious
reading, so hurtful and pernicious, let me ask of the Papists one question;
From whence comes it, that bad reading is permitted to all in general, and the
good only to a few in number? If they know and believe that the Eunuch, being
one in the rank of secular men, attained to the understanding of Christian
verity, by reading of the holy Scriptures, and that the forementioned
Spaniard, by the reading of profane books lost his faith, and became an
Atheist, how comes it, that the Lords Inquisitors after heretical errors, do
not consent that there one only book of the divine Scriptures may be published
in the vulgar tongue, that so secular men, like to that Eunuch, may daily read
in it, whereas they tolerate an infinite company of obscene and vicious books,
permitting them to come into every man's hands? If they take away the holy
Scriptures from the popular sort, which might be very profitable for many, and
no prejudice to any, (except they assume it from their own corruption and
blindness) under color and pretext, that some ground their errors out of
them, how is it, that they suffer so many bad and profane books, that can
benefit none, but (as experience continually teaches) are the instruments of
many evils? I cannot conceive what answer the Papists will return hereunto:
but this I am assured of, that as the Pope, the Inquisitors, and great Prelates
know well, that the vulgar sort can never possibly come to the sense and
feeling of that miserable servitude, whereunto they have reduced them, by the
means of depraved and petulant books, they therefore indifferently permit
them to be read of all men, making no account of the errors and vices, that
increase through the reading of such books, in that they speak not against
the Authority of the Pope nor of the Inquisitors: But by reason they know,
that the holy Scripture is a clear and manifest light, that will reveal their
works and false doctrine, they use all the care and circumspection possible,
that the vulgar sort may not read them, and so come to discern the
insupportable yoke they have laid upon them. This, out of all doubt is the
true reason, why they suppress the reading of holy Scriptures, and tolerate
those that are corrupt and bad.

And that this may the more clearly appear, I thought fit here to set down
somewhat of much, which diverse Spanish Doctors have vtter'd against profane
books, and the great prejudice that every day grows in Spain, by the reading
of them. Father Torres, amongst other things affirms, Torres, en la Filosofia
de principes. page 943.
that many of those books usually read at this day throughout all Spain, are
obscene and dishonest, and are good for nothing else, but to make Pandors and
secret Bawdes, teaching them to sin, and to send many souls into hell. These
pernicious books have a number of followers and well-willers; but good
writings that treat of virtue and piety, he close hid up in corners: for these
ill books, like a canker, enter and seize upon all parts of the mind, and so
irradicate and pluck up the root and ground of all virtues; but the Lords
Inquisitors wink at all this. Father Joseph de Jesus Maria, is very admirable
upon this subject, Fr. Joseph cap. 13. del lib. de la castidad.
exhibiting unto us many strong and unanswerable reasons, wherewith to subdue
and overcome our adversaries: First of all therefore he says, that in many
books, which are much read in the vulgar tongue, and come into the hands of
the common people in Spain, they use idolatrous speeches and phrases, wherein
the Christian Faith and Religion is scandalized, and the religious and godly
customs of Catholic people: That books of Poetry, are full of blasphemies,
and vent more error, then ever the Gentiles did in their writings. All this,
the same Author affirms, and daily experience shows no less, which the Lords
Inquisitors know well enough; and yet notwithstanding all this, they permit
unto all, and except none, the reading of such books: but to read the word of
God in secular men, they repute it for a crime worthy of death, and as an
offense of that nature, they punish it. This very Author says further, That in
those books there are not only found many violent instigations to vice, but
also masters and skillful pedagogues, who teach and instruct, how to attempt
and prosecute them; yea which is more, they make a bed for heresies. But this
last (though it be infallibly true) he confirms with a very gross and
explodible lie, speaking thus: When impious Luther (says he) began to
disperse his poison in Germany, Satan being desirous to bring into France
likewise this heresy, when he found so maine a resistance in that most
Christian kingdom, he labored with subtle policy, to have the Fables of
Amadis of Gaul translated into French, that they might infect and taint the
minds of Noble people, they being best read, and most curious in reading, and
to prepare them for the embracing of heresies; and so by the tickling delight
of lascivious loves, of fabulous feats of Arms, and magical Incantations, the
minds of men in a small time were so poisoned and defiled, that no discourse
passed among ingenious and curious people but of matters ridiculous and
fabulous. And that when the devils ministers perceived, how this Translation
was so well received and entertained, they return again, to sow abroad other
dreams and Fables, translating daily more immodest and fabulous books, which
did so obfuscate and darken young wits, and so notably polluted and stained
their wills, that men retired themselves from the reading of good books, and
divine Histories, and even the Name of Christ came to be less called upon.
Thus far extend the words of that Author; wherein, first, matter is ministered
to us of no slender laughter, in his imputing to the Protestants of France,
(whom he calls heretics) that which justly at this day may be rather imposed
on the Papists, and those practices current and in use amongst them, as the
same Author himself complains, together with many others, and daily proofs
and trials would inform us, though they had been silent. For who is ignorant,
that in the Papacy, divine Histories are exiled and banished, and profane, and
fabulous Romances brought in, in their stead? No man there, mentions the
calling on the Name of Christ, but upon some image of stone, or wood, of his
Mother, or some other Saint. And who knows not, that throughout all the
reformed Churches, they are conversant generally in reading freely the holy
Scriptures, and that only the sacred Name of Christ is in every place, and of
all men called upon; and therefore in this respect, the Pope, and the
Inquisitors, prosecute them with fire and sword, endeavoring that those Saints
by them canonized, should be prayed unto, and Christ's holy Name quite and
clean forgotten? But leaving this for another place, let it be lawful for us
once more, to demand of the Papists, What is the reason, that they
understanding how these fantastical and idle books, brought so much detriment
and hurt to the faithful in France, that as wise men (whose property it is,
as we say in our Spanish tongue, Escarmentar en cabeca agena, To be afraid by
other men's harms) they do not banish out of the Papacy, the original and
cause of so many evils, yet this they not only not do, but every day they
bring in and multiply these brutish and sordide books? For laboring so
industriously and studiously, to remove out of Spain, the holy Scriptures in
the vulgar tongue, the same being revealed by God, neither containing so much
as one letter, that justly demerits either blame or reprehension, but being
written only and wholly for our instruction and benefit: wherefore, I say,
using such rigor and severity to this divine Book, do they indifferently and
generally permit all men, to read an infinite number of base and pernicious
books, replenisht and stufft with blaspheraies, and implying many Heresies,
whereunto they attract, and draw the most godly and zealous, as our
Adversaries themselves frankly confess, and acknowledge. Till our Adversaries
give a full answer to this demand, it will not be altogether unfit, here to
set down, what learned Doctor Leon says, after he has complained, that one
of the greatest calamities of our times, was, that men are grown to such an
inclination and disposition, (he speaks of the Papists, and more particularly
of the Spaniards) that the holy Scriptures, which at other times, were wont to
be a cure and remedy, Leon en el prologo de lot nombres de Christo.
are become an infectious poison, for this prejudice (he says) they have
wrought, that by the presumption and pride of the vulgar, they have made the
reading of the Scriptures unprofitable for them, and so another discommoditie
ensues, I cannot tell whether I may justly say a worser, for they betake
themselves, without any bridle or restraint, to the reading of many books, not
only vain, and friuoulous, but importantly obnoxious and hurtful; the which
as by the Art of the devil, have in number encreast more in our age then any
other, for want of such as were good and virtuous, and the same has happened
to us, as many times it does with the earth, which, when it cannot bring forth
corn, it produces thorns; and I affirm, that this second damage, does in
some sort surmount the other, because in the sacred Scriptures, men only lose
a great Instrument and means, to be good, but in these profane Authors they
find the occasions, to be evil and wicked, for in the first only the Rudder
and Stern of good government is taken away, and in the other fomentation and
nourishment is exhibited to vices. For as S. Paul alleges, evil words
corrupt good manners, and an obscene and vnpure book, which is daily before
the eyes of him that reads it, what will it not effect? or how is it possible
he should be clear from gross and vnwholso^e blood, that is maintained with
nothing but corruption, and poison. And in truth, if we do but intentiuely
observe it, and be just and upright judges, we cannot but give sentence, that
the greatest part of our deprau'd and debausht customs (which we daily see
and meet withal) proceeds from the continual reading of these profane and
scurrillous books, with a relish of Gentilisme and Insidelitie, which those
that are Zealous of Gods service find in them, and I know not, whether in any
age amongst Christian people, a greater plague has been proved. In my
judgment, the beginning the root, and the absolute original of these evils,
consists in these books. This and much more, the same famous Doctor writ upon
this particular, and questionless would have spoken much more, and far more
significantly, had it not been for that same cruel, barbarous, and inhumane
Inquisition of Spain, in which most stinking and obscure prison, he remained
seven years, in the Town of Valladolid, where (as all the world knows) he
underwent great troubles, afflictions, and torments, because he uttered in a
Sermon, a Proposition, that was not pleasing to the Pope of Rome, though it was
but Christian and true, whereof, peradventure we will entreat more at large
in another book. Now, it remains, we only observe how the sacred Scriptures
are not prohibited the faithful, to contain them within a certain moderation
and government, because this impertinent and severe prohibition (as the
Papists themselves well know) is a cause, of greater and more pernicious
Inconveniences. And who can be so credulous as to believe, that to make bad
men good, they must needs deprive them of the holy Bible, which is the only
Instrument to make them good? when they freely permit dishonest and immodest
books, which are the proper Instruments of sin and impiety? Surely he
cannot but be a fool that believes this. But let us grant, that they who
took from the vulgar the use and reading of the Scriptures, pretended herein
to remove occasion and means of breeding errors; yet, when long experience
had taught them, that,

Inci erunt in scillam cupientes vitare Caribdim: which is, that studying to
prevent one prejudice, they brought in a thousand, (seeing through default of
the holy Scriptures, profane books crept in) why, I say, Dato vno absurdo
miltae sequuntur.
did they not labor to suppress so pernicious a p^ague, by restoring them,
and excluding the other, seeing natural reason informs us, that of two
necessary evils, we should ever embrace the least: how much more in that the
holy Scriptures are good of themselves, and remote from all evil. There is no
doubt, but if that prohibition simply aimed at the good and benefit of the
faithful, they would have been so; but there is all the matter, in that they do
not so much seek the profit and benefit of the faithful, but rather their
own particular ends and interests; the which consists mainely, inconcealing
from the people the knowledge of truth, which they might attain unto by
means of the holy Scriptures, and that they should not seek and affect to
understand it, they have always entertained them, with the scumme and dregs
of idle and profane books: the reading whereof is not only frankely permitted
them, but further it is a cause, that opposite to the wills and desires of
good men, they are perused and read over by all; of which, amongst others, the
former mentioned Father Joseph, complains in these words: Fr. Joseph ibid.
fol. 796.
The abusiue and poysonable practice of evil books, allowed of in Spain,
from whence the greatest part of corrupt customs proceeds, comes not from the
allowance and toleration of the Laws, nor from the King, because they have
ordained sufficient remedies against this damage and prejudice, but rather
from the negligence and carelessness of Judges, both Secular and
Ecclesiastical, in executing such just and good Laws, and they, whom this
most of all did concern, were the Bishops and Prelates of the Church, who being
to give daily notice hereof to Kings and temporal Lords, that they might help
and join together, for the banishing out of the Commonwealth these fountains
of pollution and uncleanness; they did not only not do it, but Kings and
Princes exhorting them to purge and cleanse the Kingdom of this letiferous
poison, they yet live, and persevere in the same, with most pernicious
carelessness and forgetfulness, not with out special and singular danger to
their own consciences, and the souls of their poor subjects. A little after,
the same Author says, it is a lamentable pity, that so many sage and wise
considerations having been entered into, to establish these just Laws, which
was (to remove out of their Studies, and Libraries these hurtful books) so
many Petitions preferred by the Sollicitors of the Kingdom, so many meetings
and consultations with the Lords of the Counsel, with such a number of
manifestations written and published, touching the Kinggs pleasure in this
behalf, it could never be once put in execution, the urgent necessity of
this execution being so material and important, what shall we say to this?
but only, that the Pope, Bishops, and Fathers of the Faith, conniue at this
perdition, seeing neither the King, nor the whole Kingdom can so far prevail
with them, as to execute such just, behoofefull and beneficial Laws; in all
other respects they being so sedulous, industrious and circumspect in purging
(as they say) the books and writings of the holy Doctors of the Church, (not
exempting herein the Scriptures divine) as appears in a published book, called
Index expurgatorius. All this we have produced, by reason of that, which
Father Granada says, he heard from an Inquisitor, and he himself alleges
it, to show the great damage that proceeds from books of corrupt doctrine
and instruction, and the inexplicable emolument and profit, deriuing from
books of good and virtuous Argument; it now remains that we should conclude
and shut up this discourse, with the very words which the same Granada uses,
in the finishing of his discourse: Laws, and just Tribunalls, look not so
much upon particulars as to generals, that is to say, not what may happen to
particular persons, but what generally concerns the good of all, who, in no
reason ought to perish, through the abuse and disorder of some, neither in like
manner do they aim, at the particular prejudice which things procure, if the
general benefits be greater then the preiudices: as we may perceive in
Navigations at Sea, for if the damages of shipwreck be great and important yet
the benefits of Navigations are far greater.

These are the principal reasons which our Adversaries produce, against the
public use and reading of the holy Scriptures, the rest are so weak and
frivolous, as they deserve not to have any more time spent in propounding them,
for that would be as much as to refute them; and so the time we should spend
in them, will be better gained, in setting down two reasons, which besides the
other before alleged, show plainly to our view, and as it were with the
pointing of a finger, that the Pope depriues not the vulgar of the Bible, to
do them good, but rather to avoid and shun his own precipice, with which
we will close and shut up this Treatise.

The first reason is, because (as Father Luys de Granada says) all the study
and care of our capital enemy is, Granada en el preambulo de la 2. part de
la introduceion del Symbol.
to bereave us of this light of the word of God, and he confirms it thus: The
first thing the Philistines performed, when they had Sampson in their power,
was to pluck out his eyes; and when they had done this, they found no
difficulty in doing whatsoever else they meant to lay upon him, even to the
making of him grind in a Mill. And this Author adds, of the same people it
is written, that they were very careful and vigilant to procure that there
might be no Forges amongst the people of Israel, but that having need of any
such things, they should repair unto their Country to have them, and to make
use of their Forges, because the people of Israel by this means, remaining
unfurnished and disarmed, they might the more easily suppress and overcome
them. With the same Author therefore, we may demand, what be the Arms of a
Christian warfare, but the Word of God? and still with the same Author we
persevere and say; our enemies in many parts, have stripped and bereaved us of
these Arms, and in stead of them, left unto us the books of their hatred and
malice, which are obscene and profane books, instigators unto vice, all which
they do, that the people hereby remaining disarmed, they might ceaze upon
them, and dispose of them and their occasions, according to their own wills
and pleasures, imitating herein, that sacrilegious and abominable King
Antiochus, who commanded the books of Gods Law, to be torn in pieces, and
burnt; and to kill any one, in whose hands at any time they were found. Pacheco
(...) discursos, fol. 732.
This he did, because (as Father Pacheco observes) the wicked man saw, that for
his wicked dessignes and intentions, it was a behoofefull thing, to extingush
and suppress the sacred books: And this, and no other, is the lively reason,
why the Pope and the Inquisitors so expressly prohibit them, and take away the
lives of such faithful men, that desire to read them in their own tongue:
like another Antiochus, This Lie you may read in Fonseca, en la segunda part
del tratado del amor de Dios, cap. 2. and in fr. Luys de Granada, en el
preambulo, de la 2. part de la introduccion.
doing as he did, which most impudently and falsely they would put upon, and
apply unto Henry the eighth, King of England; affirming that he took from
religious men the holy Books, knowing that the reading of them was as
powerful and trenchant Arms. Undoubtedly, if I shall express what I have by
experience found true, in this most noble and flourishing Kingdom of England,
about this particular, it will be wonderful different, and contrary to that
which we see daily practiced at this day, in all governments living under the
obedience of the Roman Church; For whereas there, upon grievous and cruel
penalties, the common people are prohibited the reading of the sacred
Scriptures, because the Pope, and the rest of the Prelates know well that they
would find matter enough in them, wherewith to convince and condemn, their
false doctrines, here all faithful and Christian men, are exhorted to read
and meditate on them; nay, they are sharply rebuked if they do not so: For
here neither the Bishops, nor other Prelates and Ministers of the Church have
any fear, least the people should find their condemnation, whereas in other
places, this Divine light of the holy Books is banished, as Father Granada
complaynes and laments; Granada ibid:
but in this Realm it shines and lightens in the most hidden and sesecret
corners thereof. There Prelates are destitute of all knowledge, yea, in so
gross a manner, as that some of them never so much as saw the Bible, en c. 6.
as Father Estella complains, but here there is scant a child of a dozen
years old, who has not read and read it often. In other kingdoms, many of
the Pastors do not understand the Divine writings, and which is more, they
contemn them, or at least seem to make of them but a light and slender
esteem, neither do they retain any good opinion of those that do understand
them, as most learned Doctor Leon affirms. Leon enel prolego, de los nombres
de Christo.
Here, all Pastors in general, but especially the most reverend Bishops, are
very conversant in the same study of Divine books, every one highly
esteeming, to study and understand them, and he is reputed but a bad
Christian, and a worse Pastor that does otherwise. And finally, in those
parts, like wicked Antiochus, they put those Seculars to death that read the
holy Scripture: but here like religious and zealous Christians, they commend
and remunerate such as read them. This, because it is well known to all, I
do not here particularly specify in any large relation, because experience
has taught me the truth thereof. From whence I gather, that what the Papists
faigne and devise of Henry the eight, is an infernal lie, forged by
themselves; for how can it stand with any reason, that to bring in a Religion,
that approoues nothing more in the faithful, then the reading of the holy
Scriptures, Henry the eight should prohibit them, and therefore what they
falsely father upon Henry the eight, rather may be applied to the Roman
Church, where the Scriptures are forbidden upon pain of death, for no other
end, but the same for which Antiochus the Great, suppressed and forbade the
Book of God.

The second reason which shows that the Pope forbids the Scriptures, not
so much for the peoples good as to shun his own shame, is this ensuing. The
Pope of Rome, knowing, that it has ever been a commendable custom in the
Christian Church, that public Readers should daily impart to all the people,
the reading of the Prophets and other books of the holy Scripture, and that in
a Tongue which they understood, (as may be collected out of S. Ambrose upon the
fourth Chapter to the Ephesians, and Doctor Sandoual well notes it, Sandonal en
il tratado deloficio Ecclesiastico, page 12.
as we shall show by and by) and withal perceiving on the one part, that he
could not quite put down this good custom, and without apparent scandal; and
on the other side, considering, that if the reading of the Scripture were
continued to be permitted in the vulgar tongue, his tyrannical Empire would
soon fall to the ground, (because it is impossible that one should read, or
hear read the holy Scripture, but he must discern the falsehood of the Popes
doctrine) hereupon he craftily devised a middle way to effect his purpose,
which was (as we have said) principally to conceal his own shame, more then
to effect the good of the people. First, he ordained indeed that the Scripture
should be read to the people, and thus far he cunningly cumplied with the
ancient Christian Church, and by this means subtly cast a veil and mist
over his treachery: but secondly, he so ordained reading of the Scripture,
with such a limitation and check, that in effect (though the vulgar cannot
discern it) he utterly overthrows the practice of the ancient Christian
Church, while he restraines the reading of it to a tongue not understood
vulgarly, that is, to the Latin only: which, what is it else in effect, then
not to have it read at all? and if so, it is then most apparent, that the
peoples understandings are deprived of an inualuable benefit; and it is not
likely that all this business should be made for benefit to no body: and if to
any body, either to the people, or himself; not to the people (as has been
showed) ergo, to himself: and what that is, appears clearly, though he
endeavor to keep it in the dark, which may best be effected in a tongue not
understood: but such is the Popes subtlety herein, that the poor seduced
people cannot suspect him all this while, nor consequently complain or seek
for remedy, because the Pope still bears them in hand with fair pretensions,
that he still keeps the ancient custom of the Church on foot, though indeed
he does nothing less; for the ancient Church ever propounded the Scriptures
to the common people, in a tongue known and understood of all, as is evidently
proved by these ensuing words of Sandouall. Justinius Martyr (says he)
relates of the Christians of the Primitive Church, Idem. page 20.
that on the Lords day they assembled together, and Lectures were read unto
them out of the Prophets and Apostles; and when the Lection was ended, the
Pastor admonished them, to perform in life and practice, what they had heard
read: whereupon it is more then probable, that the said Lecture and Reading was
in the vulgar tongue, well understood of all the Auditorie; for otherwise, the
Pastor should have been but a fool, in urging them to perform, what they
neither conceived nor understood; because, according to that Philosophical
Axiom, Nihil volutum, quin praecognitum. Father Francisco Antonio also
confesses as much, El Pa. Francisco Antonio, fol. 91. de sus consideraciones
sobre los mysterios de la missa.
and that in plainer terms and words, as in these following: The Epistles of
the Apostles were read in the presence and hearing of all the faithful, so as
they might be heard not only by the learned, but also by the vulgar; not only
by old men, but also by young. Then which, what could be spoken more plainly?
and indeed it does so far convince the consciences of the Romanists, that as
you see, they cannot choose but confess it, and therefore accordingly the
Papists at this day (that they might seem to continue the ancient custom) not
being altogether so impudent as altogether to abrogate it, they make pretenses
(but all are but deceitful shadows) and teach that in the Lectures and
Readings of the holy Scriptures in the Church of Rome at this day, all the
people should understand, even as Father Marquez clearly confesses, Marquez en
el resoro de ignorantes, f. l. 219.
in these words: One of the principallest reasons, why we are commanded to
hear Mass on Festival days, is, because in the Epistles, Gospels, prayers,
and other things uttered in the Mass, mention is made of all the chiefest my
steries of our Redemption, because faithful men hearing them, they might be
committed to their memories, and they not grow forgetful of such benefits.
This is taken out of Father Marquez. Now if it be true (as is confessed and
pretended) that the people should commit to memory, and not forget the things
they hear, how comes it to pass that they do not so? Is it not because they
understand not? and is not the cause hereof, their hearing it in an unknown
tongue? and does not this cut off all the benefits pretended, and leave the
people in the same case as if they had no Scriptures at all? For as reason
informs us, and that great learned Doctor Ledesma teaches us, Fr. Pedro de
Ledesma enel tratado 1. de lase christiana, eap. 2.
He that can utter a thing in Latin, if he understand not the Latin, it is
the same as if he knew it not at all. Wherefore in the Readings of the Roman
Church, it is only pretended, and no more, that the people understand: but if
you ask them what, or how they understand, their last refuge and all the
answer that is left is, That they understand what the Church does, and that
implicitly. Moreover, for the better prevailing of this delusion, and the
entertainment of this pretense, the Papists themselves believe, that in the
Mass Christ preaches unto them his Gospel, Aluarado en su art de oien viuir,
lib. 40.3.
by the mouth of the Priest, as Aluarado notes, and also by the mouth of the
Deacon, in the same, which they call the high Mass, as the Gloss speaks,
super caput perlectis, 25. de in sanctam 29. Rodriguez tom. 2. page 101. desus
obras morales.
which Master Rodriguez alleges, who teaches the same. The Papists do
likewise teach, that the Epistle delivered in the Mass, is like unto a letter,
which God sends unto men, to reveal unto them his will, and what he requires
at their hands, and that the Deacon when he reads the Letter, or the Priest
when he reads it in the Mass, finds the whole will of God therein employed and
intimated, Puente 4. tom. fol. 234.
as Father Puente speaks. And moreover Puente annexeth, that this is after the
same manner, 2. Esdr. 8.
as in the book of Esdras is expressed, that the Levites, Legerunt in libro
Legis Dei distinct, and aperte ad intelligendum: and intellexerunt cum
legeretur. If this be granted, I would feign have the Papists themselves
answer me; To what end should Christ preach his Gospel unto men, but to the
end they might understand? for there is no reason to speak, when that which is
delivered and spoken is not apprehended nor understood. As S. Augustine
speaks, Tena in Isagog. in totam sacr. Serip. fol. 318.
and conformable to him, the Bishop of Tortosa; The reason hereof themselves
do yield: quia non prodest locutionis integritas, quam non sequitur,
intellectus audientis. And Christ our Lord, speaking of a prophecy in these
words; qui legit, intelligat: for if he covet not to understand it, his reading
will be to small purpose, as Father Puente notes, Puente ibid. fol. 578.
and observes. And how is it probable, that Christ should intimate and declare
unto them his will, by means of the Epistle, when they understand not, what is
therein comprehended. This, as S. Paul says, is rather a breathing into the
air, then an instructing of the people. It is (as we usually say in our
Spanish tongue) predicar en desierto; to preach in the desert: For as the
precedent Bishop alleged says, this comes to pass, when either that which
is delivered is not understood, or that doctrine which is preached, is not
obeyed. This is not a manifesting of Gods will unto men, Tena in geg. in tota.
Scrip. sacr. fol. 320.
by the mouth of the Priest, but a speaking of the Priest only to God alone,
(if so be the Priest understand what himself reads, otherwise no;) because,
as the Apostle teaches, qui loquitur lingua ignota, non hominibus, sed Deo
loquitur: Deo, quia intelligit eum, non hominibus qui non percipiunt eum: as
the said Bishop notes very well, upon that same very place of the Apostle:
conformable to whom, Tena, ibid.
Father Hurtado proves, and preaches, quod, quando quis Verba facit, apud
hominem ignorantem, suae linguae, proprie loquendo non loquitur: the reason
hereof is, quia actualis loquutio, est actualis significatio rei, and
expressio, non est autem actualis significatio sine actuali perceptione
audientis: and he confirms it by this example, quia ramus appensus, non
significat aliquid actu, nisi quando, actu ex illo cognito, deuenitur in
cognitionem Vini: nec ramus est signum iumento, sed potatori. From all this
heretofore expressed, I collect, that the Pope, more through force and fear,
then consent or will, propounds the Scriptures in the Church to the people;
and this he does in Latin, to the end they may not conceive and understand
them. Wherein he goes quite contrary to the order and course held in the
Primitive Church, before he began to exercise his tyrannies upon men; which
very order of the Primitive Church, is now observed in England, and throughout
all the Reformed Churches, both conformable to reason, the Commandments of
God, and Apostolical instruction, which already we have sufficiently proved,
and will do more at large, if God permit me, in another place.

Out of all this formerly produced, I conclude, that the Pope forbids the holy
Bible to the common people, not so much to reprehend them within the bounds of
sobriety, as to retain them in gross and palpable ignorance; not to prevent
errors in the faithful, as to nourish and maintain his own; not to benesite
souls, but to empty purses; not to bridle the pride of his Subjects, but to
loose the raines to his own unbridled appetites, and of a private Roman
Bishop, to make himself the absolute spiritual Head, and high Priest of the
whole world: thus like another Lucifer, he erecting and raising up himself
above all that which is called God. Neither does he prohibit the Bible, the
precious pearl of Gods word, because it ought not to be given to swine, but in
that himself is one, and would have others to be so too: not because the same
is dark and obscure, but in that he, like a close and sly thief, loves
darkness better then light, for the attaining to his proper ends and
desseignes, and the more easily to tyrannize over the world.

But they that are desirous and zealous of their salvation, ought with a
grateful and cheerful heart, to receive so high and inexplicable a benefit,
out of Gods divine bounty conferred on us, in declaring unto us by the sacred
word, his heavenly will and pleasure, (which is pleasing and acceptable to him,
and the same odious and offensive to the other,) that so following the one, and
flying the other, we may both li^^ and die in his love and favor, and by this
means attain to be partakers of his glory; the greatness of which benefit,
and supereminencie of which honor, Moses declared unto the people in these
express words, What Nation is there so noble and happy, that enioyes the same
Ceremonies, Judgments, and Laws of God, which I will this day set before your
eyes? And in the Psalm 148. the royal Prophet yields praise unto God,
saying, that he had denounced his word to Jacob, and his Judgments to Israel:
which grace and favor he had not showed to any other nation of the world. So
as this high and special favor showed us by God, in communicating himself
unto us by his holy word, ought to bind us to be the more careful in seeking
him out, even as he commands us; and that we might the better do it, he
gave order, they should be diuulged in our vulgar tongues, and the holy Doctors
exhorts to the same; moving us thereunto by the example of those in the
Primitive Church, and others that lived many ages after, and also we are
hereunto invited, by the rare and innumerable benefits which do daily proceed
therefrom, derived from the true knowledge we have therein of God, and of his
Son Jesus Christ, if we desire to be known of him with approbation, and
acceptance, and that note us to be his elect, through the obligation wherein
we all stand bound, to observe his sincere service and worship, submitting all
those temptations which ordinarily assail us, to his holy will and most sacred
Law, if we mean to obtain victory over our enemies, gross ignorance and
blindness, and without which this light, must needs have a great power and
domination over us. Finally it binds us, never to let this sacred book of the
holy Scriptures to be out of our hands; the reading and meditation therein,
being our most important felicity and happiness, as may plainly appear by
all that which has been said, and Fonseca teaches no less, Fonseca segunda
part tratado del amor de Dios, fol. 57.
who is yet living in the Spanish Court, and esteemed for one of the greatest
Divines, and rarest Preachers of our time.

Laus Deo.
Los Libros de que he sacado lo que en este tratado se contiene son los que se
siguen.
The Books out of which this Treatise is gathered, are these following.
HIstoria Pontifical y catclica compuesta por el Doctor Yllescas en Madrid.
An^o 1613.

Tesoro de ignorantes compuesto por el P. Fr. Chrystoual Marquez, impresso en
Madrid. An^o 1614.

Bienes del honesto traba^o, y dan^os de la ociosidad por el P. Pedro Guzman en
Madrid. An^o 1614.

Guia espiritual del P. Puente en Madrid. An^o 1614.

Obras del Maestro Gracian, en Madrid. An^o 1616.

Tomo primero de la historia general de Espan^a por el P. Mariana en Madrid.
An^o 1623.

Consideraciones sobre los mysterios de la missa por el P. Francisco Antonio en
Madrid. An^o 1598.

Tomoprimero del Art de bien viuir por el P. Maestro Aluardo en Valladolid.
An^o 1613.

El Maestro Christiano del Maestro Reynosa en Valladolid. An^o 1618.

Obras morales del Maestro Fr. Manuel Rodriguez en Valladolid. An^o 1621.

Luz de las marauillas que Dios obra en el alma por el P. Maestro Fr. Leandro
de Granada en Valladolid. An^o 1607.

Segundo Tomo de la perfecion por el P. Puente en Valladolid. An^o 1613.

Los Nombres de Christo por el P. Maestro Fr. Luys de Leon en Salamanca. An^o
1603.

Suma del P. Maestro Fr. Pedro de Ledesma en Salamanca. An^o 1589.

Catorce discursos sobre el Pater noster por el P. Fr. Balthazar Pacheco en
Salamanca, An^o 1594.

Vigilia magna del P. Fr. Nicolas Brauo en Salamanca. An^o 1605.

Libro del Rosario de nuestra sen^ora por el P. Arinzano en Salamanca. An^o
1903.

Tratado del officio Ecclesiastico Canonico por el Doctor Don Bernardino de
Sandoual en Toledo, An^o 1568.

Primeraparte de las excelencias de la castidad, por el P. Fr. Joseph de Jesus
Maria, en Alcala de Henares. An^o 1601.

Primera part del Libro de la vanidad del mundo, por el P. Estella en Alcala
de Henares. An^o 1597.

Insinuacion y demonstracion de la Diuina piedad por el P. Maestro Fr. Leandro
de Granada en Seuilla. An^o 1616.

Philosophia moral de Principes por el P. Torres en Burgos. An^o 1596.

La introduccion del Symbolo de la Fe por el P. Maestro Fr. Luys de Granada, en
Lerma. An^o 1619.

Tratado del Purgatorio contra Luthero, por Fr. Dimas Serpi en Barcelona. An^o
1611.

Historia de la adoracion y vso de las Imagines por el Maestro Prades en
Valencia. 1597.

Segunda part del tratado del Amor de Dios, por el P. Maestro Fonseca en
Valencia. An^o 1608.

Tomo tercero y quarto de la perfecion Christiana, por el P. Puente en
Pamplona. An^o 1616.

Segunda part del Monte Caluario, por Don Antonio de Gueuara, en Anueres. An^o
1559. Con Preuilegio.

Isagoge in totam sacram Scripturam, Autore Ludouico de Tena Episcopo
Dertusensi, en Huesca. An^o 1622.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER. M. DC. XXIV.


