The Phoenix of these late times: Or the life of Mr. Henry Welby, Esquire. who
lived at his house in Grub-street forty four years, and in that space, was
never seen by any. Aged 84. Showing the first occasion, and the reasons
thereof. Whose Portracture, you may behold, as it was taken at his death. With
Epitaphs and Elegies of the late deceased Gentleman, who lies buried in S.
Giles Church near Criple gate, London.

LONDON: Printed by N. Oaks, and are to be sold by Richard Clotterbuck at his
shop in little Britain, at the sign of the golden ball. 1637.

Mr Henry Welby, Gt. Aetatis Suae. 84.



Epitaph: Obijt Die 29 Octobris 1676.

Arabia yields a Phoenix, and but one.
England, This Phoenix, and besides him none.
To solitary Deserts boath retyer,
Not mindinge, what the World does most admire.
His Face, though it was much desyr'd by many
In forty four years was not seen by any.
She, in spyal flames, in fervent zeal he dies
And Boath in Time, new Phenixes shall rise.
The Description of this Gentleman.
THis Gentleman, Master HENRY WELBY, was forty years of age before he took
this solitary life, being eighty four years old when he dyed: those that
knew him, and were conversant with him in his former time, do report, that he
was of a middle stature, a brown complexion, and of a pleasant and cheerful
countenance: his hair (by reason no Barber came near him for the space of so
many years) was much over-growne; so that he at his death appeared rather like
an Hermit of the Wilderness, than the inhabitant of a City: His habit was
plain, and without ornament; of a sad colored cloth, only to defend him from
the cold, in which there could be nothing found, either to express the least
imagination of pride, or vainglory. The expense of his time was study, the
use he made of it, meditation: those hours he retired from reading, he spent
in prayer: He bought all books whatsoever, which came forth, only making use
of the best: such as broached controversy, he laid by, as aiming at the peace
of his own Conscience: What should I say? he dyed living, that he might live
dying; his life was a perpetual death, that his death might bring him to an
eternal life; who accounted himself no better than a Glow-worme here on
Earth, that he might hereafter shine a most glorious Saint in heaven.

Upon the Life and Death of Master Henry Welby.
IF miracles and wonders with each Nation,
Do strike the People there with admiration?
If it be so with them, tell me I pray,
Why we should not admire as well as they?
We have of late seen miracles in Nature,
Both for old age, some small, some great in stature;
I think we gap't and star'd enough at those,
In which we did our folly much disclose:
And seeing we have don't so well before,
Faith let us wonder now a little more;
For we that were so perfect at it then,
Do know the better how to do it again:
And furthermore, it is such a strange thing, that
You cannot blame a Man to wonder at:
Read, and believe it, for indeed it is true,
This Picture here presented to your view,
Does represent the subject of my verse,
The manner of his life I will rehearse.
First, having spent abroad full forty years,
Some for his pleasure, mixed with cares and fears:
Examaning himself, he then retired,
And spent the remnant that were unexpir'd
In burning flames of zealous contemplation,
All for Gods glory, and his own salvation.
He bought all sorts of books, what ere came forth,
Only made use of them of greatest worth:
If any thing amiss therein he spyed,
He would be sure to lay that book aside.
God had increased his Basket, and his store,
And he thereof gave freely to the poor:
There was to him no greater recreation,
Than fasting, praying, reading, meditation:
He closely kept himself from all men's sight,
On all occasions he his mind would write.
His life he led, for forty years and more,
Besides the forty spoken of before;
Full four and forty years; 'twas just so many,
And in that time was never seen by any.
His hair was grown, as it is figured here,
That he much like a Hermit did appear.
Though he be dead and gone, yet let his name
For ever live, with never dying fame.
J. B.

Upon the Life and Death of Master Henry Welby.
WHat age is this we live in, that does see,
And produce wonders above Antiquity?
Some Nature tax, as if our life and growth
Were unto former times inferior both.
Yet we saw one of late, that when he stood,
He looked as he were borne before the Flood.
A second, numbering days, as they should have
No end, or did defy Death, and the Grave.
A third, as if that Nature would amend,
And contract what she did before extend,
Is like a Pigmy in his height decreased,
Who now will say that Miracles are ceased?
Look farther in Men's manners, you will find
As great a disproportion in the mind:
We have a Welby, can himself immure
Within his Chamber, and there live secure
Forty odd years, and rather more, than less,
Than Israel once did in the Wilderness.
He eat no Manna, nor no fare so good,
And yet he never murmured at his food.
Flesh he abhorred, and wine; he drank small beer,
Cowes Milk and water-gruell was his cheer:
It was not avarice, nor hope of gain,
Nor love toward his heir, made him abstain:
He was no Sectary, no Anchorite,
Nor yet of that engagement, to invite
To such a strictness, vain applause to win;
Nor was it any penance for his sin:
But once upon distaste, he took an Oath,
And since all men's society did loath,
Which made him live enclosed thus; yet his purse
Was open, and the poor fared never the worse.
He read all Books, and for his recreation,
He used frequent Prayer, and Contemplation.
O who can found the thoughts that do arise
From minds so raped, and filled with ecstasies?
Thus Welby lived according to his vow:
Whose Life to us was but a Death, and now,
That he his wonted solitute may have,
He is retired to a more silent Grave.
Shackerly Marmion.

The Phoenix of these late times: Or the life of M. Henry Welby Gentleman, who
lived at his house in Gruh-street forty four years, and was never seen by
any, aged eighty four.
I AM to present you with one of that rare temperance and abstinence, that the
times past, those present, or those to come, neither have already, can now, or
but with great difficulty, may hereafter yield a more rare president. It is
said of Frederick the third Emperor, that when the Physicians told him, that
his Empress Augusta Leonora (being then barren) if she would drink Wine,
(from which she had abstained from her youth) in these cold parts of Germany,
she might easily have issue: The Emperor after some pause assented thereunto,
but said withal: Malim uxorem sterilem, quam vinosam, I had rather have a wife
subject to sterility, than vinosity: which being told unto to her, she made
answer, True it is, that I am bound in all things to obey the will of my Lord
and husband the Emperor; but if on one side he would set Wine and Life, and on
the other my Denial and Death: I wish rather to die, than to drink it.

Of abstinence there be four kinds: Natural, Miraculous, Violent, and
Voluntary: we call that natural, when either by nature we abhor certain
meats, though we be then in good and perfect health, betwixt which and us,
there is an antipathy, or else, when by some distaste or disease in the
stomach, we loath such things, as our eyes can scarce endure to look upon,
much less our palets to taste, and that is the first sort of abstinence: the
second are such supernatural fasts, which we read of the Saints of God,
Moses, and Elias, and of Christ himself in the wilderness; all which were for
the space of forty days together; and these are rather for our admiration,
than our imitation. The third, is violent, or compeld, when we fast because we
have not wherewith to eat, as it happens in famine and scarcity. The fourth,
and last is voluntary, which we undergo by our own counsel and reason, and
that is branched into diverse sorts, as Physical, Political, Religious,
superstitious, etc. which are largely disputed of by the learned.

Fasting, says one of the Fathers, purges the mind, enlightneth the senses,
subjects the flesh to the spirit, makes the heart contrite and humble,
disperseth the clouds of concupiscence, extinguishes the flames of lust, and
strengthens chastity, keeping it within the secure bounds of sincerity and
purity; it loves not verbosity, it hates superfluity, it despises insolency,
it commends humility, and informs a man's self of of his own infirmity: Fast
and Alms are the two godly assistants unto prayer, and as Saint Gregory says
in his Homilies, such an abstinence God himself approves, when that which
thou take from thy self, thou distributest to another, and when thy own
flesh is punished, the hungry stomach of thy needy neighbor is by thee
replenished. He that will fast as he ought to do, says a learned Father, must
be in prayer frequent, in judging just, in friendship faithful, in injuries
patient, in contentions temperate, from filthy speaking an aliene, to evil
deeds averse, in banquets continent, in charity simple, amongst the crafty
cautelous, amongst the sad sorrowful, amongst the evil speakers silent,
amongst the humble equal, against the proud and contumacious daring, in
suspicions sparing; for true abstinence is not to forbear meat, and to follow
vanity, but it is rather to separate thy self from sin and iniquity: Do
thou forbear flesh, and yet wilt not make it scrupulous to feed upon thy
brother? abstainest thou from wine, yet cannot refrain thy self from doing
thy neighbor injury? will thou taste no food until the evening, and spend the
whole day in oppressing the fatherless and needy? it little profits thee to
starve thy body by keeping it from necessary viands, if in the mean time thou
surfeit thy soul with superfluity of vices.

Concerning the strange and strict retired and cloystered life which this
Gentleman lived; it cannot be said of him, as it was spoke of those, who took
upon them a Monastic life of old, to be in the cloister with their bodies, and
in the streets in their mind; now within, anon abroad; to sing one thing, to
think another; to have a Psalm in their tongues, but not the sense in their
heads; to be in heart desperate, in habit dissolute, to have wandering eyes, and
wavering thoughts, the shape of one religious, the substance of one that is
irregular, and if he have but the Cucullus, (which the old Proverb says, non
facit monachum) the Hood which makes not the Monk; all is safe, all is well,
he apprehends no other hope, he aims at no other happiness.

If thou take upon thee a retired life, what make thou in the multitude? If
thou do profess silence, why pratest thou abroad amongst the people? If thou
only professest fast and reares, why do thou at any time gurmundize or
laugh? Of a retired man, his simplicity is his Philosophy: but thou will say,
that thy ambition is to teach and instruct others; thou ought rather to
weep for them, than to wrangle with them: but if thou do cover to be a
teacher, know thou what thou have to do; let the vileness of thy habit, the
sincerity of thy countenance, the innocence of thy life, and the sanctity of
thy conversation be their example and president, and that is thy best Doctrine
and Instruction.

These be the words of an Ancient and Reverent Father: These our garments
(which I weeping speak) ought only to be the Emblemes of Humility, are worn
by the separated men of these days in all pride and ostentation; nay, our own
Climes can scarcely afford us wherewith to apparel our selves. For the Monk
and the Martial man from the same piece of cloth buyeth his Hood and his
habit: But Sobriety and Solitude, with voluntary poverty, are the true
Ensigns of all monastic retirement: when those amongst us, which would
pretend themselves to be reclusists, bear their eyes, which ought to be
dejected upon the earth, to look still upon the world from whence they came,
advance them up toward the Heavens, to look upon that sublimity to which they
can never attain: when their feere, that should only be confined to the
Cloister, tire themselves in needless Iourneys, both in Court, City, and
Country: when those Tongues that are vowed unto Taciturnity and silence, are
heard in all private and public counsels: and when those hands which are
soly appropriated to supply their own necessities, are employed to snatch away
the patrimony of others.

But I come to a third thing most remarkable in this noble Gentleman, namely
his Temperance, which I have read to be thus defined: A moderation of the
desires, obedient to Reason; an affection binding and cohibiting the appetite;
a mediocrity restrayning the lusts and desires of all carnal affections; a
virtue which governs all the motions of the mind and body, so far, that
they comply and agree with the order of persons, places, and times: The parts
thereof are gentleness, liberality, gravity, sadness, severity,
shamefastness, urbanity, friendship, benevolence, or good will, concord, love,
peace, continence, clemency, charity, meekness, chastity, and honesty,
moderation, taciturnity, frugality, parsimony, goodness, purity, and
innocence. She is likewise that light which excels the darkness and
obscurity of passions; she is of all virtues that are the most wholesome; for
as well publicly as privately she does persuade humane society; she exalts
the Soul, (wretchedly thrown down in vice) and restores her to her pristine
place. She is moreover a mutual consent of the Soul, causing all disorder
and irregularity to take Reason for a rule, and discretion for a direction.
Whosoever is neither puffed up with praise, nor afflicted with adversity, nor
moved by slanders, nor corrupted by gifts, is fortunately temperate; for there
is nothing in the world better than Moderation, for by it the assaults of the
flesh are subdued, and the fruits of a good life are retained: it is rich in
losses, confident in perils, prudent in assaults, and happy in it self.

It is the property of Justice not to violate the right of any man, and it is
the Appendix of Temperance to offend no man. He cannot praise Temperance, who
proposes his chief felicity in Voluptuousness and pleasure, because it is
the grand enemy to riot and excess. Solon tells us, that it plucketh a man
from all gross affections, and carnal appetites, and lets him not exceed
either in foolish rejoicing, nor ungodly sorrowing; for the pride of the flesh
is to be curbed, and restrained with the sharp Bit of Abstinence: As no man
can be temperate, unless withal he be prudent: so no man can be held to be
truly valiant, unless withal he be temperate. Nay more, Justice cannot
subsist without it, because it is the chief point of a just man to keep his
soul free from all perturbation: I conclude with that of Plotinus, Temperance
is the Mother of all duty and honesty.

These three virtues we have strived to illustrate unto your view, but how all
these accidents meet in one subject, is the Argument now in hand. Abstinence
is a virtue, found in one man, but scarcely in another; solitude and
retyrednesse of life in few, not in many; and Temperance and Continence may be
embraced by some, not by all; yet all these eminent lines meet in this one
Center, as the circumstances following shall make apparently manifest.

This noble and virtuous Gentleman, Mr. Henry Welby, borne in Lincolne-shire,
was the eldest son of his Father, and the inheritor of a fair revenue,
amounting to a thousand pounds by the year, and upward; first metriculated in
the University, and after made a Student in one of the Innes of Court, where
being accommodated with all the parts of a Gentleman, he after retired
himself into the Country, and matched nobly unto his good liking: but
thinking with himself that the world could not possibly be contained within
this Island, and that England was but the least piece and member of the whole
body of the Universe, he, (as many, or the most of our young gentlemen do)
had a great mind to travel, as well to profit him in experience, as benefit
himself in language, and to that purpose spent some few years in the Low
Countries, Germany, France, and Italy, making the best use of his time, and not
like some phantasticke heads, learn only to drink with the Dutchmen,
complemant with the Frenchmen, some aiming only to fetch Venus from Venice,
others studying to steal Matchievel out of Florence, and generally bringing
home fashions rather than faith, and many more vices rather than virtues.

Others also by the change of the air have took their advantage to change
their religion, which is quite averse to the old Proverb, Coelum non animum
mutant qui trans mare currunt, such as cross the seas, and travel from one
Province unto another, though they receive new air, yet keep their old
minds: yet this was verified in him, who well knew no error to be so
dangerous, as that which is committed in Religion, because therein, and in the
constant profession thereof, subsisteth our perpetual happiness, and
ever-during felicity, for truth is the medicine to a troubled spirit; but if
erroniously taught, it turns into mortiferous poison.

The ancient Fathers have given their especial marks, by which, the true
religion may be known. First, that it serves the true and only God.
Secondly, that it serves him according to his word. And thirdly, that it
reconcileth that man unto him, which unfeignedly follows it: it is like an
even square or balance, the rule and Canon by which we are to direct our
lives, and the very touchstone which discerns truth from falsehood; moreover,
as vices border upon virtues, so superstition reflecteth upon religion, which
Religion does link and unite us to serve one God with willingness and
unanimity; it is the guide and conduct of all other virtues, and they who do
not exercise themselves therein, thereby to resist and oppose all false and
erroneous opinions, are but like those foolish and unexpert soldiers, who go
to war without weapons: now if all men (as this Gentleman) would but study
the truth, and strive to persevere therein, the voluptuous man would therein
seek his pleasure, the gormundizer his surfeit, the proud man his ostent, the
avaritious man his wealth, the ambitious man his glory; for it is the only
mediocrity that can fill the vacuum, and emptiness of the heart, and sat and
satisfy the desire; it serves also for a skillful Pilot to direct us the way
to heaven: when as the contrary, is that blind guide, which leads us the
broad and spacious passage to hell: Briefly, those men may be truly termed
religious, who refusing the vain and transitory pleasures of the world, wholly
set their thoughts and minds on divine contemplations: and so much for his
religion.

Now courage and courtesy are the two principal decorements that adorn a
gentleman, in neither of which he was any way deficient: For the first, as he
was ever far from giving any distaste, so he was never known to take any
affront; for valor consists not in hazarding a man's person without fear,
but to put on a noble resolution in a just cause; neither could this gentleman
bear himself so innocuously in his youth, but that he has been enforced to
make proof of his valor in the field, in which he still came off with honor
and advantage, but never boasting when he had the better, but still sparing,
when he might have spoiled, holding this maxim, that to conquer is natural,
but to pity heavenly; and it is the property of true courage to outface
danger, conquer by custom, and end with honor: it contemns all perils,
despises calamities, and conquers death: Quemcunque magnanimum videris,
miserum neges, None that is magnanimous can be miserable.

Bias holding war with Iphicrates King of Athens, and by the disaster of
War being round environed by his enemies, and his soldiers thronging about
him, and asking very timorously what he would advise them in that extremity to
do, with a bold and undaunted courage answered them again, Leave me, and
seek your own safeties if you be so minded, and make report to those that are
alive, that your General dyed with courage fighting, and I will tell to the
dead that you escaped from death basely and cowardly flying. But from his
courage, I come to his courtesy.

It is a true saying, as a Tree is known by its Fruit, the Gold by the Touch,
and a Bell by the Sound, so is a man's Birth by his bounty; his honor by his
humility, and his calling by his courtesy, which not only draws unto us the
love of strangers, but the liking of our own Countrymen: Mildness and
Courtesy are the Characters of an happy soul, which never suffers Innocence
to be oppressed. Proud looks loose hearts, but kind words gain affections:
That which is called common courtesy, is held to be no courtesy; for he that
is alike kind to all, can be loving to none; for that which is general, cannot
be drawn within the limit of a particular: But the rigor of Discipline
managing and directing this virtue, and it, again, being governed by order and
discretion, the one will illustrate and commend the other; so that neither
rigor shall seem rough, nor courtesy contemptible; for it stands in the
stead of a moderate temperance, decking and adorning a man with mildness and
generosity: for as it is the true note of Nobility, so it is the certain mark
of a Gentleman, to be courteous to strangers, patient in injuries, and constant
in the performance of all just promises; and for these he was known to be
remarkable.

To these, give me leave to add something of his liberality and bounty, whose
best honor is in relieving the poor, and greatest Happiness in living in the
thoughts of good men: and he well considered with himself, that the charity of
a liberal man more benefitteth the giver than the receiver. For bounty in
giving frail and mortal things here upon earth, receives immortal meede and
reward in Heaven. He that is able to give, and gives not, (says the Emperor
Aurelius) is no better than an enemy; and he that promises a present benefit,
and delayeth the performance thereof, is a suspicious friend. It is an old
saying, There is no greater folly, than to confer a courtesy upon an old
man, or a child, the one being likely to dye before he can requite it, the
other being so young, that he is not able to remember it: But his bounty was
known to be free, willing, and without respect of Age, Sex, or persons. But
such is the corruptnesse and abuse of these times, that the memory of a benefit
does soon vanish away, but the remembrance of an injury will stick in the
heart for ever. But this is a Law that ought to be observed betwixt the giver
and the receiver, that the one should instantly forget the gift he has
bestowed, and the other should always have it in remembrance: It also
becomes him much better to hold his peace that gives a reward, that it
becomes him to be silent, that receives a benefit. But his liberality (as
Cicero ingeniously confesses) consisted in giving with judgment.

This was the manner of his behavior and carriage of life for the space of
Forty years, (I mean till he arrived at that age) being respected by the
rich, prayed for by the poor, and indeed, generally beloved; having a Daughter
beauteous and virtuous, furnished with all the accomplishment that either
Nature could give, or Education and Instruction adorn and rectify, who was
espoused to a Sir Christopher Hilliard in Yorkshire.
Knight of good descent, and a noble Family, to the Fathers great joy and
comfort: but as all mundane happiness is fading, and all earthly delights
transitory, to day waxing, to morrow withering; now flourishing, and anon
flagging: so it fared with this worthy Gentleman, who late environed with all
the felicity and contentments of this world, was almost in a moment abandoned
and retired from all the pleasures and delights of the world.

The occasion whereof, (some say) was the unkindnesse, or (which I may rather
term it) the unnaturalness and inhumanity of a younger brother, who upon
some discontent or displeasure conceived against him, rashly and resolutely
threatened his Death: But this innocent Gentleman measuring the dispositions of
others by himself, and not imagining such barbarous cruelty could be in man,
of what condition soever, much less in a Brother, he held them as the rash
menaces of unbridled youth, which by good counsel, or complying with the others
desires, might be easily reclaimed, reckoning them as words that would never
break into wounds, and doubtful language that could not easily beget danger:
and as true Innocence goes still armed with confidence, and he that is
guiltless, still dreadlesse; so he neither feared his courage, nor shunned
his company, till at the length the two Brothers meeting face to face, the
younger drew a Pistol charged with a double Bullet from his side, and
presented upon the elder, which only gave fire, but by the miraculous
providence of GOD no further report: at which the elder seizing upon the
younger, disarmed him of his tormentary Engine, and without any further
violence offered, so left him: which bearing to his chamber, and desirous to
find whether it were only a false fire, merely to fright him; or a charge,
speedily to dispatch him: when he found the Bullets, and apprehended the danger
he had escaped, he fell into many deep considerations: For wise men will
always use circumspections, and first consider what to do, before they
conclude any thing: Now the causes that beget this deliberation and counsel
with our selves, are fear, care, necessity, and affection: Fear afflicts,
care compels, necessity binds, affection wounds: his fear afflicted
him, lest hazarding himself to the like danger, he might be the occasion of
shortning his own innocent life, and hastening his brothers shameful and
infamous death: his care compelled him by his future cautelous carriage to
prevent both: necessity bound him in mere fraternall piety, to prevent all
future occasions that might preiudise either of them in so high and horrid a
nature: and lastly, his affection so far and so deeply wounded him, that
since, where he expected the love of a Brother, he had found the malice of an
enemy, since he could not enjoy his face with safety, he would ever after deny
the sight of his own face to all men whatsoever.

And upon the former considerations he grounded this irrevocable resolution,
which he kept to his dying day; which that he might the better observe, he took
a very fair House in the lower end of Grub-streete, near unto Cripple-gate,
and having contracted a numerous retinue into a private and small family,
having the house before prepared for his purpose, he entered the door, choosing
to himself out of all the rooms three private chambers, best suiting with his
intended solitude: The first for his Diet, the second for his Lodging, and the
third for his Study, one within another: and the while his Diet was set on the
Table by one of his servants an old Maid, he retired into his lodging-chamber,
and while his Bed was making, unto his Study, still doing so, till all was
clear: and there he set up his rest, and in Forty four years never, upon any
occasion, how great soever, issued out of those chambers, till he was borne
thence upon men's shoulders; neither in all that time did Son in law,
Daughter, or Grandchild, Brother, Sister, or Kinsman, stranger, Tenant, or
servant, young, or old, rich, or poor, of what degree or condition soever,
look upon his face, saving the ancient Maid, whose name was Elizabeth, who
made his fire, prepared his bed, provided his diet, and dressed his Chamber;
which was very seldom, or upon an extraordinary necessity that he saw her;
which Maidservant dyed not above six days before him.

As touching his Abstinence in all the time of his retirement, he never tasted
Flesh, nor Fish; he never drank either Wine, or strong water; his chief food
was Oat-meale boiled with water, which some call Gruell; and in Summer, now and
then a Sallet of some choice cool herbs. For dainties, or when he would
feast himself upon an high day, he would eat the yelke of an hens egg, but
no part of the white; and what bread he did eat, he cut out of the middle part
of the loaf, but of the crust he never tasted; and his continual drink was
four shillings beer, and no other; and now and then, when his stomach served
him, he did eat some kind of suckets; and now and then drank read Cowes
milk, which his maid Elizabeth fetched for him out of the fields hot from the
Cow: and yet he kept a bountiful table for his servants, with entertainment
sufficient for any stranger or tenant, that had any occasion of business at
his house.

In Christmas holy days, at Easter, and upon all solemn festival days, he
had great cheer provided, with all dishes seasonable with the times, served
into his own Chamber with store of wine, which his maid brought in; when he
himself (after thanks given unto God for his good benefits) would pin a
clean Napkin before him, and putting on a pair of white holland sleeves,
which reached to his elbowes, call for his knife, and cutting dish after dish
up in order, send one to one poor neighbor, the next to another, whether it
were Brawne, Beef, Capon, Goose, etc. till he had left the table quite empty:
Then would he give thanks again, lay by his linen, put up his knife again,
and cause the cloth to be taken away; and this would he do Dinner and Supper
upon these days without tasting one morsel of any thing whatsoever; and this
custom he kept to his dying day, an abstinence far transcending all the
Carthusean Monks, or Mendicant Friars, that I ever yet could read of.

Now as touching the solitude of his life, to spend so many Summers and Winters
in one small or narrow room, dividing himself not only from the society of
men, but debarring himself from the benefit of the fresh and comfortable air;
not to walk or to confer with any man, which might either shorten the
tediousness of the night, or mitigate the prolixnesse of the day: what
retirement could be more? or what restriction greater? in my opinion it far
surpasses all the Vestals and Votaries, all the Ancresses and Authors that
have been memorized in any Hystory. Now if any shall ask me how he past his
hours, and spent his time? no doubt, as he kept a kind of perpetual fast, so
he devoted himself unto continual prayer, saving those seasons which he
dedicated to his study; for you must know, that he was both a Scholar and a
Linguist; neither was there any Author worth the reading, either brought over
from beyond the seas, or published here in the kingdom, which he refused to
buy, at what dear rate soever; and these were his companions in the day, and
his Counselors in the night; insomuch, that the saying may be verified of
him, Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus: He was never better accompanied, or
less alone, then when alone.

I need not speak much of his continence, since that does necessarily include
it self in the former. Abstinence is a fast from meats and vice, but
continence is a continuance in all the four cardinal virtues: what should I
say? his continence he expressed in the time he lived in the world, and his
abstinence in the greater part of his age, after he had separated himself from
the world: every man is known by his actions; neither is any man to be
accounted a good man for his age, but for his charitable deeds; it is most
true indeed, that such an one as we call good, is better than the good he does,
and a wicked man is worse than the evil that he is able to do. But in this
gentleman, the thing most worthy our observation is, that he, who was borne to
so fair fortunes, and might have enjoyed prosperity, for his souls sake, and
to enjoy the pleasures of a future world, should study adversity; to have much,
and enjoy little; to be the Lord of all, and a servant to all; to provide for
others to eat, whilst he prepared himself to fast; and out of his great
plenty to supply others, whilst himself wanted: and so much for his great
continence; but all this while I am come to no particulars of his charity.

Charity (says Saint Chrysostom) is the scope of all Gods commandments: it
ransometh from sin, and delivers from death: for as the body without the
soul can enjoy no life, so all other virtues without charity, are merely cold
and fruitless: she in adversity is patient, in prosperity temperate, in
passions strong, in good works active, in temperance secure, in hospitality
bountiful, amongst her true children joyful, amongst her false friends
patient; and the only measure to love God, is to love him without measure:
moreover, it makes a man absolute and perfect in all other virtues, for there
is no virtue perfect without love, nor any love that can be truly sincere
without charity: a poor man being in charity is rich, but a rich man without
charity is poor: Charity and Pride both feed the poor, but after diverse
sorts; the one to the praise and glory of God, the other to purchase praise and
glory with men; the first concerns him, the latter not.

He was no Pharisee, to seek the praise and vain ostent amongst men; neither
did he blow a trumpet before him when he gave his alms; neither when any
impudently clamord at his gate, were they therefore immediately releeved; but
he out of his private chamber, which had a prospect into the street, if he
spyed any sick, weak, or lame, would presently send after them, to comfort,
cherish, and strengthen them, and not a trifle to serve them for the present,
but so much as would releeve them many days after. He would moreover inquire,
what neighbors were industrious in their callings, and who had great charge of
children, and withal, if their labor and industry could not sufficiently
supply their families; to such he would liberally send, and releeve them
according to their necessities; and this was charity as it ought to be; for so
our best Divines have defined it.

I cannot reckon up the least of infinites in this nature done by him, and
therefore I leave them to the favorable consideration of the charitable and
understanding Reader, thus concluding, He may not improperly be called a
Phoenix: for as in his life he might be termed a Bird of Paradise, so in his
death he might be compared to that Arabian Monady, who having lived fourscore
and four years, half in the world, and half from the world, built his own
funeral nest or pile, composed of the Teberinth and Cinnomon, inter-woven with
Onix and Galbanum, with the sweet and odoriferous smells of Myrrh, Aloes, and
Cassia; and so made his deathbed an Altar, and his godly zeal kindling those
sweet spices, sent up his soul in an acceptable Incense, to that blessed and
sacred Throne, where a contrite heart, and humble spirit were never despised.

To the sacred Memory of that most abstenious Gentleman, Mr. Henry Welby.
OF any man at once alive, and dead,
Should any make report, (as seen or read)
He Would hardly find belief: yet they that knew
This shadows substance, say this may be true,
And in his person prove it; for his breath
Was balanced equally, 'twixt Life and Death:
To Heaven he lived, but to this treacherous world,
(Her toys and all her honyed-poyson hurled
Far from his bosom) he was dead; his Face
Not seen by any, in the lingering pace
Of four and forty Winters: but his hand
And heart were often, in his strict command
Of Alms, and bounteous Largess; his Estate
Not seen so at his Table, as his Gate.
Forty four Winters one poor petty room,
To him, was all the World, to him a Tomb.
Tho. Brewer.

In Commendation of that virtuous Gentleman Mr. Henry Welby.
WEll be the blessed Subject of these lines,
Well be the Star that now in glory shines,
Well be thou, well be all that live to dye,
And dye in grace to live immortally.
Thou that did from the world thy self exclude,
And (by abstaining flesh) the flesh subdued;
And with the Sword, (Gods Word) warred with the devil,
Still striving to shun all occasions evil:
For knowing man's best works to be impure,
From sight of man thou did thy self immure:
Where reading good things, sin was mortified,
Hope was confirmed, and Faith was fortified.
Thy Charity did work, (not one day idle)
True Prayer and Fasting did thy frailty bridle,
And (like Cornelius) up to Heaven ascended
Thy Alms and Orisons, and there attended,
Until thy soul shook off earth transitory,
To be enshrined, and crowned with endless glory.
J. T.

Upon the Life of that most worthy Gentleman, Master Henry Welby.
OLd Henry Welby, well be thou for ever,
Thy Purgatory's past, thy Heaven ends never.
Of Eighty four years life, full forty four
Man saw thee not, nor e're shall see thee more.
'Twas Piety and Penitence caused thee
So long a prisoner (to thy self) to be:
Thy bounteous house within, expressed thy mind,
Thy Charity without, the poor did find.
From Wine thou wa'st a duteous Rechabite,
And flesh so long time shunned thy appetite:
Small Beer, a Cawdle, Milk, or water-gruell
Strengthened by grace, maintained thy daily duel
Against the witching World, the Flesh, and Fiend,
Which made thee live and dye well, there is an end.
JOHN TAILOR.

AN EPITAPH, Or rather, A Funeral Elegy upon the Right Worshipful Mr. Henry
Welby, Esquire, who dyed at his House in Grub-streete, and lies buried in the
Church of Saint Giles, near Cripple-gate.
WHo on the setting Sun shall cast their eyes,
May easily guess next morning how he will rise.
Those that our parting from this old world view,
May presuppose what welcome in the new
Is to be had; but best, when Qualis vita
Is sweetly Echoed to by Finis ita.
If this be true, as no man needs to doubt,
Search this man's life, nay, all the world throughout,
To parallel in both, 'tmay be denied
Many more strictly lived, more Saint-like died:
And therefore we may fairly hope, that he
Is now where we may wish our selves to be.
This man through many storms and tempests hurld,
Though he was in, yet was not of the world;
When forty four years since he did divide
Himself from men, even then to men he died:
And at that time, his precious soul to save,
His Chamber made his Chapel, Bed his Grave.
What did he now then? since none twice can dye,
He changed his Bed, remote from noise to lie,
Where undisturbed, he better rest might take,
Until the Angels Trumpet him awake.
This, of such note, so late, shall we let pass
Slightly? No; rather make his Dust our Glass,
Him our Memento, and his Life (no less)
A Mirror, by the which our lives to dress.
And though we strive not to be like austere,
(For that indeed scarce humane strength can bear)
Let Us in some sort our love to virtue show,
And crawle like Children, ere they well can go.
If he has been so abstinent? at least
Let us forbear to surfeit when we feast.
He drank no Wine at all, let us not use
Immoderate Cups, our senses to abuse.
His clothes were only to defend from cold,
Shall our pyde garments then be daubed with gold?
Many his Manours were, and great his rent,
Yet he with one small chamber was content.
Then let not such, already well possessed
By powers hye hand, their lands from others wrest.
His Temperance all vain objects did despise,
Let us then make some covenant with our eyes:
If he from his best strength to his last hours
Pulled down his body, let us not pamper ours.
Rare Presidents ought to be followed most:
Than this, a rarer there is no Age can boast.
THO. HEYWOOD.

FINIS.

