Catalogus Protestantium*

Or, THE PROTESTANTS CALENDAR.

Containing A SVRVIEW OF THE PROTESTANTS Religion long before Luthers days,
even to the time of the Apostles, and in the Primitive Church.

BY GEORGE WEB D. of Divinity, and Preacher of the Word of God at the Bathe.

LONDON Printed for Nathanael Butter. 1624.

An Epistle written by a Friend to the Author in his absence.
CHristian, and discreet Reader, It were a great defrauding the Storehouse of
Religion, to conceal that for any private respect, which concerns a public
benefit. Aug. Confess. lib. 12.
Veritatem celare, est aurum sepelire: To conceal the Truth (says St.
Augustine) is to bury Gold; and to smother any ancient Sacred testimony of
Antiquity, were to hide that treasury in the bowels of the earth, which is
the inestimable Dowre of Gods Church. Now of all truth, and of all testimonies
derived from the root and record of Antiquity, none ought to be more sought
after then the retained purity of Apostolic Doctrine, resplendent in all
Ages since our Saviors plantation, even in the gloomie and dark days before
Luther.

Our Priests and Jesuits for their unpleasant clamorous, and obstriperous
sound, not unfitly resembling Frogs and Locusts, have of late days been
croaking and throtling out this harsh note and noise to every Protestant
passenger, Where was your Church before LVTHER? Thinking belike so to choke us
with this Question, as that not giving us leave to fetch breath, we should not
possibly be able to derive our Religion from any ancienter Author. But alas
poor Romanists! Though it would serve our turns to answer with Ignatius the
Martyr, Jgnat. Epist. ad Philad.
(...), JESUS CHRIST is my Antiquity. Yet it shall appear unto you that
Almighty GOD, has not left his Truth (howsoever opposed by your impious
rabble and malice) (...) to be without sufficient witness in all Ages, as may
appear by the Writings of many Christian Antiquaries, who have delivered the
Lamp of knowledge and direction to us, and for the future benefit of the
Christian World, is now more plainly expressed by the Learned labor of this
Reverend Divine, out of whose large field of observation and Reading, he has
affoorded you so fair a Calendar and plentiful Catalogue of Names, as may
suffice to point out a Protestant successiue Church from Age to Age. Yea it is
hereby easily seen, that the Church of England, has not wanted multitudes of
well disposed hearts at all times; howsoever the public authority at some time
lacked, to maintain the open Preaching of the Gospel. As for the worthiness
of this work, worthyest these times, let the goodness of God be duly
glorified, and the Authors paines-taking therein acknowledged: so shall the
doubtful be better informed, the weak confirmed, and many a soul benefited.

Thy welwiller in Christ, JOHN GEE.

THE PROTESTANTS CALENDAR:
Deuteronomie 32.7. Remember the days of old, consider the years of many
generations, ask thy father, and he will show thee: thine elders, and they
will tell thee.
WHen the Athenians had consulted the oracle of Apollo Pythius what Religion it
were fittest for them to profess: Xenophon
They received this answer, That they should follow the religion of their
Ancestors: and when they again had replied, that their ancestors had often
changed their religion, and therefore they knew not in such an often alteration
which to follow, the Oracle resolved them, M. Tull. Clear, de natura Deorum.
Illud optimum quod and primum, That is best which was at the first. The maine
controversy at this day in the world is about religion, in the great variety
whereof, among Jews, Pagans, Turks, and Infidels, yea among those who call
themselves by the name of Christians, many weak and unstable souls stand as
in a maze, and know not where to settle themselves. Augustine. Arnobius.
Now albeit (as both Augustine and Arnobius well observe) Religion is not so
much to be weighed by time as by truth, neither is it so much to be enquired
after when it began, as how it is to be followed; yea it cannot be denied
(which Tertullian does auerre) that the Antiquity of Religion does much serve
to testify the verity thereof, ^^enul.
and the longer time it has had of continuance, the more it claims our
observance, and ties us to obedience. The Heathen Hesiod could say (...) The
old law is best, Hes^od.
And the best and most divine of all the Philosophers Plato, Plato.
(...) The Ancients are best, as coming nearest unto God: And it is a rule
among Lawyers, Qui prior est tempore, potior est iure, He that is first in time
has the chiefest right; Job, 8.8, 9, 10.
hence is it that Bildad thus advises Job, 8.8, 9. Inquire I pray thee of the
former age, prepare thy self to the search of their fathers, for we are but of
yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon the earth are but a shadow:
shall not they teach thee, and tell thee? And Iere. 6.16. Thus says the Lord,
Stand ye in the ways, and see, ask for the old paths, where is the good way,
and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Deuteronomy. 32.7.
And in the song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.7. Remember the days of old, consider the
years of many generations, ask thy father and he shall show thee, thine
elders and they will tell thee.

This trial of our Religion by Antiquity I undertake in the following
discourse, not so much against the Athiest who shakes off all religion, Philip
Mornie treatise of the truth of religion.
as if there were no use of it at all: for I could show him that religion had a
being so soon as there was any being; and that before men were tied to any
obedience by humane Laws, before they furnished their minds with any Arts,
before they wore clothes on their backs, Religion was in use. Neither against
the Turks and Pagans, for I could show them the Antiquity of true Religion long
before their new devised superstitions, Clem. Ale^.
and that whatsoever light they had of Religion, Campian. Greg. de Vale^ Fisher
in conference with D. Feally.
whatsoever show of goodness they have in their several Religions, they have
borrowed, or rather (like thieves) filched it from hence: but my trial and
Apology is framed against the Papists, who exclaim against us as Nouelists,
and condemn our religion as a late vpstart, challenging us to show where our
Church, where our religion was in former times? which challenge of theirs
howsoever it has been answered to the full at diverse times, by diverse learned
Worthies in our Church, D. Field of the Church. D. Morton. Cathol. Ap. D. Usher
de contin. flat. eccles. Archb. of Canterb. treatise of perpet. visib. of the
Church. Patrick Symson. Richard Bernard August. de Trin. lib. 1. c. 3. and de
mendac. c. 6.
and of late has received a full satisfaction (if any thing will satisfy such
unquiet spirits) by the most Reverend Father and highest Prelate in our Church,
so that the most part of the books which of late come from the press, are
written of this subject; yet I hope this mine after gleaning shall neither
seem presumptuous nor superfluous: It is the counsel and advise of S.
Augustine that at such times, and upon such occasions as these are, al men
should write, that have any faculty in writing, albeit it be but the same
things in other words, that all sorts of people among many books might light
upon some, and the enemy in all places might find some to encounter him: For
Zions sake I could not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I could not rest,
Esaias 62, 1.
until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation
thereof as a lamp that burns. And if any shall demand of me, as Ioab did of
Ahimaaz, 2. Sam. 18.12, 13.
why I would be so desirous to run this way after so many better-footed
Cushies, mine Apology is, yet let me run after them, though it be like
Ascanius, Non passibus aequis, although the matter be the same, or much more
mean, my method peradventure may be more plain.

For in this controversy between us and the Papists concerning the Antiquity
of both our Churches, I follow the tract prescribed by Moses. 1, Looking back
into the days of old, and the years of many generations. 2, Making inquiry of
our fathers, and our elders, that they may show and tell us, whether Church,
whether Religion is the ancientest.

And I begin first with the first. The trial of the truth hereof by the
antiquity of time, because the Papists now adays principally insist upon this
point. The Church of God (say they) consists not of a few people, Bell. de
eccles. lib. 3. c. 13. Gregor. de Valen. tom. 3. p. 142. Co^ter. Enchir. c. 2.
Rhemist. in Act. 11.24.
but of many; it is not hidden or obscure, but conspicuous; the company thereof
perpetually holds a visible succession of Pastors and people, as sensibly as
any other society of men, so that any time, one may point with his finger and
say, this is the Church. But the Protestants Church cannot show this; ergo it
is no true Chuch. Concerning that tenent of theirs about the perpetual
visibility of the Church (in that sense as they take it) how infirm it is I
refer the reader to the learned Treatises of the most reverend and judicious
Divines of our Church, Archbishop of Cant. in his treatise of the visibl: of
the Church. D. Field of the Church. D. Whites way to the true Church.
who have purposely written of that Argument, I rather bend my self to refute
their Minor proposition, wherein they deny that we of the Protestant Church can
show any such succession or visibility of our Church and Religion in former
times. And that so much the rather because Gregory of Valenza peremptorily
maintains, Greg. de Valen. (...). 3. p. 142.
that this is a point which pusseleth us extremely, and that we are not able to
show any company of people, which in times past was known in the world to hold
that form of doctrine and religion which we have brought in: wherein albeit
(as their own Bellarmine confesses) It is not required to the universality of
the Church, Bellar. not. eccl^^. c. 7.
that of necessity there be at all times in every Country some believers, it
suffices if there be successively: whence (says he) it follows that if
only one Province did retain the true faith, yet should it truly and properly
be called the Catholic Church, as long as it might be showed that it were the
same which it was at other times in other places of the world: yet (such has
been the singular mercy of God to his Church in the manifestation thereof) that
we are able to show that there has been no place in Christendom, but there
have been some of our religion therein, as not only our own experience, B^z.
sign eccles. lib. 19. c. 1. Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. c. 21.
but our adversaries own reports bear witness, when they complain how our
heresy (so heretics style it) has possessed many and large Provinces. To
make this the better manifest, I shall in the ensuing discourse set down as in
a Table, a particular Catalogue in what places, at what times, by what persons
our Religion has been professed and maintained in former ages. For an
introduction whereunto, let us first consider what our Adversaries do except
against us.

As the Jews sometimes spoke unto our Savior, Thou art not yet fifty years
old, John 8.57.
and have thou seen Abraham? so the Papists say to us, Rhem. annot. in Ephesians
4. v. 13.
Your Religion is not yet an hundred years old, and can such a Religion be
good? And as the Gentiles sometimes vpbraided the Primitive Christians, Prudent
periph. hymn. 10.
Nunc dogma nobis Christianu^ nascitur post euolutos mill demu^ consules, Now
after we know not how many thousand Consul-times, the Christian Religion
forsooth is start up. So the Papists object against us: now at the last, after
so many hundred years, Campian. Bell. de eccles. lib. 4. c. 5.
after so many hundred Popes, after so long continuance of the faith and
doctrine of the church of Rome, without any alteration or opposition; The
Protestant Religion is sprung up, the first founder thereof being Martin Luther
an Apostate Friar etc. Popish discourse concerning faith. p. 57.
The Protestant Religion (says the Jesuit) was never heard of before Martin
Luther set it abroach: and a late popish Doctor blusheth not to utter, that it
is most manifest that all in England were Papists without exception from the
first christning thereof until about the latter end of King Henry the eight.
Vide Archb. of Cant. de visib. eccles. p. 74.


What, was our Religion never heard of before Luther set it abroach? were all
in England Papists, every one without exception in that religion, from the
first time that it was Christian, till Henry the eight brought in an
Innovation? Let us try the honesty of these Popish Doctors: and by a view of
this, try how in other things we may trust the^ on their words, let us
(according to the counsel of Moses the man of God) look to the days of old,
and the years of many generations, let us search the records of time, and
beginning with Luther, look backward unto the former times, to the years of
many generations that were before him, and if we do not find the footsteps of
our Religion in those ancienter days, let the Papists be credited, and our
mouths stopped.

Martin Luther was borne at Isleben in Saxony, Mass^^ lib. 2^ Casp pencer. l.
5. Abbat Vsperg. Job. Sleidun. Martyrol. Anglic. p. 771, 772.
Anno Domini 1483. He was brought up in the University first of Magdeburg,
then of Erford, and afterward at Wittenburgh, where at the age of 29 he
commenced Doctor. At the first he was a Monk of the Augustine Order, and he
began to distaste Popish religion about the year of our Lord 1516, by
occasion of his looking into, first, the Pardons and Indulgences which Pope Leo
the tenth set to sale in Germany by Friar Tecellius, and afterward by prying
into other stuff of Popish superstitions: so that the time of his separation
from the Church of Rome must be reckoned to be about the year of our Lord,
1516, or 1517.

King Henry the eight shoke off the Popish yoke about the 25 year of his
reign, Chronic. Ang^ic. in vita Hen. 8. Statut. ann. regni 25. Acts and Monum.
p. 96^.
viz. Anno Domini 1534 Before which time he wrote against Luther, and was an
earnest defender of the Papacy.

Before either of these two times, and whilst both Henry the eight and Luther
were Papists, we can produce professors of our Religion between the year of
our Lord 1500 and 1516.

In England.

Doctors and learned men.

D. John Colet, Deane of Paul's, who was a great labourer for reformation in
the Church, and in his Sermons bitterly inueighed against inhibition of Priests
marriage, pilgrimages, and diverse other abuses in the popish Church: for which
he was much persecuted by Richard Fitz-Iames, Bishop of London. Pa^etex
Registr. Fitz Erasm. ep. ad Iodoc. Ion.

Gulielmus Lillius. Gulielm. Grocinus. Gulielm. Latimer. Thomas Lynacre.
Whole Congregations persecuted for it.

In the Diocese of Lancolne, to the number of 437 persons. Martyrol. p. 751,
752. etc.

In London 68 persons. p. 734. 745.

Martyrs put to death for it.

Will: Sweeting. John Brewster. John Brown. Iokime Norman. John Stileman.
Thomas Man. Robert Cousin. Christop. Shoemaker Robert Rane. John Seriuener.
In France.

Doctors and learned men.
Iacobus Pauanus. Johannes de Cadurco. Laurentius Crucens. Patet ex Crisp. and
pantal.
Congregations.

Whole villages of them in the tract where the Alps are joined with the
Pyrenies. Peir. de Soan. in hist. Council. Trident. p. 3.

Whole villages about Merindol. and the Country of Prouence. Martyrol. p. 859.

Martyrs.
Dionysius de Reaux. Iacobus Pauanus. Bartholomaeus Millen. Henricus Poile.
Johannes Chastellanus.
In Germany.

Doctors and learned men.
Leo Judah. Johannes Oxlinus. Vldericus Zuinglius.
Congregations.
Tigurines. Bernates. Lucernates. Suicenses. Vnderualii. Basilienses. Martyrol.
p. 791.
Martyrs.
Petrus Spengler. Wolgangus Schurch. Leonardus Heilar. Wendelmuta Vidua.
In Bohemia.

There were diverse about this time professing the Protestants religion, who
were by the Papists termed Pycards, Calystini, and Subutraques. Pier: de Soau.
in his History of the Trent Council, p. 3.

Before this time, and before Luther was borne, there were professors of the
Protestants Religion between the years of our Lord, 1450 and 1500.
In England.

REynold Peacocke Bishop of Chichester, who publicly preached against the
Pope, Friars, transubstantiation, and the whole leaven of popery. Thomas
Gasgorgu. lib. de dict. Theol. p. 3.

Martyrs.
William Tilsworth. Lawrence Ghest. Thomas Barnard. Babram. James Mordon. Ioane
Boughton Mother to the Lady Young. Acts and Monum. in regu. Henric. 7.
Persecuted for the same.
John Blomeston. Richard Hegham. Robert Crowther. John Smith. Roger Brown.
Thomas Butler. John Falkes. Richard Hilmin. Margery Goit. With diverse others in
Kent, Couentrie and London. ibid. p. 713, 714.
In France.

Philippus Comineas, a French Historiagrapher, who spared not to reprove the
vices in Popery, and to extol those who opposed the same. Martyrol. p. 672.

Johannes. Selestadiensis. Vide ^iu^ Epist. ad Maximil. Imper. contra
Pontificios.

Antonius Mancinellus, who wrote an eloquent oration against the filthy life,
and wicked manners of the Pope and his Clergy; and for that cause had his
tongue and hands cut off by the commandment of the Pope. Martyrol. p. 674.

Charles the eight was at often defiance with the Pope. Ibid. p. 675.

In Germany.

The Germans in general exhibited their complaints against the Pope to the
Emperor Maximilian, Martyrol. p. 672. Rodulphus Agricolae. Pontanus. Philippus
Baroaldus. Georgius Valla. Johannes Ostenderpius. Doctor Keiserspergius. Doctor
Andreas Proles. Ex Luc. Osiand. lib. 1. c. 8.


VVeselus Groningensis wrote against popish penance, indulgences, purgatory,
works of supererrogation, abuses of the Mass, prayers for the dead, vows,
precepts of the Pope and Prelates, etc. He was a man so famous and notable for
his great learning and good life, that he was commonly called, Lux mundi, The
light of the world. Ex Noviomag. and Martyrol. p. 670.

In Bohemia.

Georgius Pogiebrachius, Governor of that Kingdom under the young King
Ladislaus.

Rochezana and diverse other Preachers more, of whose conformity with us in
Religion, and separation from the Church of Rome, we may read, Cocl. lib. de
Hus. and Martyrol. p. 662. Item ex Aene. Sylv. in Histor. Bohem.

In Italy.

Johannes Baptista Mantuanus. Angelus Politianus. Hermolaus Barbarus. Johannes
Picus Mirandula.
This Picus Earl of Mirandula, being but a young man, went to Rome, and there
set up 90 conclusions to be disputed on, of which diverse were about the
Sacrament, Justification, etc. quite contrary to the tenent of the Church of
Rome, for which he was persecuted by the Pope and his Clergy. Luc. Osiand.
lib. 1. c. 8. Martyrol. p. 740.

Hieronimus Sauanorola an Italian Monk, sorely inueighed against the
corruption in Popery, maintained justification by faith, that the communion
ought to be administered in both kinds; that indulgences and pardons of the
Pope were of no effect; against auricular confession, and the Popes Supremacy;
for which cause he with two more who taught and preached the same together with
him, were hanged at Florence, and afterward burnt to ashes. Illiric. Catal.
test. Martyrol. page 450.

Before that time there are to be found professors of the Protestant Religion,
between the years 1400 and 1450.
In England.

THe name of Lollards about this time was commonly known in England: That they
and we do agree in the substance of our Religion may appear, ex descript.
sect. Lollard.

William Bishop of Norwich complains, how the number of them did here
increase. Martyrol. page 609.

Martyrs.
Rich. Houerden. John Goose. Paul Craw. William White. John Claidon. Richard
Turning. Sr John Oldcastle. Lord Cobham.
Persecuted and put to penance for that profession.
John Burrell. Thomas Moon. John Finch. Nicholas Belward Thomas Grimar. John
Beuerley. Thomas Pie. John Mendham. Robert Shiruing. John Terrie. Hugh Pie.
John Parker. John Skilly. John Cooper. Bartholmew Thatcher. Thomas James. Alane
Andrew. William Wright. Richard Fletcher. John Aberee. John Middleton. John
Waid. Richard Clerk. Robert Beet. Richard Page. John Warden. John Kinget.
Thomas Albeck. William Bates. Will: Osbourne. Robert Briggs. William Marsh.
John Goodwin. Henry Bood. Richard Horn. John Spire. Richard King:
with diverse others, as we may find them named and recorded, Martyrolog. page
608.

In France.

Thomas Redonensit, a Frenchman by birth, came into Italy about the year 1433,
and there seeing the corruptions of the Church of Rome, inueighed exceedingly
against the same; preaching that the Church did lack reformation: that the
Popes excommunication is not to be feared, and diverse things to the like
effect: for which he was persecuted by Pope Eugenius, and in the end degraded,
and burnt at Rome. Ex Antonin. 3. part. fol. 165.

Nicholaus Clemangis an Arch deacon. De annot. non soluend.

In Italy.

Laurentius Valla, a Roman Patrician, and Cannon of S. John of Lateran. Ex eius
tractat. contra Ementit. Donat constat.

Petrus de Ali^^^, Cardinal of Cambray. Tract. de reform. eccles.

Leonardus Aretinus. Ex eius libello in Hypocrit.

Nicholaus Pycennius an Italian Captain. Ex orat. Arelacens. in Council. Basil.

In Germany.

Antonius Cornelius Lynnichanus. Ex orat. ad cler. Colon. de lubricitat. sacerd.

Martyrs.
Henricus Grunfielder. Henricus Ratgeber. Johannes Dracndersius. Petrus Thoraw.
Matheus Hager: of whom, and the doctrine for which they suffered, we may
read, in Bali. cent. and Martyrol. p. 614.

In Bohemia.

John Hus, Bachelor of Divinity, maintained as Articles in Prague, against the
Church of Rome (in effect the same that we do) for which he was called to the
Council of Constance; where for persisting therein he was condemned, and
afterward burnt. Council. Constant. and Choclaeus Huss.

Hierome of Prague, Mr of Arts, seconded John Hus, in defense of the same
doctrine, and followed him in martyrdom. Cocl. ibid.

54 Noblemen of Morauia wrote to the Council of Constance, in defense of John
Hus, and Hierome of Prague, whose names, together with their Letter, are
recorded, Martyrol. p. 587.

A great part of the Kingdom of Bohemia forsook the Pope, and claue to the
doctrine which they had learned from Hus and Hierom. Cocle. ibid.

Zisca, a noble Bohemian, with a great multitude of associates, wage war
against the Papists, and throw Images and Idols out of their Churches, Coch.
ibid.

Before that time there may be seen professors of the Protestants Religion,
between the years 1350 and. 1400.
In England.

ROger VVimbleton, whose learned Sermon against diverse points of Popery,
preached at Paul's Cross, Anno 1389 is extant, Martyrolog. page 503.

John Wickliffe, public Reader of Divinity in the University of Oxford, a
famous learned man, whose doctrine agreeing with ours, may be seen in his
propositions recorded, Martyrol. page 414.

This Wickliffe had many favorites at that time, especially John of Gant, and
Henry Lord Percie; the one of Duke of Lancaster, the other Marshall of England,
Ibid.

The University of Oxford, page 408, and many in the Parliament, Anno 43 of
Edward 3, did adhere unto him. Ibid.

The Letters of King Richard the third, and the Acts of Parliament then declare
that this doctrine was daily preached in Churches and Churchyards, at which
were present great multitudes of people. Anno 5. Rich. 2. c. 5.

Martyrs.
William Santree. John Badbic.
Persecuted for the same Doctrine.
Philip Repington, Nicholas Hartford. William Thorpe. John Puruie. John
Edwards. William Swinderby, and diverse others. Act. and Mon in vit. Rich Walter
Br^^^. John As^^n. John ^eeker. John Sey^^^. David Cotray.
In France.

Gerardus a Deacon. Henricus de Iota.
Henricus de Hassia, 140 of those who adhered to the doctrine of the
Albigenses, were about this time put to death in the Province of Narbone,
Massae hist.

A great number more about this time were burnt in France for the like cause,
and were nicknamed, Publicans, Puritans, Paterines. Houedom. hist. and
Martyrol. page 387.

In Germany.

Taulerus, a preacher of Argentine.

Johannes Montziger Rector of the University of Vlme, who openly in the
schools, impugned the doctrine of Transubstanciation. Martyrol. p. 386.

Conradus Hager. Rhider.
About the year of our Lord 1390, thirty six Citizens of Mentz were burnt for
the doctrine of the Waldensis, and holding the Pope to be Antichrist, and
relying upon the Scriptures, and not upon the traditions of the Church of Rome.
Bras. Anal. St. Martyrol. p. 587.

In Italy.

Nicholas Orem, whose Sermon before the Pope and his Cardinals, Anno 1546;
favors of our doctrine. Extat Martyrol. p. 382.

Johannes de Ganduno. Andreas a Castro. Dantes Florentinus. Franciscus
Petrarcha. Johannes de rupe Scissa. Johannes de Castellione. Johannes de
Poliaco.
In Bohemia.

Matthias Parisiensis, a Bohemian by birth, about the year 1370 wrote a book
of Antichrist, proving him already to be come, and that the Pope is the same.
Martyrol. p. 586.

Iacobus Milnensis. Miletius.
The University of Prague in defense of Wickliffe, ibid. 420

Peter Pain, a Scholar of Wickliffe, came into Bohemia, and brought with him
VVickliffs books which were in quantity as great as Saint Augustines works.
Histor de Hus. lib. 1.

In Spain.

Petrus de Corbaria. Franciscus de Arcatara. Florelog.
Before that time there may be seen professors of the Protestants Religion,
between the years 1300 and 1350.
In England.

ARmachanus, sometimes a Student in Oxford, afterward Bishop of Armach, and
Primate of Ireland; who before Pope Innocent the 8 his Cardinals disputed nine
conclusions against the Friars. Wickliffe in Trid. Besides that, he contested
against diverse other abuses in the Popish Church. Martyrol. p. 378 for which he
sustained diverse troubles, by means of the Pope and his Cardinals. Martyrol.
page 375.

That there were diverse others about this time of that Religion here in
England, may appear out of a book then compiled and entitled, The complaint
of the Ploughman. Extat. Martyrol. p. 366.

In France.

Philip the French King wrote a Letter of defiance against Boniface the 8.
Nichol. Trivet.

William Nagaretta.

William Plesiano, in the French Kings name solemnly protected against the
Pope. Martyr. p. 314.

The Nobles, Prelates, and Parliament of France censure the abuses of the
Papacy, ibid. p. 315. 318. 324.

Rudo Duke of Bourgundy about the year 1348, disswadeth the French King from
permitting in his Realm the Popes Decrees and Decretals, whose sage counsel
then given, as yet remains among the French Kings Records. Testatur Carol.
Molinaeus.

In Germany.

Gulielmus Ockam about the year 1326 wrote in defense of the Emperor
Ludouicus against the Pope, who wrote also diverse other Books in which he
confuteth the usurped Supremacy of the Pope, and entering into mention of the
Popes Decrees extrauagant, declares how little regard is to be given thereto.
John Sleid. lib. 4.

Vlricus Hangenor, Treasurer to the Emperor Ludouicus publicly opposed
himself against the Popes proceedings. Martyrol. p 358.

Gregorius Ariminensis about the year of our Lord 1346, maintained the same
doctrine of grace and free will, which the Protestants at this day do, and
dissented from the Papists, and Sophisters, counting them worse then Pelagians.
Ex Trithemio.

Petrus de Bruis who laid the Axe to the root of Popery, and in set-Treatises
opposed most of his documents. Pap. Mess. in Bonif.

Luitpoldus. Andreas Landensis.
In Italy.

Marsilius Patauinus, in his book entitled, Defensor pacis, held these
conclusions. 1, That the Pope has none authority over other Bishops, much
less over the Emperor. 2. That the Word of God ought to be judge in causes
Ecclesiastical. 3, The Clergy and Pope ought to be subject to Magistrates. 4,
That Christ is the head of the Church, and that he never appointed any Pope to
be his general Vicar. 5, That the marriage of Priests is lawful. 6, That S.
Peter was never at Rome. 7, That the Clergy of Rome is a den of thieves. 8,
That the Popes doctrine leads to eternal damnation. Defens. pac.

Aligerius. Andreas de Castro.
Johannes Rochetaylada (Henrici de Erford names him Haybalus) preached openly
that the Church of Rome was the whore of Babylon, and the Pope with his
Cardinals to be the very Antichrist. And being for the same brought before the
Popes face, constantly did persevere in the same, saying, that he was
commanded by God to publish the same. Froysard. Volum. 1. chap. 211. and
Martyrol. page 360.

Before that time there may be seen professors of the Protestants Religion,
between the years 1250 and 1300.
In England.

PEter the son of, Cassiodore wrote a zealous Epistle to the Church of
England, dehorting it from the tyranny of the Church of Rome. Ex vetust. Chron.
Alban. extat. Martyrol. 323.

The Popes inhibition was despised in England, Anno Domini 1294.

Diverse also about this time were accused here in England for adhering to the
opinion of the Waldenses. Turris Land. in record. reconcil. inter regem and
Baron.

In Germany.

Gulielmus Altissiodorensis, an ancient Schoolman, in whose sums many points
of popish doctrine are strongly opposed and confuted. Naucler. vol. 2. Genesis 45.

Johannes Semeca, Provost of Halberstat, was about this time excommunicated,
and deprived of his office, for resisting Pope Clement the fourth, gathering
certain exactions in Germany, who therefore appealed from the Pope to a
general Council, and had many great favorers of his side. Martyrol. page 287.

In France.

Gulielmus de S. Amore, Master in Paris, and chief ruler in that University,
he wrote a book de periculis Ecclesiae, wherein he maintains 39 conclusions
against the Papists; but especially against the Friars. Magdeb. cent. 13. c. 5.

Robertus Gallus, borne of a Noble parentage, about the year 1290, wrote
diverse prophesies against the Pope and church of Rome, in a book of visions.
In the first Chap. whereof he painteth forth the Pope like an Idol. In the
twelfth Chapter like a Serpent. In the thirteenth, he resembles the state of
the Church of Rome to a body, whose head is dry, lean, and withered like a
logge of wood. In another place, he compares the Schoolmen in their subtle
questions and distinctions to a man, who having fine Manchet bread, and pure
Wine set before him, does notwithstanding choose rather to gnaw upon an hard and
flinty stone. Martyrol. page 292.

In Italy.

Petrus Johannes, a Minorite, about the year 1290, taught and maintained many
things against the Pope, proving that he was Antichrist: and the Synagogue of
Rome, the great whore of Babylon. Nichol. Emer. in lib. inquisit.

In Spain.

Arnoldus de Villa noua, a Spaniard by birth, about the year 1252 was by the
Pope condemned for an Heretic, because he wrote against the corruptions of
the Romish Church; his preaching was to this effect. First, that the Pope and
his Clergy seduce the world, like Satan, from the truth of Christ. Secondly,
Faith (as the Papists require it) is no better then the Devils faith. Thirdly,
that the Pope leads men to Hell. Fourthly, that Cloisterers are void of
charity. Fifthly, that Masses are not to be celebrated, and that they ought not
to sacrifice for the dead, with many other propositions to the like effect.
Magdeb. cent. 13. c. 5. H^siad. cent. 13. c. 10.

Before that time there may be seen professors of the Protestants Religion
between the years 1200 and 1250
In England.

RObert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, a man of great learning and godliness,
who lived in the days of Pope Innocentius the fourth, and constantly resisted
his unlawful demands, as by name, the inuesting of a young Italian boy whom
the Pope had recommended unto him, to be admitted into the next vacant Prebend
in his Diocese: for his sharp reproving the Pope of Rome, and powerful
preaching against the corruptions in that Sea, he was commonly called Malleus
Romanorum, The Hammer of the Romans: for his courage and doctrine, the Pope
was much incensed against him, and swear that he would hurl him down to such
a confusion, that he should be made a gazing stock to all the world:
notwithstanding all which, this good Bishop died peaceably. And when as after
his death the Pope would have cast his bones out of Christian burial, in the
night following the said Bishop seemed in a vision to appear before ^^m, and
smiting him with his Crozier-staffe on his right side, with a stern look and
terrible voice to say unto him, O thou scuruie, lazy, bald, doting Pope, have
thou purposed to cast my bones out of the Church? God will not suffer thee to
prevail: woe to thee that despisest, for thou shall be despised. And so
seeming to depart, the Pope was found the next morning in a manner half dead.
Math. Paris. and Martyrol. p. 295, 296.

In France.

Laurentius Anglicus, an Englishman borne, but Student in Paris, and of prime
esteem in that University, wrote against the Pope, affirming that in him and
his Prelates Antichrist was already come. Martyrol. p. 292.

Almaricus a Doctor of Paris, was burnt for withstanding altars, images,
invocation of Saints, transubstantiation. Car. Chron. 1202.

In Sweden.

About the year of our Lord 1240 there were in Sweden many Preachers who in
their Sermons inueyed against the Pope, affirming the Pope and his Bishops to
be heretics and Symoniacks, and that popish priests were mere seducers, that
the Popes curse was not to be dreaded, and his indulgences were mere
fopperies. Ex Chronic. Abbat. Vsperg. Crantz. lib. 8. c. 10.

In Germany.

Frederick the second resisted the Popes usurpations, exiled his authority out
of Germany, and fought against him prosperously. Mat. Paris. p. 71.

Sygefridus Seginoburgensit, Rudicenus Rhathenicensis, Conradus Frisingensis,
Bishops of Boiora join with the Emperor against the Pope. Auent. lib. 5.

Euarardus Inuanensis an Archbishop in Germany spoke thus of the Pope in an
Assembly of Bishops at Regenspurg: He under the color of religion lays the
foundation of the kingdom of Antichrist: These priests of Babylon will reign
alone, they can endure no equal, they will never rest until they have
trampled all things under their feet: he sits in the Temple of God, and is
exalted above all that is worshipped. Thus does that child of perdition (whom
they use to call Antichrist) in whose forehead is written the name of
blasphemy, I am a god, and cannot err. Auent. lib. 7. p. 546.

Before that time there may be seen professors of the Protestants Religion
between the years 1150 and 1200.
In England.

GErhardus and Dulcinus Nauarrensis about this time preached against the Church
of Rome, defending and maintaining, first, That prayer was not more holy in one
place then another: secondly, That the Pope was Antichrist, and Rome the very
Whore of Babylon prefigured in the Apocalypse. These two about the year 1158
brought 30 other of their own opinion with them over into England, who by the
commandment of the King and Prelates, were burnt in the forehead, and so
driven out of the Realm. Rob. Gisburn. Illiricus says they were afterward
slain by the Pope. Illir. Catol. Martyrol. p. 83.

In France.

The Waldenses or Pauperes de Lugduno, so called from one Waldus a man of great
substance in the City of Lions, who about the year 1160 taking occasion by the
sudden death of one with whom he was walking, began with a careful study
to reform his life, and to this end studied the Scriptures diligently, and
taught the true knowledge of Gods word to as many as resorted unto him. In
short space the number of those who joined with him came to thousands, who were
dispersed abroad into diverse parts of the world: These were miserably
persecuted by the Pope and his faction. Hist. de Waldens.

Raymund Earl of Toulouse for taking part with them was wrongfully vexed and
disinherited by the Pope. Mat. Paris.

In France.

The Religion of the Waldenses.
1 They held that the Pope is not greater then another Bishop. 2 That there is
no purgatory. 3 That it is in vain to pray for the dead. 4 That Masses for the
dead are the inventions of covetous priests. 5 That images, hallowing of
waters, and other creatures, are superstitious. 6 That the word of God should
be truly preached unto all men. 7 That Friars shrift, and the use of the oil
in Baptism, are the inventions of men. 8 They contemned the Mass, and all
that appertained to it. 9 They misliked the single life of votaries, and the
distinction of days and meats. 10 They defended the reading of Scripture by
the Laity. 11 They had but two sacraments. 12 That the Communion should be
administered in both kinds. Nauc. vol. 2. g. 900.
Hildebertus Archbishop of Tours about this time taxed the pride of the Pope,
and being an excellent Poet, made this distich of Rome: Vrbs foelix, si vel
dominis vrbs illa careret,
Vel dominis esset turpe carere fide.
Happy would this City be,
If wanting lords her self were free,
Or having Lords in dignity,
These wanted not true honesty.


In Germany.

Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor, about the year 1150 opposed himself
against the Pope, forbidding appeals to Rome, and the coming of Legates from
thence into Germany, and other tricks of the papal pride. A great part of
Germany took part with him. Naucl. vol. 2. p. 836. genesis 39.

In Constantinople.

About this time, Anselme Bishop of Haremburg, being sent from Lotharius to
Calo Johannes Emperor of Constantinople, among other things he disputed much of
the supremacy of the Roman Bishop, Nichetes Bishop of Nicodemia excellently
contested against him, and confuted his arguments, maintaining that the pride
of the Romish Church was the cause of so many schisms and heresies which were
then abroad in the world. Ext. in Naucl. vol. 2. p. 900 and in Patr. Symps.
hist. of the Church. p. 433.

Before that time there may be seen professors of the Protestants Religion
between the years 1100. and 1150.
In England.

THeobald Archbishop of Canterbury with the Prelates of England, in a Council
held at London, anno 16. Regni Stephani regis, decreed that Bishops should live
more discreetly; that Priests should not be Rulers over worldly matters, that
they should teach their flocks more diligently, and that the people should
read the Scriptures, and learn the Lords Prayer, and the Creed in English.
Malsmb. Chron.

King Henry the first, and his Nobles, were even at the point to forsake the
Romish Church, Patet ex Epist. Anselm. ad Pascal. Pap. and Martyrol. page 177.

Liucolniensis gave this description of a Friar; A Friar is a dead Carcass
risen out of his Grave, wrapped in a windingsheet, and carried among men by the
Devil. Wichleif. in Trialog. lib. 4. cap. 26. page 143.

In Almaine.

HIldegard a Nun and a Prophetess, living about the year 1146. most
bitterly reprehended the abominable life of the Pope and his Clergy,
inueighing against the greedy subtle proceeding of Friars; denouncing woe
unto those who suffer themselves to be seduced by them, and foretelling the
horrible destruction of the Church of Rome. Histor. Iornal. and Martyrol. p.
182. and 237.

In France.

BErnard Abbot of Cluxaval born in Burgundy, lived about this time, who
although (living in a most corrupt age) he was exceeding superstitious in some
points, yet freely reproved diverse corruptions then coming on, he is clear
with us against the conceit of the Virgin Mary's Conception free from sin,
as appears, Ex Epist. 179. ad Came. Lugdon. Against Merits, Ser. 1. de
Annunciat. Against Justification by works, Sermon. 22. in Cantic. Against Free
will, Lib. de Grana. and lib. Arb. Against the seuenfold number of Sacraments.
Ser. 1. de coen. Dom Against the uncertainty of Salvation. Epist. 107. Against
the Popes Greatness in Temporalities. Lib. 2. consid. ad Eugen. Also he
admonished Count Theobald, who bestowed great matters in building of Abbeys and
Churches, that he should rather support them which are of the household of
Faith, and be careful to build the everlasting Tabernacle. Epist. 107.

In Flanders.

ABout this time was one burnt in Antwerp, for Preaching against the real
presence in the Sacrament. Massan. Chron. lib. 16. anno 1124.

In Germany.

HEnry the fifth Emperor, against Paschalis then Pope, maintained his own
right of making Bishops, and other Privileges that belonged to his Ancestors,
which the Pope usurped. Nauder. vol. 2. p. 807. Segon. anno 1111.

In Italy.

Arnulphus an eloquent Preacher came to Rome about this time, and in his
Preaching reproues the vicious life of the Popish Clergy; he is supposed to
be the Author of the Book called Opus Tripartitum, which contains a great
complaint of the enormities and abuses in the Church, of the number of their
Holidayes, of the curious singing in Cathedral Churches, of the rabble of
begging Friars, of the unchaste voluptuous behavior of Churchmen; and finally,
wishes reformation to begin at the Sanctuary; for the which the hatred of the
Pope and his Clergy was so much incensed against him, that they laid privy
wait for him, took him and drowned him. Martyrol. page 181. Sabellius and
Platina, say they hanged him. Platin. in vit. Honor. 2.

Before that time there may be seen professors of the Protestants Religion,
between the years, 1050. and 1100.
In England.

ABout this time (says Matthew Paris) The King of England favored not much the Sea of Rome, because of their impudent and insatiable exactions, neither would
he suffer any of his Subjects to go to Rome, alleging these words in the
Author thus expressed, Quod Petri non inhaerent vestigijs, praemijs inhiantes,
non eius potestatem retinent, cuius sanctitatem probantur non imitari. Math.
Paris.

In France.

BErengarius Archdeacon of Angeow, about the year 1060. withstood the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation newly hatched in the Council of Lateran. And although by
the violence of the Pope and his Clergy he was driven to recantation, yet
after his Death many adhered to his opinion. Malsmb.

In Germany.

HEnry the third Emperor, withstood Hildebrand the Pope and his usurped
Supremacy. Sigeb. Chron. in anno 1077.

Walenam Bishop of Mergburg. Merian. Scot.

Sigefridus Archbishop of Mentz. Martyrol. page 161.

The Council of Worms. Aventin. Anal. lib. 5.

The Council of Brixia about the year 1083. pronounced the Pope to be
deposed, and withdrew themselves from his Authority.

Abbas vsb. and Martyrol. page 164.

In Italy.

NIcetus an Italian Abbot.

Benno. Vgobaldus. Leo. Johannes. Petrus. Natro.
Theodinus. Cardinals, with diverse other Bishops and Priests of Italy,
forsook the Pope, and adhered to the Emperor. Auent, Anal. lib. 5.

Sygebert, a Chronicle writer of those times, taxes the Popes Excommunication
of Princes and absoluing their Subjects from obedience, of novelty and
heresy. Sygeb. in anno 1088.

And thus (through Gods assistance) we have traced out the footsteps of the
Protestants Religion from Luther to Berengarius, from the days of Henry the
eight, unto the coming in of King William the Conqueror. And we have found a
cloud of witnesses in England, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Bohemia, and
diverse other Countries, for the space almost of Five hundred years
successively professing and maintayning the same, whereby we may plainly see
that our Religion was long before Luther, and that they were not all Papists
that lived in the Christian world, before Luthers days, as the Papists
foolishly do traduce. Now let us follow the same tract a little higher, and
make inquiry whether we may not find the same in the Elder days, and in the
years of former Generations, even to the time in which Popery first began,
and before the hatching of the same; which (by the like assistance of Almighty
God) I doubt not to perform in that which follows.

But now for a while in the next ensuing Centuries, we shall, I confess,
behold the Church of Christ, like the Sun obscured in a cloud; Popery being
about this time in the height of her Pride, Revel. 17.2.14.
When the Kings of the earth gave their power and strength unto the Beast, and
the Nations were drunken with the Cup of that Babilonish Strumpet. Besides,
that (even as our Adversaries themselves acknowledge) those times were barren
and obscure times, because there were few good Writers in those times which did
Record the occurrents of the times; And therefore there cannot be expected so
large Catologue in these, as we have, either in the days before, or in these
latter Times. Yet blessed be the name of the Lord, he has not left himself
without witnessesse, even in these most obscure times, But there we may meet
with diverse, who followed the same way, and professed the same Truth, which we
Protestants now do, as may appear by the Induction following.

Between the years 1000. and 1050.
In England.

Marianus Scotus an Historiographer, who lived in the days of King Edward the
Confessor, and spared not in his writings to reprove the practice of Papists in
those days. Maxian. Scot. hist. and Martyrol. p. 149.

Under the reign of King Canutus (although superstition did in this land
wonderfully abound, yet diverse points of the Protestants religion, as
Justification by Faith, obedience in all sorts of people to Magistrates, in the
same manner as we now hold them, was then professed, as may appear by Canutus
his Laws, Martyrol p. 148. and ex Iornal. hist.

In France.

Luthericus an Archbishop in France, about this time denied the real presence
in the Sacrament. Baron: Ann. 1004. n. 5.

Glaber Rodulphus wrote, how that the Bishop of Rome should have nothing to do
in another man's Diocese. The which he also says was the opinion of all the
French Prelates. Hesp. lib. 2. c. 9. Quem refert Baronius.

In Germany.

Rodulphus Ardens Preached against the popish opinion of Merits, as appears
out of his Homily, Dominic. in Septuagint: and in his 1. Hom. in Dominic Trin.

The same Rodulphus Ardens also taught, that there is no ability in us to
keep the Law, As may appear out of his 2. Hom. in 18. dom. Trinit.

Between the years 950. and 1000.
In England.

The Clergy of England in a Council held, 975. withstood Dunstans
prohibition of Priests Marriage, Hen. lib. 5.

Fatholdus (whom some call Ethreredus) a learned man of Scotland so evidently
by Scriptures and Fathers proved, that Marriage was lawful to men in
spiritual offices, that Dunstans Miracle was reputed an illusion of the
Devil, Hist. Magdeb. cent. 10. c. 9.

Aelfricus Archbishop of Canterbury about the year 996. wrote an Epistle to
Wolfine Bishop of Shirburne against the housling of the Sacrament; And another
Epistle to Wolstan Archbishop of York against Transubstantiation. Which with a
Sermon of his in the Saxon tongue are extant. Martyrol. p. 1040. 1401. 1042.

In France.

Fulco Archbishop of Rhemes uttering his mind freely in a Council held at
Rhemes under the Reign of Carolus Simplex, against the abuses of the Court of
Rome, and for seeking reformation of the Church, was slain in that Counsel by
Vinemarus. Ex Rhem. Council.

Luitprandus a famous Historiographer, in the days of Otho the 1. wrote
against the Pope. Epist. Luitpr. ad Reginomundus Episc. Hisp.

In Germany.

Otho the Great Deposed Pope John the 13. and assumed into his own hands the
nomination and making of Popes, which was a manifest resistance against the
growth of the primacie. Sigon. lib. 7. ann. 963.

Theophilact is thought to have lived about this time, he was Bishop of
Bulgaria, and wrote Greek Commentaries upon the Evangelists, etc. He said
Antichrist should spring in the decay of the Roman Empire; and of Marriage,
that it was honorable, and a step to the Chair of a Bishop. Theophilact.

Between the years 900. and 950.
In England.

The English Clergy about this time were very peremptory against the Real
presence. Osbernun vit. St. Oden. Martyrol. p. 1029.

The Laws of King Athelstan, and of King Edward the Elder, do plainly show,
that the Kings of England at that time governed as well in causes
Ecclesiastical as civil. Extract. e legibus. Rex Athelst. Martyrol. p. 1039.

In France.

Reynerus confesses, that about this time there were in France, diverse of the
Predecessors of the Abbigenses, which even in those days held their opinions,
Illyr. tom, 2. c. 5. p. 548.

In Germany.

The book entitled Fasciculus temporum complains of the manifold abuses
which about this time were in the Church of Rome, which caused diverse of the
Germans to write, and to inueigh against the same, Fascic. temp. p. 68.

Between the years 850. and 900.
In England.

KIng Alfred caused the Psalter and diverse other parcels of holy Scripture to
be translated into the English tongue, that the English might be the better
acquainted with the same. Gulielm. de Regiby. Angl.

Johannes Scotus a great learned man was famous about this time, he wrote a
Book (...), and an other De corpore and sanguine Domini, for the which, and
other of his Positions contrary to the opinion of the popish Church, he was
accused of the Pope for an Heretic, and at the last was murdered. Iornal. c.
171. Martyrol. p. 130.

Noetus and Werefrithus at the same time here in England were of the same
opinions. Ibid.

In Germany.

Huldericke Bishop of Ausburgh about the year 867. wrote an Epistle to Pope
Nicholas the 1. proving by substantial reasons, that Priests ought not to be
restrained from Marriage, Ex tat haec Epist. Martyrol. p. 125. Illyric. in
Catal. Meminit etiam huius Epistolae Aeneas Siluius in sua perigr, and
Germaniae descriptione.

The Bishop of Rauenna also about this time wrote against the Supremacy of the
Bishp of Rome. Anast. in vit. Nich.

In Constantinople.

Michael the Emperor, and Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople stoutly
resisted the Popes supremacy, in opposition of whom the Ambassadors of Pope
Adrian the 2. came to Constantinople, where a Council being gathered by
Basilius against Photius, great policy was used in that Council, to have all
things framed to the content of the Romish Bishop, Michael was slain, Photius
deposed, and to his place Taratius a great defender of the adoration of Images
is preferred. Exopist. Nich. ann. Mich. Anastas. in vit. Nich. 1.

Between the years 800. and 850.
In England.

John Mailros. Claudius Clemens.
Two learned men of Scotlan sent by King Achaius to Charles King of France, and
the first professors of Learning in the University founded in Paris; These two
were much disliked by the Prelates of the Romish Church, because they would not
assent to all the superstitions of that Church in an age so miserably deformed.
Patrick, Symps. hist of the Chapter 2. Book. cent. 8. p. 386.

In France.

Claudius Bishop of Tours opposed himself against the adoration of Images,
Invocation of Saints, Pilgrimage, etc. Jonas Aurel. de Cult: Imag.

Albertus Ballus a Bishop in France was Excommunicated by Pope Zachary,
because he held diverse things contrary to the Romish superstitions. Hist.
Magd. cent. 8. cap. 10.

In Germany.

Lotharius the Emperor reduced the Pope to the obedience of the Empire, and
sent three Archbishops, twenty Bishops, and diverse noble men to Rome, who
disputed against the Pope and confuted him. Anastas. vit. Po^t; (...) Serg. 2.

Between the years 750. and 800.
Bertram that famous learned man, very skillful in the Scriptures, and of a
life unblameable, as Trithemius testifies of him, wrote a B^oke about this time
against Transubstantiation, which book is now extant. Trithem. Catul. script.

Alcwinus and the Bishops of England wrote an Epistle substantially grounded
out of holy Scripture about this time to the French King against setting up of
Images and other popish practices. Continuatio Bedae in ann. 792.

In Germany.

Charles the great assembled a Counsel at Franckeford about the year 794.
wherein was condemned the worshipping of Images Council. Fr.

The same Charles also caused a book to be made against the 2 Nicene Counsel
(where the worshipping of Images was decreed) with another set forth by
Ludouicus his Son to the same effect; Both which are to be seen at this day.
Rhegino. Chron. 2.

In Constantinople.

In the year of our Lord 755. and in the 13. year of the Reign of
Constantinus Copronymus a general Council of 338. Bishops were assembled at
Constantinople, in which Council the worshipping of Images is condemned, and
the placing of them in Oratories and Temples was forbidden. Zonar. Tem. 3. p.
88.

Between the years 700. and 750.
In England.

Beda translated St. John's Gospel into English. Malmsh.

Adelbartus. Clemens.
These two here in England about this time preached against the Popes
Supremacy, Traditions, Images, Purgatory, Masses for the dead, and in defense
of Priests marriage. Illyr. Catal. test. tom. 1. p. 633.

In Constantinople.

Philipicus. Leo Isaurus.
Two Emperors of Constantinople opposed themselves against the Popes
supremacy, and the worshipping of Images. Zon. tom. 3. p. 84.

Between the years 650. and 700.
In England.

AIdan. Finian.
Coleman, Three Scottish Bishops. Also, Cutbertus. Iurummanus. Cedda.
Wilfridus, of whom it is testified, that they gave themselves wholly to the
preaching of the word, and followed that life which they preached, giving good
example to others; that they abhorred the papal pomp, and had many bitter
controversies with the Court of Rome, Bed. lib. 2.23. and lib. 4 c. 3.
Martyrol. p. 110.

In Constantinople.

About the year 681. and in the 12. year of Constantius Pagonatus, a general
Counsel was held at Constantinople, where was disanulled the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, concerning prohibition of Marriage to men in spiritual
offices, as also it was ordained, that the Patriarch of Constantinople should
be equal in authority with the Pope of Rome. Sext. Synod. Can. 13. Also it
was forbidden to make the holy Ghost in likeness of a Dove. Caxanc. in can. 82.

In Portugal.

In the Council of Bracara there held about this time, the Cup was appointed
to be ministered to the Laietie, as well as the Bread in the Administration of
the Sacrament, against the practice of some who then used to dip the Bread, and
so to give it, which was one beginning of the half Communion. Council. Bracaz.
3.1.

Between the years 600. and 650.
In England.

MEllitus. Brockmaile.
1100. Monks of Bangor (not Monks after the Popish order, but living by the
sweat of their brows, and labor of their own hands) who were miserably
slain, because they withstood the proceedings of Austin the Monk, who from
the Pope was sent over into England. Polychus, 20. Martyrol. p. 107.

In France.

Serenus Bishop of Marsils in France about this time opposed the popish
bringing in of Images into the Churches, and brake down all the Images that
that were set up in his Diocese, Alphons. v. Imago.

In Greece.

The whole Greek Church complained at Phocas, when first he gave the
Supremacy to Boniface. Plat. Bonif. 3.

Gregory Bishop of Rome, no less contesting against that Supremacy, taxing
the desire thereof as a Character of Antichrist, Greg. Epist. 32.34.38, 39.

Thus have we traced the footsteps of the Protestant Church 400. years and
upward before the Conquest of England by William Duke of Normandy, a thousand
years before Luthers time, or the days of Henry the eight; and have found our
Religion professed and maintained by diverse persons, and in sundry places, not
only here in England, but also in most parts of Christendom, even to the time
when Popery began to show it self in her colors in the days of Boniface the
3. of that name Bishop of Rome, and Phocas the Emperor. 2 These. 2.7.
At what time as that mystery of iniquity, which began to work in the
Apostles days, did gather head, and display it self; how easy it will be
for us to derive the succession hereof from an higher descent, and to show the
continuance thereof from the Apostles time, shall hereafter be made manifest.
In the mean while, we will for a while look back unto our pope-Catholike
Adversaries, and find out their starting holes, by examining what they object
or can except against the Catalogue before recited, and see what color they
have to set upon their false suggestion which they buzze into the ears of
their proselites, that our Religion was not heard of before Luthers time, when
we have such a cloud of Witnesses of our side, as already has been produced.

Their first cavil is against the smalnesse of the number; Genebrard. Chr.
lib. 4.
Admit (say they) that there have been in the days of old, some that have
leaned to diverse of these heretical propositions of the Protestants, and have
opposed themselves against the doctrine of the Romish Church, Brist. praefat.
in moti^^
(as there has been scarce any piece or Article of the Roman faith, but by
one or other, first or last, it has been called in question,) yet (as Andrew
said of the five Barley Loaves and two small Fishes, which were to be divided
among five thousand hungry people, John 6.9.
Ioh. 6.9. What are these among so many? so say they? What are these few?
Bellarm. lib. 4. de Eccles. c. 8. Rhem. in Act. 11 ss. 4.
this little handful of Protestants in regard of whole Countries Kingdoms,
and Nations throughout all the world, who have embraced the Catholic faith of
the Church of Rome, and adhaered to that sea? or how can so small a number make
a visible Church?

To this we answer, 1. That number or multitude is no true mark or note of a
Church; for if Truth should be measured by the opinion or practice of the
multitude; Then Iesabels Church should be better then the Church of which
Elias was, 1 King. 18.19.
for Baals Prophets were 450. fed at Iesabels Table, when as Elias (as far as
he could see) was left himself alone, Then should the Pagan religion be
better then that in Israel which was but an handful in regard of the rest of
the world; Psalm. 76.1.2. Psalm. 147.19.20.
Then should Turkisme be better then the Christian religion, for that at this
day has greater number that follow it then this. And so the Turk should be
better then the Pope, Mahumetisme more to be commended then Popery, because
the ones Dominion is larger in extent then the other, and that has more
Proselites then this: But our Blessed Savior himself preuenteth that
objection, when he calls his flock, Pusillum gregem, A little flock, Luke
12.31. Math. 7.13.
Luke 12.13. and again tells us. Mat. 7.13. that wide is the gate and broad
they way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat,
but straight is the gate, and narrow the way which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it.

2. It is no wonder that in these times of persecution of the Church of Christ
by the Sea of Rome, the number of true professors was so small; for these were
the days and times, Revel. 12.5.6.
When this woman fled into the wilderness, when the greatest part of the
Christian world, both small and great, rich and poor, Revel. 13.16, 17.
bond and free, were compelled to receive the mark of the Beast, and no man
could buy or sell, save he that had the mark or the name of the beast, or the
number of his name; By reason whereof the number of this faithful flock of
Christ was much diminished and obscured; which is the cause why the professors
of our Religion in those times, being driven from place to place, and
persecuted by Antichristian tyranny; Their names, the places of their abode,
and other circumstances, whereby their memories should have been preserved,
could not so easily be made known unto us.

3. As the true Church may sometimes be more secret and hidden, ye^ reduced to
a very small number, as already has been declared, so that number, be it
never so small, that company be they never so few (professing the Truth aright,
and having the right marks of the Church) may be a true Church, Where two or
three (says our blessed Savior) are gathered together in my name, Math. 18.26.
there am I in the midst of them. Mat. 18.20. Whereupon Tertullian infers,
Tertul. exhort. ad Castital. Augustine. Ennar in psalm. 28 Durand. lib. 6.72. v.
25.
Where three are that sincerely profess the truth, there is a Church; And
Augustine says, The Church sometimes was only in the house of Noah, sometimes
in Abraham's family only, sometimes in Lot and his house. And the Papists
themselves do acknowledge, that at the time of our Saviors Passion the true
Faith remained only in the Virgin Mary.

4. Neither have I (in the Catologue before recited) set down all that either
lived or are recorded in the several Ages above mentioned, but only a few in
stead of many; by which few it may be easily gathered that there were many
more of them, for such Learned, such eminent men, when they show forth
themselves, could not want partakers, howsoever the oppression and Tyranny of
the adverse party did keep them under. Neither are there so few who have
already been named, if we rightly cast the account; In some of these
Centuries and half Centuries (I confess) there appear more, in some less,
as the cloud of Popish ignorance or persecution did thicken or lessen; as
sometimes amounting to hundreds, at other times to thousands, as may appear by
that which already has been alleged. And this (if we had no more witnesses
to preduce) were enough for answer unto their demand, who require us to show
any that professed our Religion before the days of Martin Luther, and to stop
the mouths of our Popish adversaries, who thus vauntingly insult over us,
Rhem. in Romans 11.4.
That they will not put the Protestants to prove, that there were seven
thousand of their Sect before their new Elias, Luther began; But let them prove
(say they) that there were seven, or any one, either then, or before then, in
any Age, that was in all points of his belief.

Rhemists are a branch of another Objection, which the Papists frame against
our former Catologue. Gregor. de Valenc. Com. theol. ^om. 3. d. 1.
And that is this, How can you prove (say they) that those parties whom you
claim to be yours (such as in the former Catalogue were mentioned) held the
same Religion which you now do, or if in some things they may seem to accord
with you, yet that in all points, they were of your belief.

To this I answer: 1. That it is not requisite that to prove them to profess
the same Religion together with us, we must prove them in all points to have
been of our Belief, or that the least difference in opinion should make a
difference in Religion, for what Church ever was there, wherein all the members
thereof did fully consent in every point without any show of difference?
Surely, not the Pope Catholic Church; for do all that profess themselves
members of that Church agree in every point professed and maintained by that
Church? Council. Trident. Watso^. Quodl.
What then mean those great Differences between the Scotists and Thomists,
See D. White his way to the true Church.
between the Dominicans and Franciscans, between the Priests and Jesuits;
yea, between their best and most relied upon Divines? Yea what point of their
Religion is there (wherein they and we do differ) which has not been
contradicted by one or other of their own Religion? Neither could the purest
Churches in the primitive Times claim freedom in all her members, from all
difference in opinion, as hereafter shall be manifested. Now then, if among
those whom in the Catalogue above mentioned I have recorded, (to have been of
our side) there be not found in every point a joint opinion and full consent,
shall they therefore be denied to have been of our Religion? By the same
reason, many of the ancient Fathers should not be of the Communion of Saints or
Catholic congregation, seeing that they likewise had their differences, and
they that were most Orthodoxe amended the others errors. This therefore, can
no whit prejudice our Cause, though all above mentioned did not in all and
every point of our Religion maintain the same that we do; for thus a learned
Divine of theirs does acknowledge, Luc, Pin. these. vadem. these. 83
That the unity of the Church consists in this, that the members thereof
believe the same things, use the same worship of God, and receive the same
Sacraments.

2. That they and we hold the same Religion, we prove by the Testimony of our
Adversaries themselves. Campian. rat. 10. Cochlae. hist. Huss. lib. 1. and 2.
Campian calls John Husse and Wichlief, the forerunners of our Faith.
Cochleus says, that John Husse took his Doctrine from the Wichleuists. And
Aeneas Syluius, Aene. Syl. hist. Bohem. c. 35. Bellar. in Praf. general Contr.
that the Wichleis did embrace the opinion of the Waldenses. And Bellarmine
joyneth together, as professors of the same Religion, the Berengarians,
Petrobrusians, Albigenses, Waldenses, Wichliuists, Hussits, Lutherans,
Zuinglians, Caluinists, etc.

3. We prove them and us to accord for substance in one and the same Religion,
by comparing our Doctrine and practice now, with that of theirs in former
times; The which concordance (to avoid prolixitie) shall be manifested in these
particulars.

1. About the Scriptures.
We make them the rule and trial of our Faith, and hold the sufficiency
thereof unto salvation. Artic. 6. Synod. Land. and Homil. 10. So does the
Augustan confession. Artic. 1. So John Husse and the Bohemian Protestants. Job.
Huss. de abomin. Sacerd. and Monach. page 84. So John Wichlief, Artic. 6.
collected out of his Sermons, Martyrol. page 396. So the Waldenses, Artic. 1.
vide hist. Waldens.

What Books we esteem Canonical, and what Apochypha, Artic. 6. Synod. Land.
The same do the Augustan confess. Artic. 2. objects against them in the Trent
Counsel, the French, Artic. Gal. confess. 9. So the Belgicks, Artic. 41.
Belgic. Confess. So the Waldenses, Artic.

What we hold for the translation of them, and having them in the vulgar
Tongue. Hom. 9. The same Weselus Groningensis. patet ex Nontemag. The Lollards,
subregno henric. 5. Martyrol. p. 69. The Waldenses, Art. 10. Arnulphus, ex
opere tripart. King Alphred, Martyrol. page 1115. The French men above 200.
years since, Praefat. in testum. Rheon. ss. 4. Confess. Heluet. Art. 4. Bohem.
c. 1. Belgic. Art. 7. Saxon. Art. 1. Suerim. Artic. 1.

About the Sacraments.
AS we hold that they are effectual Seals and pledges, etc. Artic. 25.
Synod. Land. So Magdeburg. Eccl. cent. 12. August. artic. 13. Heluet. artic.
29. John Wichleif in Trialog. Waldens. art. 9.

As we deny the Sacraments of themselves to have power to confer Grace.
Synod. Land. artic. 26. Homil. 15. So Hierome Schuff. coram Archiep. Treuir.
Rocherano and the Bohemtan Ministers, Prucer. 5. Waldenses, Artic. 14.

As we acknowledge but two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.
Catecluf. Angl. and Art. 25. So Confess. Heluet. artic. 20. Basil. artic. 5.
Belg. art. 33. Saxon. artic. 12. So Weselus Groningens Johan. Monterger, Anton.
Nancinel. vt supra. Waldenses, artic. 11.

About Baptism.
AS we deny Baptism of it self to wash away all Sin, or to confer Grace
ex opere operato. Artic. 27. So Confess. Heluet. artic. 21. Augustan, artic. 9.
Bohem 12. Wittemb. c. 10.

About the Supper of the Lord.
AS we deny the real presence of CHRIST'S very Body and Blood in that
Sacrament. Synod. Land. artic. 28. So Confess. Heluet. art. 22. Bohem. 13.
Picus Mirandula, John Husse, Wichleif, the Waldenses, Aelfricus, and in a
manner all in our Catalogue before recorded.

As we contest against the Mass. Homil. 15. So Confess. Heluet. artic. 11.
Bohem. c. 6. Augustan. artic. 34. So Gerrhardus, Dulcinus, Arnulphus, vt supra.
So the Waldenses, artic. 4.

As we maintain the receiving of the Communion in both kinds. Synod. Land.
artic. 30. So Confess. Heluet. artic. 22. Saxon. act. 15. John Huss. Calestini,
sub vtraque in Bohem. Waldenses, Artic. 11.

About the Church.
AS we hold the due administration of the Word and Sacraments, to be the true
marks of the visible Church. Synod. Land. artic. 19. So Confess. Heluet. act.
14. Bohem. c. 8. Suen. 32.

As we deny the Church of Rome to be the Catholic Church. Homil. 1. So
Confess. August. artic. 4. Arnolph. in council. Rhem. Wichleif. Sygebert, etc.

As we deny the Churches authority to be greater then the Scriptures. Synod.
Land. artic. 20. so Confess. Heluet. artic. 4. Basil. artic. 10. Bohem. c. 1.
Preachers in Suiden. Abbas vspag. Gulielm. de Sanct. Amore, etc.

About the Pope.
AS we deny the Popes Supremacy. Oath of allegiance. so Confess. Heluet.
artic. 18. Bohem. c. 8. Augustan. artic. 7. so Hierome Sauanorola; Thomas
Rhedonensis, Wichleif, Gulielmus Ocham, etc.

As we hold the Pope to be Antichrist. King James Expos. of the Revel. So the
Council in France under Hugh Capet. So Antoninus Marcidellis, Mathias
Parisiensis, Marsilius Patauinus, Rochetailada, and in a manner all in the
Catalogue before mentioned.

Of Justification.
AS we hold that we are justified by Faith, and not by Works. Synod. Land.
artic. 11. So Confess. Heluet. 2. c. 16. Augustan. artic. 6. Bohem. c. 7.
Weselus Groaning. Pieus Mirandula, Bernard, Arnulphus, etc. vt supra.

About Priests Marriage.
AS we hold it lawful by the word of God for Bishops, etc. to Marry. Artic.
32. So Confess. Heluet. artic. 37. Bohem. c. 9. Wittemb. c. 21. Waldensis.
artic. 9.

About Purgatory.
AS we reject the opinion of Popery as fond and ridiculous. Synod. Land.
artic. 22. So Confess. Helu. c. 26. August. artic. 11. so the Waldenses, artic.
3. so John Husse, Wichleif, and the most part of the above named, etc.

About the Civil Magistrate.
AS we hold that Kings and Princes have the chiefest power in their Kingdoms,
both in causes Civil and Ecclesiastical. Synod. Land. art. 37. so Confess.
Heluet. artic. 26. Bohem. c. 16. Augustan. artic. 16. so Henry the 5. Emperor,
Frederich, Barbarosia, Taulerus Plesiano, Ludo, and the most of the rest above
named.

I might go on in the comparison through every point of Doctrine in our
Churches, and show the consent of these likewise in the particulars together
with us; But for avoiding of prolixitie, I refer the Reader to the
examination hereof, in the denotation of their particular opinions, as they are
set down in order in the Catalogue.

And here by the way we will mere with another Objection of theirs which is
this; What do you talk (say they) of Unity and Consent in your Protestant
Churches? you cannot tell whom you follow, nor who are with you; The Lutherans
are against the Zuinglians, these against the Caluinists; The Geneua and other
reformed Churches, differ in many points from the English; Therefore if any in
the Catalogue before mentioned, were Lutherans, they were none of yours; If
they were Caluinists, they were none of yours? And therefore, how can you show
your Religion in former times.

I answer. 1. It is not strange to see difference in some circumstances
between those that profess one and the same Religion. St. Paul testifies of
the Church of Rome, (even then when it was at the best) That there were therein
who caused divisions and dissentions, contrary to the Doctrine which they had
received. Romans 16.17.
And of the Corinthians he says, There was among them envying, strife and
contention, some held of Paul, 1 Cor. 3.3. Act. 15.39. Gal. 2.11.
some of Apollos, some of Cephas. So Paul and Barrabas, yea Paul and Peter had
their differences. So Polycrates and Victor, Cyprian and Cornelius, Cyrill and
Theodoret, Hierome and Ruffinus. Nazianzen and the Council of Constantinople,
had not only their differences, but also bitter oppositions; yet all agreeing
in the substance of Faith, and reputed members of the same Catholic Church.

2. We answer, The defects and corruptions of Churches must be distinguished;
and they be either in Doctrine or in manners; Again, corruptions in Doctrine
must further be distinguished, some of them are errors indeed, but besides
the foundation, some directly against the foundation, and these ouerturne all
Religion, whereas the former do not. As are these defects and corruptions in
Churches, so are their differences, some about Ceremonies, some about
substance. Now although the Churches of Geneua, Heluetia, Belgia, etc. differ
from us in some points of Ceremonies and Circumstances, yet look we to the
substance of Faith and Doctrine which we and they profess, there is no
difference at all between us; Indeed the maine difference is between us and
them, about the point of Ecclesiastical Discipline. But mark in what manner,
we all jointly agree in the substance of the Discipline, confessing on each
side that there must be the Preaching of the Word, Administration of the
Sacraments, according to the institution, and the use of the power of the
Keys, in Admonitions, Suspensions, Excommunications; The difference between
us is only touching the persons, and the manner of putting this Discipline in
execution; And therefore notwithstanding this by difference, we and they are
of one and the same Religion, as may likewise appear by the Harmony of
Confessions.

3. As concerning those Churches, which commonly are called the Lutheran
Churches; though their Augustan Confession has not satisfied the expectation
of other of the reformed Churches, and some of the more rigid among them,
Admonition of the Ministers in the Parler.
hate us as bad as Papists, yet we and they are of one Church; for we have the
same enemies in matters of Religion, and do alike confess the Divinity, The
office of the Mediator, the doctrine of Faith, of good Works, of Repentance,
and in opinion about the Word, the Church, the Magistrate, are of one
judgment. They differ indeed from us in the matter of the Sacrament, and
therein are in a gross error. But that difference between them and us, does
not take away wholly the Analigie of Faith and Doctrine between us; for that
there is a true and real receiving of the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Lords Supper, we all agree. And we jointly confess, that Christ is there
present so far forth, that he does truly feed us with his very Body and Blood
to Eternal life; all the controversy lies in the manner of receiving, we
acknowledging a Spiritual receiving, which is by the hand of Faith; They
adding thereto the Corporal, whereby they imagine themselves to receive Christ
with the hand and mouth of the Body. And though to maintain this their
opinion they be constrained to turn the ascension of Christ into a
disparition, whereby his Body being visible becomes invisible; yet in the
maine points we agree, that he entered into his Kingdom in our name for us;
that we are governed and preserved by his power and might, and that whatsoever
good thing we have or do, proceeds wholly from the grace of his Spirit; we
pity their errors, and leave their persons unto God. Again Popish
Transubstantiation, and Lutheran Consubstantiation are both, we confess,
against the truth of the Manhood of Christ, yet with great difference.
Transubstantiation is flat against an Article of Faith; for if Christ his body
be made of Bread, and his blood of Wine, (which must needs be, if there be a
conversion of the one into the other) then was he not borne of the Virgin
Mary; for it cannot be both made of Bakers bread, and also of the substance of
the Virgin. Again, it wholly abolisheth the outward Sign, and the analogy
between the sign and the thing signified, and so ouerturneth the Sacrament.
But Consubstantiation does not so, Q.
neither does it overthrow the substance of any Article of Religion, but only
a maine point of Philosophy, which is, That a Body does occupy only one
place at one time. Therefore howsoever in this point there be a great
difference between the Lutherans and us, yet we may be both of one Church.

Papists object against our former Catalogue of Protestants. Popish disc. of
Faith ss. 57
Admit (say they) that in former ages you can find some that were your
ancestors, and the forerunners of your Faith; Stapleton. de Iustif. lib. 9. c. 7
yet what manner of persons were they? Such as were notorious Heretics, men
branded with the mark of gross and damnable Doctrines, Campia^. rat. 10.
prodigious and hellish lives, Reprobates, condemned by Popes and general
Councels, yea the very dregs, and the bellows, and the Jewel of hell.

To this we answer. 1. That it is no new thing for those, who are most
blameless to be slaundered with many false and unjust calumniations; Blessed
are ye (says our blessed Savior) when men shall revile you, Math. 5.11.12
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake; Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, Act.
2.13. and 16 20. and 17.7. 2. Cor. 12.16.
for so prosecuted they the Prophets which were before you. As were the
Prophets so likewise the Apostles, at more times and in more places then one,
charged with many accusations, which yet in truth were but mere calumniations,
Plinius.
so the Jews (when the visible Church of God was only among them) were
slandered as worshippers of Hogs, Cornel. Tacit.
and Asses, and contemners of all Religion; So the old Christians in the
Primitive Church, were slandered to use incestuous company each with other
like Oedipus, and to eat man's flesh at the banquet of Thyestes; Eusebius. Eccles.
hist. lib. 4. c. 7. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 2 Eusebius. lib. 9. c. 6 Sozom. l. 5. c. 25
Idem lib. 8. c. 28
So Athanasius, Narcissus, Cyrill, Chrysostom, and which else of the
ancientest worthies of the Church, have been free from slanders and sinister
imputations? No marvel then if these, who in their several times did separate
themselves from the common corruptions of the Times, and withstood the errors
of those lines, do taste of the malignant aspersion in those times.

Secondly, we are not so much to regard what the Court of Rome, and their
Councels have thought and pronounced against these our Ancients, for they were
parties partially affected against these their opposits, and it is no rare
thing with that Synagogue, to damn those to the pit of hell, who any ways
cross their proceedings; Neither do we believe that all they are or were
Heretics, whom the Papists call heretics; for whatsoever does withstand
their Hierarchy, they account heresy. But our Apology in that behalf is
that of the Apostle St. Paul, Act. 24.14.
After the way which they call heresy, so worship we the God of our Fathers.
Rob. Grosthead B. of Lincoln. vt citatur in Wichleif trialog.
And if that description of Heresy may go for current, which was delivered by
a Reverend and learned Prelate in this Land, almost four hundred years agone,
Haeresis Graece, electio Latin est sententia humano sensu electu, scripturae
sacrae contrar^^ palam docta, pertinaciter defensu.
That Heresy is an opinion hatched in man's own brain, contrary to holy
Scripture, openly maintained, and stiffly defended; then can they by no means
brand either us or these our predecessors, with the name of Heretics, who
neither hold any opinions grounded upon our own fancies, neither openly
maintained or stoutly stand to any errors whereof they justly can convict us,
but that we and they are truly orthodoxe and right Catholics, who teach and
maintain nothing, but that whereof we have evident warrant out of the Word of
God.

Thirdly, what is that which they can object against any of those who are
mentioned in our former Catalogue? Is it concerning our Faith or Life, or both?
Let us look to the Trial of the particulars, and I doubt not, but all their
suggestions will prove lies, and mere slanders, as may appear if we do take
a view of the particulars.

And here. 1. We will begin at Luther, because their spite is most against
him, as being a principal opposite of theirs, and upon whom they would father
the beginning of our cause. And let us hear what they can say against Luther.

Popish Discourse of Faith. ss. 57.
Martin Luther (say they) was an Apostate Friar, a man known by his writings,
words, deeds, and death, to have been a notorious evil liver. That Luther was
sometimes a Friar, we grant, and that afterward through the mercy of God, he
obtaining a more clear knowledge of the Truth, renounced their profession we
do not deny; But what Apostasy was this in him? or how can it more disparage
him, Act. 22.3. and 23.6. and 9.1, 2, 3, 6, 18, 19. D. White his way to the
true Church.
then it did the Apostle Paul, who at the first was a Pharisie, and after that,
being better illightned by God, renounced the profession Pharisaicall, and
became an Apostle, both those former professions being mere hypocrisy, save
that this of the Friar is of the deeper tincture.

Stapleton. disc. p. 159.
And what have they to say against his Writings? Forsooth they were unsavory,
rash, petulant, unsound, and altogether heriticall. Soon said, but not so
soon proved, for it does so appear by their confutation of the same? let them
make that appear, and then we will credit them; In the mean space, howsoever
we stand not in defense of all, either matter or manner of his writings,
neither indeed do we build upon him, we will rather give credit to some less
partial, but more iuditious even among the Papists themselves, who give other
manner of testimony concerning Luthers writings; Q. Erasm: ad Cardin: Mogunt.
for thus Erasmus speaks of them; It is observed for a truth, that these men
(meaning the Papists) condemn many things in Luthers books, which in
Augustine and Bernard are read for godly and good divinity; And he adds,
That he sees this, the best men are least offended at his writings. Hosiand.
Hist. Eccles. cent. 16. p. 837.
So Andreas Masius in the company of diverse observed and acknowledged, that
there was more divinity in one page of Luther, then sometimes in a whole book
of some Father.

And what can they object against his life? did he forsake his Monastery and
give himself to the Devil, following him, and doing homage unto him, that all
things might prosper according to his mind; as did Siluester the second?
Platin. in Siluest. 2.
did he rob Churches, and murder his Predecessors, as did Pope Boniface the
seventh; Baron ann 985 n. 1. Onu^^. lib. 3.
did he commit incest with his own Daughter, as did Pope Alexander the sixth?
did he cast the Sacrament into the fire, as did Pope Hildebrand? did he keep a
beuie of whores, Benno Cardinalis. Luitprand. lib. 6. c. 6. and. 7.
turn the Church into a Stews, drink healths to the devil, revel up and
down the streets in armor, and set men's houses on fire, as Pope John the 12.
did? No surely: Not any show in Luthers life of any of these or such like
offenses, yea, Erasmus (one who was familiar with him) in a certain Epistle to
Cardinal Wolsie gives testimony of him, Erasm. Epist. ad Cardinal. E^^rac.
that his life was approved with great consent of all men, And this (says he)
is no small honor to him, that the integrity of his manners is so great, that
his very enemies can find nothing which they may Calumniate.

Pontac. Campian. Onupb. in Ioh. 8
What deeds then has he done, for which they should find such fault with his
life? Forsooth he married a Nun, he lay with Bora; he lay with her; But
first he married her; he had not his Marozias, Reyneras, Theodoraes,
Stephanaes, to be his bedfellowes without any care or veil of marriage; Baron.
in ann. 928. 912.
But he was a Friar, she a Nun, both which had vowed not to marry: But who
tied them to those vows? or what vow of man can disanull the lawfulness of
Gods own ordinance; 1 Cor. 7.9. Rubrio. qui non habit vxorem habent Concubinam.
Whether, is it not better to marry then to burn? Whether is it not more
Clerke-like to have a wife of his own, then (which is common among them) to
have dispensation to keep a Concubine? It is a ruled case in their Schools,
and usual in the popish practice in this kind to dispense with vows: was
this Martin Luthers fault, that he married without their papal dispensations?

Leonic. ^^al. p. 246.
But what is it which our Papists have to say of the death of this worthy man?
An horrible miracle (says one of them) and such as before was never heard of,
that God showed in the soul death of Martin Luther, damned in body and soul:
when Martin Luther fell into his disease, He desired the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ to be given unto him, which having received, he died soon
after: Being dead, and his body laid in the grave, on the sudden such a tumult
and terror arose, as if the foundations of the earth had been shaken; the next
night after was heard a noise and cracking about Luthers Tomb much louder then
before, which waked all that were in the City out of their sleep, trembling,
and almost dead for fear, wherefore in the morning opening the Sepulcher where
Luthers detestable body was laid, they found neither body nor bones, nor
clothes, but a stink of Brimstone coming out of the grave, had well-nigh
killed all the standers by. An horrible and dreadful example indeed, if it
were true: But when I pray was this report raised? when was it written? surely
long before Luthers death; And this merry conceit being diuulged abroad, and
sucked in greedily by the Papal faction, at length a coppie thereof came to
Luthers hands, D. White his way to the true Church. p. 430.
to the which Libell he writ an Answer beginning in these words, I Martin
Luther, by this mine hand writing confess and testify, that upon the 21. of
March I received this fiction concerning my death, as it was full of malice
and madness, and I read it with a glad mind and cheerful countenance, etc.
What? my masters the Papists, are you not ashamed of these iuggling impostures?
Are you grown so impudent, that you will not conceal your false Tales and
forgeries, which you invent against holy men of God, till they be dead, but
publish them in Print in their lives time, that they themselves (as Luther and
Beza did) may convince you of slander and of malice? Bez. Epist. ad stuckium.
No wonder then that you blush not to traduce Calvin, Jewel, King, and other
worthy instruments of Gods glory, when they are dead. But you will say, you
have a true relation of Luthers fearful end, and that set forth after he was
dead indeed; Let us hear what it is; Marry this (say they) Martin Luther going
to bed, Coccl. vit Luth. Caluinaturcism. p. 957. Defense of the Cens. p. 66
merry and drunken, was found the next morning dead in his bed, his body being
black, and his tongue swelling forth as if he had been strangled, which some
think was done by the Devil, some by his wife: And that as they bare him to
Church to bury him, his body so smelt, that they were feign to throw it into a
ditch, and go their ways: Thyrraus de Daemoniac. part. 1. These. 99.
And that a servant of Luthers being in the Chamber when he died, opening a
Casement to take in the air, saw near unto him a great number of black
spirits hopping and dancing wonderful? But did they who relate this see it?
were they then present? or upon whose relation do they deliver it? Nay herein
they are altogether silent; Therefore let us hear what they who were present
with Luther at the time of his death, and saw him dying, and accompanied his
body to the Funeral, be rather believed then these railing lying Papists; And
who were these? Albert Earl of Mansfield and other noble men, Ioh. Sleidan.
Com. lib. c. 16. Hierom in Weller. Martyrol. p. 789
Iustus Jonas, Michael Coelius, Johannes Aurisaber, Ambrose his his childrens
Schoolmaster, and many more; And what testify they of his manner of dying,
even this: That in the year of our Lord 1546. the 17. of February, D. Martin
Luther sickened a little before supper of his accustomed malady, to wit, the
oppression of humors in the crifice or opening of his stomach; which
sickness seasoning upon him, he was had to bed, where he rested two hours,
where his pains increasing, he called up D. Jonas and Ambrose his childrens
Schoolmasters, and by their help removed into an other Chamber; Into which
being newly entered, Albert Earl of Mansfield with diverse other came into his
Chamber, with whom he learnedly discoursed; of our knowledge in the life to
come, of the labors in the Trent Counsel to suppress the truth, of the care
which every good Christian should take to maintain the truth; Giving himself
many times to his private prayers and soliloquies with God; And feeling his
fatal hour to approach, he commended himself to God with this devout prayer;
Heavenly Father, who art God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God
of all comfort, I give thee thanks for that thou have revealed thy Son
Christ unto me, in whom I have believed, whom I have professed, loved, and
preached; and whom the Bishop of Rome and the rest of the wicked persecute and
reproach; I beseech thee, my Lord Jesus Christ, receive my poor soul, And,
Heavenly father, though I be taken out of this life, and shall lay down this
my body, yet I believe assuredly, that I shall remain forever with thee, and
that none shall be able to pluck me out of thine hands. And having ended
this prayer, he repeated the 16. verse of the 3. chapter of the Gospel by S.
John, and then the 20. verse of the 68. Psalm, and not long after this he
commended his soul into the hands of God two or three times over, with show of
much comfort, as a man falling asleep by little and little, he departed this
life; the standers by perceiving no pain to vex him; his Funerals were
solemnly performed at Wittenberge, where by the appointment of the Prince
Elector, he was honorably buried in the tower Church, with great lamentation
of many, Bugenhagius making the Funeral Sermon, and Melancton the Oration.
This was the end of that good man, whose memory shall ever be precious in the
Church of Christ, and flourish as the rod of Aaron laid up in the Tabernacle.
Thus much for the Popish exceptions against Luther.

The next whom they except against are John Huffe and Hierome of Prage, the two
famous Bohemian Martyrs, and learned professors of our religion* And what is it
which they can say against ^^^m John Husse (say they) was a very Goose (so it
pleases them to descant upon his name, Stephen Paletz. Stanislaus de Znoymar.
Council. Constan.
which in that tongue does so signify. Hierome of Prage a mere Sophister:
both of them Arch heretics, Cochleus. lib. 2. Histor. Hussit. p. 88. Dico
igitur Iohannem Husse neque sanctum, neque beatum habendum sed impium potius,
etc.
turbulent and pernicious persons, ambitiously desiring vain glory,
maintainers of damnable and detestable opinions. Cochleus thus writes of them:
I say therefore that John Husse is neither to be accounted holy nor blessed,
but rather wicked and eternally wretched, insomuch that at the day of Judgment
it shall be more easy, not only with the Infidel Pagans, Turks, Tartarians,
and Jews, but also with the most sinful Sodomites, and the abominable
Persians, yea also with most impious Cain killer of his own brother, with
Thyestes killer of his own mother, and the Lestrigones, and other
Anthropaphagi, which devour man's flesh: yea more easy with those infamous
murderers of Infants, Pharaoh and Herod, then it shall be with him, etc.

Duraverba, A rash and harsh sentence, yet Michael the Archangell when he
contended with the Devil, Jude 9.10.
disputing about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing
accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee, But these speak evil of things
they know not. They condemn these two worthy Divines for Heretics, their
doctrine for heresy, and burn them, damn them to hell, rail against their
memory, before they prove either them or their doctrine Heretical. Aenaeas
Siluius. Antoninus. Laziardus.
True indeed it is, that Aeneas Siluius (known afterward by the name of Pope
Pius the 2.) and Antoninu^ and Laziardus do falsely father many erroneous
Articles upon them, which they never maintained, Recognitio ciuitatis and
Universe. Prag. August. 30. 1414.
neither came it into their heart to maintain, as both themselves do
profess, and the City of Prage witness with them; And in the Council of
Constance, besides many false accusations suggested against them, and their
doctrine, their true opinions were consured as haereticall; But how were they
proved so to be? how were they confuted? did not he plead his cause before the
whole Council? did he not promise to revoke his opinions if by the word of
God, it might be proved that he had erred? did they go about by the
Scriptures, and not rather by clamours, outrages, and reproaches to answer him?
I appeal to the Acts of the Council. Nay more, hear the testimony of one
who was deputed Inquisitor to enquire into the doctrine of John Husse by the
Sea of Rome, and that is the Bishop of Nazareth, Inquisitor of heresy in the
City, and Diocese of Prage, who by his Letters written, does clear him from
any heretical position. The coppie of whose Letter is to this effect.

WE Nicholas by the grace of God, Martyrolog. p. 549.
Bishop of Nazareth, and Inquisitor, specially deputed by the Apostolic Seat
for heresies, both of the City and Diocese of Prage, by these presents make
it known to all men, that we have often communed and talked with that
honorable man, Master John Husse, Bachelor of Divinity of the famous
University of Prage, and have had diverse and sundry Conferences with him, both
of the Scriptures, and diverse other matters; And in all his sayings, doings,
and behavior, we have proved and found him to be a faithful, and a
catholic man, finding no manner of evil, sinister, or by any means
erroneous doings in him: to this present we do witness and protest moreover,
how the said John Husse of late in the Cathedral Church of Prage, etc. has
set up his Letters written both in the Latin and Bohemian tongue, containing
sententially in effect, that he the aforesaid John Husse would appear before
the reverend Father Conrade Archbishop of Prage and all the Prelates and
Clergy of the Kingdom of Boheme, etc. and there be ready to satisfy every
man that shall require him to show a reason of his faith and hope that he
holds, and to see and hear all and every one which could prove any
obstinacy of error or heresy, lawfully against him, under pain to receive
the like punishment: also that he would be at the Council of Constance now at
hand, there before all the Prelates and holy Fathers, to declare and show forth
his innocence: After the which Letters as is aforesaid by the said Master John
Husse, openly set up. There did no man appear before us which would accuse the
said John Husse of any error or heresy whatsoever. For evident witness of all
which things, we have commanded these present Letters to be made, and
confirmed the same with the setting to of our Seal.

Dated in Prague, 30. of August, Anno Dom. 1414.

As for that aspersion of Ambition or vain glory, Ioh. Huss de Sacerd. and
Monachor. abhominat. page 84. Nam and ista scribens fateor quod nihil aliud me
in illi^ vrget, nisi dilectio Domini Jesus crucifixi, etc.
which the Pope-Catholikes would fasten upon this holy man, let us hear his
own Apology; In writing these things (says he) I confess that nothing
else has moved me hereunto, but only the love of our Lord JESUS Crucified,
whose prints and stripes (according to the measure of my weakness and
vileness) I covet to bear in my self, beseeching him so to assist me with
his Grace, that I may never seek to glory in my self, or in any thing else,
but only in his Cross, and in the inestimable ignominy of his Passion which
he suffered for me. And therefore, I write and speak these things, which I
doubt not but will like all such as unfeignedly love the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
contrariwise will dislike not a little all such as be of Antichrist: Also
again, I confess before the most merciful Lord JESUS CHRIST Crucified, that
these things which I do now write, and those which I have written before,
neither I could have written, nor knew how, nor durst so to have written,
unless he by his inward unction had so commanded me: Neither yet do I
write these things, as of authority, to get me a name, for (as Saint
Augustine and Hierome do say) that is only to be given to the Scriptures,
and writings of the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, which do abound in
the fullness of the Spirit of JESUS, and whatsoever is there said is full of
verity and wholesome utility.

As concerning the life and conversation both of John Husse, and Hierome of
Prague, which the Papists labor to traduce, let us hear the testimony, not
of Plebians, but of the Nobles of Morauia, not a few, but 54. of them, written
to the Council of Constance in their defense. The Copy of it begins thus:
Extat. Marty. vol. p. 386. and 387.
TO the right Reverend Fathers, and Lords in Christ, the Lords Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Ambassadors, Doctors, and
Masters, and to the whole Council of Constance; We the Nobles, Lords, Knights,
and Esquires of the famous Marquesdome of Morauia, wish the desire of all
Goodness, and the observation of the Commandments of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
For as much as every man, both by the Law of Nature, and by Gods law, is
commanded to do that to another man, which he would have done unto himself,
etc. We therefore (God being our Author) having respect, as much as in us
lies, unto the Law of GOD, and the love of our Neighbor, did send our Letters
unto Constance, for our dearly beloved Friend of good memory, Master John
Husse Bachelor of Divinity, and Preacher of the Gospel, whom of late, in the
Council of Constance (we know not with what Spirit being led) you have
condemned as an Heretic, neither having Confessed any thing, neither being
lawfully Convict, as was expedient; having no errors or Heresies declared or
laid against him, but only at the sinister and false accusations, suggestions,
and instigations of his mortal Enemies, and the Traitors of our Kingdom and
Marquesdome of Morauia. And a little after; Wherefore we have thought good,
even now to direct our Letters Patents to your Reuerences now present, in the
behalf of Master John Husse, openly professing and protesting both with heart
and mouth, That he the said Master John Husse, was a Just, Good, and Catholic
man, and for a long season worthily commended and allowed in our Kingdom, for
his Life and Conversation. And a little after; So that using all the diligence
that we might, we never heard or could understand, that Master John Husse had
Preached, taught, or by any other means affirmed any Error or Heresy in his
Sermons, or that by any manner of means he has offended Us or our Subjects,
either by word or deed, but that he has always led a quiet and Godly life,
etc. You have also cruelly Murdered the Worshipful man Master Hierome of
Prague, a man abounding in Eloquence, Master of the seven Liberal Arts, and
a famous Philosopher, not being seen, heard, or Examined, neither Convict, but
only at the sinister and false accusation of his and Our accuser, and
betrayers. And then toward the end of that Epistle: The premises
notwithstanding, We setting apart all fear of men's ordinances, provided to
the contrary, will Maintain and Defend the Law of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
the Devout, humble, and constant Preachers thereof, even to the shedding of our
Blood.

Dated at Sternberge, in the year of our Lord, 1415. upon St. Wenceslaus day,
Martyr of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.



Round about these Letters there were 54. Seals hanging, and the Names
subscribed, whose seals they were, who were these that follow: ALssokabat de
Wiscowitz. Vlricus de L Hota. Joan: de Ksimicz. Iosico de Scitowitz. Joan: de
Ziwla. Joan; de Rheychenberg. Wildo Skitzini. Derlico de Biela. Kos de
Doloylatz. Joan: de Simusin. Dobessimus de Tissa. Drazko de Aradek. Steph. de
Hmodorka. Joan: Derne de Babonecx. Barso dictus Hloder de Zeinicz. Joan:
Hmursdorfar. Plataska de Wilklek. Petrus de Sczitowcy. N. Studenica. N.
Brilcel. N. de Cromasona. Aramisicick Douant. Joan: Douant. Joan: Cziczow.
Wencessaus de N. N. de N. N. N. Iosack de N. Henricus de N. Waczlalz de Kuck.
Henric. de Zrenowicz. Baczkode Conald. Petrus dictus Nienick de Zaltoroldeck.
Czenko de Mossnow. N. de N. Zibillutz de Clezan. Joan: de Paterswald. Parsiual:
de Namyelkz. Zodonic de Zwietzik. Ratezek Zawscalp. Joan: de Tossawicz. Diua de
Spissna. Steffko de Drackzdw. Odich de Hlud. Wosfar: de Pawlowicz. Pirebbor de
Tire zenicz. Rynard de Tyrczewicz. Bohunko de Wratisdow. Vlricus de Wracdraw.
Deslaw de Nali. Bonesh: de Frohenicz. Eybl: de Royssowan.


Whose names I thought good here to annexe, not only for the more credit of
that worthy Testimony given by these Noble men, concerning the Life and
Doctrine of John Husse, and Hierome of Prague; but also to show the great
number of professors of the Protestants Religion in that small part of
Christendom, in the Marquesdome of Morauia, and that in a time when Popery
did bear so great a sway, whose example no doubt many more did follow, seeing
these were Nobles, men of prime note and esteem in their Country. And thus
much may suffice for the Apology of John Husse, and Hierome of Prague.

Exception against John Wichleif.
The next of our ancient Protestants, which the Pope-Catholikes do except
against is John Wichlief; And what is it that they can except against him?
Waldens. Epist. ad Martin. Ser.
He was (say they) an heretic, an hypocrite, a time-seruer, a man proud and
Ambitious, Ex histor. Mo. nast. D. Albani.
a sower of pestilent and pernicious Doctrine; And because he was not
preferred to greater honors and dignities of the Church, therefore he
conceiving indignations against the Clergy of these times, Polyd. Virgil. in
vita Edoard. 3.
became their mortal Enemy.

As for the crime of Heresy objected against him, we have already showed,
Apology for John Wichleif.
that it is an usual thing with the Papists, to term all those Heretics
who withstand their Popish proceedings; let them first prove his Doctrine to
be Heresy, and then they may have some color for their assertion; otherwise,
their censure does no more prejudice him, then the Pharisees did the Apostle
Paul, Act. 24.14.
in counting that Heresy which was the true Worship of God Almighty. The
Council of Constance indeed picketh out 45. Council. Constan. ss. 5.
Articles of his Positions, which they condemn as Heretical, diverse whereof,
we confess, may justly be excepted against; Wichleif. in Trid.
yet many of them (as himself complains) were falsely reported. A thing
common with the Enemies of the Truth, to invent and forge lies, that so they
may more freely defame. Respons. ad 18. Artic. Wichleif. in Fascic. rer. Expet.
There was one William Wideford, who took upon him to answer 18. Articles,
said to be Wichleifs; whence a man may gather some of his Doctrine; but that
all things there said against him, were not true, may well be observed out of
the same answer, declaring that he had many things concerning Wichliffe only by
fame and report, In sine. Artic. 10
which we may well know is not always the most certain relator. But suppose
that in his opinions and assertions some blemishes peradventure may be noted;
yet such blemishes they be as rather declare him to be a man that might err,
then which did directly fight against Christ our Savior, as the Popes
proceedings and the Friars did. And what Doctor, or learned man has been from
the prime age of the Church, so perfect, and so absolutely sure, in whom no
opinion has sometimes swerued away?

As for pride and vain glory which they tax in Wichliffe, what color can
they have for that imagination; seeing that their own Chronicles do affirm,
Ex histor. Monast. D. Albani.
that he and his fellows accustomed to go barefooted, and in simple russet
Gowns, and in gesture and behavior to show much humility. As little show
have they of Ambition, which they tax in him, or indignation for want of
preferment in those times; L. Archbishop of Canterb. p. 66. Ex Archiu: Colleg.
Baliol. Oxon.
for neither was his preferment so mean, he being both Public Reader of
Divinity in the famous University of Oxford, and also head of a College in
that University; And also having been employed as an Ambassador with
certain other Lords and men of great esteem by King Edward the third sent
into Italy, Martyrol. p. 390.
to treat with the Popes Legates concerning the affairs betwixt the King and
the Pope, Ibid. p. 393. and 412.
with full Commission: The Copy whereof Extat. Acts and Monum. p. 390.
Moreover, what dignity or preferment here in England could have been wanting
unto him, had he ambitiously affected the same, Jbid. p. 393. and 412.
having such especial Patrons as the King himself, the Duke of Lancaster,
Earl Percie Lord Marshall, the Earl of Salisburie, and diverse others of the
greatest in Land, who continually took his part, and stood with him?

Moreover as concerning his great Learning, we have the confession of Friar
Walden, his most cruel and bitter enemy, who in a certain Epistle written to
Pope Martin the fifth says, Walden. Epist. ad Martin. 5.
That he was wonderfully astonished at his most strong Arguments, with the
places of authority which he had gathered, with the vehemency and force of
his reasons, etc. And for further Testimony both of his life and learning,
hear the public Testimonial of the whole University of Oxford given unto
him and his memory; The Copy whereof follows.

Unto all and singular the Children of our holy Mother the Church, to whom this
present Letter shall come, the Vice-Chancelor of the University of Oxford,
with the whole congregation of the Masters wish perpetual health in the LORD.
For as much as it is not commenly seen, that the Acts and Monuments of valiant
men, nor the praise and merrits of good men should be passed over, etc.
Hereupon it follows, that the special good will and care which we bear unto
John Wichliffe, sometime child of our University, and Professor of Divinity,
moving and stirring our minds (as his manners and conditions required no
less) with one mind, voice, and testimony, we do all witness, all his
conditions and doings throughout his whole life, to have been most sincere and
commendable; whose honest manners and conditions, profoundnesse of Learning,
and most redolent Renown and fame, we desire the more earnestly to be notified
and known to all the faithful; For that we understand the maturitie and
ripeness of his conversation, his diligent labors and travails to tend to
the praise of God, the help and safeguard of others, and the profit of the
Church. Wherefore we signify unto you by these presents, that his conversation
even from his youth upwards, unto the time of his death, was so praiseworthy
and honest, that never at any time was there any note or spot of suspicion
noysed of him, But in his answering, reading; preaching, and determining, He
behaved himself laudibly, and as a stout and valiant Champion of the Faith,
vanquishing by the force of the Scriptures, all such who by their wilful
beggerie blaspheamed and slaundered Christ's Religion. Neither was this said
Doctor convict of any heresy, or burned by our Prelates: God forbid that our
Prelates should have condemned a man of such honesty, for an Heretic, who
among all the rest of the University, has written in Logic, Philosophy,
Divinity, Morality, and the Speculatiue Art, without peer. The knowledge of
which, all and singular things, we do desire to testify and deliver forth,
to the intent that the fame and renown of this said Doctor, may be the more
evident, and had in reputation among them, unto whose hands these present
Letters testimonial shall come.

In witness whereof, we have caused these our Letters testimonial to be
Sealed with our common Seal. Dated at Oxford, in the Congregation house the 5.
day of October, in the year of our Lord. 1406.

Thus far of Doctor Wickliffe, and of the cauils which the Papists do object
against him; The next that especially they except against in the Catalogue
before recited, are the Waldenses.

Exceptions against the Waldenses. Laziardus. Volaterranus. Syluius.
And what have they to except against these Waldenses?

These Waldenses (say they) were a beggarly rascal sort of people, ignorant
and unlearned, seditious, factious, followers of evil opinions, and among the
rest, they would have all things common among them.

To that exception of Papists against the poverty of these Waldenses we
answer. 1. Apology for the Waldenses.
That poverty can be no disgrace unto them who live uprightly, and maintain
the truth in sincerity, Prou. 19.1.
Better is the poor that walks in his integrity, then the rich that is
perverse; has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, Iam. 2.5.
and heirs of the kingdom of heaven? 2. Neither yet were they all in such
poverty, Histor. Waldensium.
for Waldus (whom they call the ring leader of them) was a man of great
substance, Reymund Earl of Toulouse, and diverse other great Potentates adhered
to them and their Religion. 3. Neither was their number so small, or themselves
such vagabonds as the Papists do traduce them, Ibid.
for though the fury of persecution did disperse diverse of them, and caused
them to fly from place to place, yet they followed their callings, and many
times valiantly defeated their enemies.

To the want of learning, and gross ignorance, which the Papists object
against them, I answer, first with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. 1 Cor.
1.26, 27, 28.
Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many Noble has God
called but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise, etc. 1 Cor. 2.1.
And again, That they are best learned, who have learned to know Jesus Christ
and him crucified. Secondly, we deny that they were all so illiterate or
unlearned. Re^nerus a Writer about that time, and a bitter enemy of theirs, in
a long process, wherein he describes their Doctrine, testifies that he
heard of one who did know the party, Reyner. de Waldens.
that a certain heretic of this sect (so it pleases him to style them) to
convert a certain person to his faith, in the night and Winter time, swamme
over the River Ibis to come unto him, and to teach him: Moreover so perfect
(says he) were they in the Scriptures, that he himself did see and hear a
man of the Country unlettered; which could recite over the whole book of Job
word by word without book, with diverse others which had the whole new
Testament perfectly by heart. And although some of them rather merrily then
unskillfully expounded the words, John 1.12. Sui non receperunt cum; Aenaeus
Sylu. Bohem. hist. de Waldens. dogmat.
Swine did not receive him; yet were they nor so ignorant and void of
learning, but that in Reynerus his time they had 40. Churches at the least, and
Pastors to instruct them, Reyner. resp.
and in one Parish called Cammach, there were ten open Schools of them.

And whereas they are taxed by Aeneus Siluius to savor of an Anabastinill
community, Martyrol. 209.
that they had all things common among them, This is a malicious slander of a
papal Parasite; Indeed because they being thrust forth both of Country and
goods, and compelled to make the best shift as they could for themselves, they
did not intend their own private commodity, but every one did help each
other to the utmost of his power, the most part of them being made through the
Tyranny of their persecutors very poor; and hence they were called Pauperes
de Lugo^^o, Or the poor men of Lions.

Their Doctrine, howsoever the Papists (after their usual manner) mis-report
of it, and speak worse of it then it is, yet cannot be brought by them within
the compass of Heresy, or be confuted by the Word of God. The Book of
Inquisition does thus describe them and their manners: Ex Inquisitorio quodam
libello de moribus and consuetudine Waldens.
The manner of the Waldensis is this; They kneeling upon their knees, do
continue in their prayers with silence, so long as a man may say thirty or
forty Pater-nosters: And this they do every day with great reverence, being
among themselves, and such as be of their own Religion, both before Meals,
and after; likewise when they go to bed, and in the morning when they rise,
and at certain other times also, as well in the Day as in the Night. Also they
have and use the seven Articles of Faith concerning the Divinity, and seven
Articles concerning the Humanity, and the ten Commandments, and seven works
of Mercy, which they have compyled together in a compendious Book, glorying
much in the same, and thereby offer themselves ready to answer any man for
their Faith. Before they go to meat, they have this Grace; Benedicite, Kyrie
eleyson, Christ eleyson, Kyrie eleyson, Paternoster: Which being said, then
the elder amongst them begins thus in their own Tongue; God which blessed
the five Barley Loaves and two Fishes in the Desert, before his Disciples,
bless this Table, and that which is or shall be set upon it, In the Name of
the Father, of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen. And likewise when they rise
from meat, the Senior gives thanks, saying the words of the Apocalypse;
Blessing, and Worship, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, Honor, Virtue, and
Strength to God alone for evermore, Amen. And adds moreover; God reward them
in their Bosoms, and be beneficial to all them that be beneficial to us, and
bless us: And the God which has given us Corporal Feeding, grant us
Spiritual Life; and God be with us, and we always with him: To which they
all answer, Amen. And thus saying Grace, they hold their hands upward, looking
up to Heaven. After their Meat, and Grace thus said they teach and exhort among
themselves, conferring together upon their Doctrine, etc. Hitherto the Book of
Inquisition made against them, does testify of them.

Let us add hereto the Testimony of Reynerus, their professed Enemy; who
when he had said all that he could, in deprauing and impugning them, yet is
driven to confess this of them: Reyner. Hist. de Waldens. Ex Orthuin. Gratian.
This Sect of Lyonests (so he calls them, of the place where-hence first
they sprang) has great show of Piety, living uprightly before men, and
believing all things aright concerning God, and all the Articles of the Creed,
only they hate and blaspheme the Church of Rome, etc. Thus far, by way of
Apology, for the Waldenses.

The like Apology I might make for all the rest of those famous Worthies,
which together with us, long before our days, or the days of Martin Luther
have professed the same Religion which we now profess. But because these,
beforementioned, are the parties against whom our Adversaries (the Papists)
especially do except; and whatsoever else they do, or can allege against
any other particulars, are the same things which have been answered unto the
former exceptions; I will surcease from further Apologies, especially seeing
that I labor to be brief. This (which this way has been spoken) may
suffice, to clear these Ancients of our Religion (whom we have already
proved to have been of the same Faith and Religion which we now hold, and
the Papists themselves call the forerunners of our Faith) from those
slanderous Calumniations which they asperse upon them, and to prove them such
famous and worthy Instruments of Gods glory, that we need not be ashamed to
follow them in that holy way which they have gone before us.

Having now cleared the way, and traced the footsteps of our Protestant
predecessors backward, from the days of Martin Luther, unto the very time when
Popery (that great Mystery of Iniquity) began to display it self in her
colors, from the time of King Henry the eight, unto the days of Phocas the
Emperor, for the space well-nigh of a thousand years; I now return again to
prosecute this Catalogue, and to show a far higher ascent of the same, from
the time when Popery was set on foot, unto the days of the Apostles, and the
time in which our blessed Savior did manifest himself in the flesh.

Which labor, albeit it might well be spared, for as much as the Controversy
being between us and the Papists, Which of the two Churches is the most
auncientest; we having already showed the continuance of our Church, even
from the time when first their Church (if we may call that a Church, which
they have turned into a Court) began, we have done already to stop their
mouths, and to free our selves from that imputation of Novelty which they
object against us: Yet for the more ample manifesting of the Point now in
Controversy, and wholly to stop the mouth of the Adversary, that it may
appear that our Religion is yet of far greater Antiquity; a farther
demonstration shall be made, wherein it shall appear, that our Religion (that
which is now professed by the Protestant Churches) is that same Religion which
was taught by Christ and his Apostles, professed and maintained by all the
Orthodoxe ancient Fathers, Martyrs, and Confessors, that lived in and since the
Primitive Church, to the time that Popery was first hatched out of his
Cockatrice Egg.

Which to make plain, we must by the way take notice, That in the first six
hundred years there was no substantial or fundamental Innovation received in
the Church; the present Roman Faith (touching the Points controuerted between
them and us) being as yet either vnhatched, or not received by known
Heretics: 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
Only the Mystery of Iniquity that began to work in the Apostles time,
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 32. lib. 4. cap. 23.
increased by the Heresy, Ignorance, and Superstition of some that daily
corrupted the Truth. Stories remember us of a saying of Hegesippus, Niceph.
lib. 4. cap. 7.
That the Church continued a Virgin undefiled, as long as the Apostles lived:
but when that generation was past, the conspiracy of wicked Heresy, through
the seducing of those who taught other Doctrine, took beginning. Hereof the
Apostles gave warning, Act. 20.28. Philip. 3.18. Basil. Ep. 70.
and the ancient Fathers complained, and that with tears. It is our Task now
to prove, that all those faithful Christians, who lived either in the
primitive purest times, or afterward kept themselves orthodoxe, unspotted from
then-broached heresies, till the heresy of heresies, Popery was set on foot,
were of the same faith and religion with us, and were of our side: for the
trial whereof, as we have already looked into the days of old, Deuteronomy. 32.7.
and considered the years of many generations which are past and gone; so now
let us ask our Fathers, and they will show us, let us ask our Elders, and
they will tell us.

And here as the Papists challenge us to show where our Church was before
Luthers time, we will show our Church before the time of Pope Boniface the 3.
who was the first that took upon him the name of the universal Bishop, and at
whom (and not before) the Popish Church (as now it is) does take her beginning.
This Boniface about the year of our Lord 507. with much ado obtained of
Phocas the Emperor, Otho Frisingen. Chron. lib. 5. c. 8. Marian Scot. in ann.
608. Vsperg. in Phoca.
that he might be made the universal Bishop of the world: The which authority
(say the Roman Chroniclers) his successors have not only held fast with
their teeth, but also wonderfully increased. Before this time, or before there
was ever any who usurped any such Ecclesiastical Supremacy, we have many
that took our part, as may appear by this Induction.

Between the years 450. and 500.
In Rome.

GRegory the 1. who albeit he did much decline from the sincerity of his pious
predecessors, and was a pat^on or many superstitions, yet was an earnest
opposite against the papal Supremacy, calling it vain, proud, profane,
blasphemous, mischievous, Antichristian, against the commandments of God, and
the decrees of Councels. lib. 4. Epist. 32.34. affirming him to be a follower
of Satan, and forerunner of Antichrist, who assumeth that title. Epist. 38.39.

24. Bishops, and 34. Presbiters in a Council at Rome. Anno Dom. 595.

Jn Constantinople.

Euphemius, who was so firm and constant in his Religion, that he would not
anoint Anastasius Emperor, before he had sealed a writing that he would make
no innovation in Religion. Theod. lib. 2.

Jn Alexandria.

John called Tabenesiota, who kept the true says, and was banished by
Anastasius, because he would not damn the counsel of Chalcedon. Magdeb.
cent. 6.

In Antiochiae.

Gregorius who ministered in Antiochia 25. years, how he adhaered to our
Religion: see Euagr. li. 6. c. 18.

Between the years 400. and 450.
Jn Rome.

LEo, at the first a Deacon, afterward Bishop of Rome, among whose
constitutions there is a sharp decree against the ambition, which even then
began in that sea. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. c. 10.

Jn Constantinople.

John Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, who lived in the days of Arcadius
and Honorius: In whose writings we may find most part of those points, wherein
we differ from the Papists confirmed: As for example.

Atticus another Bishop of Constantinople, who next save one succeeded
Chrysostom in that sea, was a bitter enemy to superstition for perceauing
that diverse of the people of Constantinople, sorted to the Sepulcher of
Sabbatius, to pray and to do some worship to your defunct; he caused that body
in the night season to be raised, and to be buried in another place unknown to
the said superstitious people, that so they might leave off their Idolatrous
praying. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. c. 10.

Accatius another Bishop of Constantinople succeeded Gennadius, and governed
that sea 17. years. In his time the Roman Church contended for superiority.
This Acatius resisted the fame, and little regarding the pride of the Roman,
Bishop, excommunicated Foelix, and razed his name out of the roll of Bishops.
Histor, Magd. Ibid.

Jn Syria.

Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus a Town in Syria, lived under the Emperors
Theodosius, Valentinian, Martian: Among other things wherein he agrees with
us, he is directly against transubstantiation. Theod. dial. 1. c. 8.

Jn Africa.

Augustine Bishop of Hippo, one of the most learned of all the ancient
Fathers, his Religion was the same with us, as may appear in these ensuing
articl^s about.

1. The sufficiency of Scripture. lib. 2. de pec. meri. c. 36. lib. 2. de
doct. Christ.

2. The Laities reading the Scripture. confess. lib. 6. c. 5. and in Psalm. 33.
sess. 2.

3. The marks of the Church. de vnitat. eccl. c. 2.

4. O iginall sin. enchirid. ad laur. c. 92.

5. Good works. in Psalm. 102.

6. The Sacraments. tract. 15. in Ioh. and de symbol, ad catech. and tract. 30.
in Ioh. and contra Adamant. c. 12. and tract. 30. in Joh. and de ciuit. dei.
lib. 21. c. 25.

7. The authority of Bishops and Councels. Ser. 2. epist. 162.

8. Invocation of Saints. tract. 19. in John. and contr. Faust. Manich. lib. 20.

See farther S. Augustines agreement with us in the maine points of faith and
doctrine, in a Treatise lately set forth to this purpose, entitled S.
Augustines Religion, wherein are proved 62. points of our and his concordance.

Jn France.

Eleutherius Bish. of Lions.

Saluianus Bish. of Marsell.

Hilarious, first Bishop of Arles, afterward of Vienne, opposed himself
directly against Leo Bishop of Rome, and would acknowledge no jurisdiction of
that Sea, over the Churches of France: he came to Rome, and withstood the Pope
to his face. Leo ad Gal. Episc. epist. 77. and 89.

Vincentius Lirinensis. Magd. cent. 5. c. 10. Prosper Aquitanicus. Magd. cent.
5. c. 10. Martinus Turonensis. Magd. cent. 5. c. 10.
Between the years 350. and 400.
In Jtaly.

AMbrose, Bishop of Millane, whose accord with us in the maine points of our
Religion may appear out of his writings. viz.

Hierome borne in Stridon, a Town of Dalmatia, brought up in learning at Rome,
who although he wanted not his errors, and inclined much to diverse
superstitions, which began about those times, yet accorded in many things with
us, as may appear by his writings.

Jn Antiochia.

Flauianus, against whom Damasus, Syricius, and Anastasius, Bishops of Rome,
were mighty opposites, who misinformed the good Emperor Theodosius against
him, before whom when Flauianus had appeared, he freely and wisely spoke to
this effect. O Emperor, if any man blame my faith as perverse, or my life as
unworthy, I am content to be judged by my very Adversaries: But if the
Disputation be only concerning Principality, and eminent places, I will not
contend with any man, but denude my self of all Superiority, and commit the
charge of Antiochia to whom ye like best. Theodor. lib. 5. c. 23.

In Jerusalem.

Cyrillus, who was an enemy to the Pomp of the Clergy, and had more regard
to feed the Poor, and to the Preaching of the Word, then to the outward
garnishing of Churches. Zozomen. lib. 5. c. 25.

Jn Constantinople.

Nectarius, a man of noble birth, Bishop of Constantinople; in whose time,
Auricular Confession was abrogated in Constantinople, upon occasion of
Adultery committed between a Penitentiarie and a woman, confessing her sins
unto him. Socrat. lib 5. c. 19.

The Council of Chalcedon.
Where, was the Emperor Martianus himself in person, and of Bishops and
reverend Fathers, 630. These in plain terms, gave the Sea of Constantinople
equal Privileges with Rome, and in causes Ecclesiastical, to be advanced as
far as Rome. Concilium Chalced. Act. 16.

In Armenia.

Letoius, Bishop of Meletina, in Armenia, a bitter enemy to Monkish
Profession, whose society he was wont to call a Den of Thieves. Theodot.
lib. 4. c. 11.

Jn Africa.

Optatus Mileuitanus, who lived about this time, and does accord with us;
first, in the Scriptures, that they are the Judge of Controversies, Lib. 6, and
lib. 1. de Script. secondly, about the Sacraments, Lib. 6. and lib. 1. C^bus
ibi est spiritualis, and potus spiritualis: In the Point of Regeneration, Lib.
2. and 7. In the Point of the Catholic Church, Lib. 2. aduersus Parmen.

Jn Europe.

Hilarious, Bishop of Poitiers in France, who took great pains to purge the
Country of France from the Arrian Heresy, and to withdraw the people from
Superstition. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 31. Histor. Magdeb. Cent. 4. cap. 10.

Between the years 300. and 350.
Councels.

THe Councels of Ancyra, Nice, Tyrus, Gangra (in which was condemned the
Heresy of Eustasius speaking against Marriage, eating of Flesh, etc.)
Eliberis, Carthage (where the Bishop of Rome was stoutly withstood) Antioch,
and Sardica, were all summoned at the commandment of the Emperors, not of
the Popes. Tom. Council.

Fathers.

Basilius Magnus, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, in his Writings he much
confirms our Faith, and Doctrine, and complains of the pride of the
Western Churches, and condemns their affectation of the Supremacy. Basil.
transmarin. Epist. 77. and Epist. 10. ad Eusamos.

Gregorius Nazianzenus, who revived the true life of Preaching, when the Truth
of GOD seemed to have been buried, and inueighed against the pride of
Prelates, seeking Supremacy over others. Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 5.

Gregorius Nyssenus, a married Bishop. Niceph. Callist. lib. 1. cap. 19. whose
Writings albeit the Papists do allege in many places, to patronize their
doctrines and opinions; yet being well considered, they make nothing for them,
but rather much against them. Vide Sculleti examen locorum ex Nysseno a Pontif.
citat. in medulla Patr.

Macarius Aegyptius, a learned Writer, is altogether with us in the point of
Justification, Hom. 11: in the certainty of Salvation, Homil. 19. and 20.
against the Real presence, Hom. 27. against Purgatory, Hom. 30, 44. and 22.
against Freewill, Hom. 2, 27.15, 46.

Eusebius Caesariensis, a learned man, and writer of many Books, agrees with
us against the Papal Supremacy, Lib. 2. de vit. Constable. and 3. and 37. about
the Scriptures, Lib. 5. Histor. Eccl^s. c. 14. about the Sacraments, Lib. 1.
demonst. c. 10. and li. 5. cap. 3. about Justification, Lib. 1. Histor. Eccles.
cap. 5. against Images, Lib. 3. de praep. Euang. against Popish Injunctions of
Fastings, Lib. 5. Eccles. Hist. c. 23.

Epiphanius, borne in a little Village of Palestina, called Barsanduce; he
wrote much, and in his Writings agrees with us, concerning the Scriptures,
Lib. de men's. and power of the Catholic Church, Haeres. 35. about Marriage,
and Virginity, Haeres. 48. about Fasting, Haeres. 33. against invocation of
Saints, Haeres. 78, 79. against Images, Haeres. 19. against the Mass, Haeres.
55. against Purgatory, Haeres. 59. against celebrating of Priests, Haeres. 61.
against Lay-Baptisme, Haeres. 76.

Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, whose name was famous in the elder Church,
wrote much, and agrees therein with us: Against Traditions, Epist. de Synod.
Niceu. Decr. against Invocation of Saints, Epist. ad Adelph. against their
seven Sacraments, Orat. 2. contra Arrian. against Images, Orat. contra Gentes:
against the Supremacy, Epistol. ad Solit. and many other such like points.

Paphnutius, a Bishop in a Town of Thebaida, himself an unmarried man,
opposed himself in the Council of Nice, against the inhibition of Priests
marriage, and caused the same to be stayed, Socrat. lib. 1. c. 11.

Lactantius Firmianus.

Didymus, a Doctor of the School of Alexandria.

Acholius, Bishop of Thessalonica.

Osius, Bishop of Corduba.

Asclepas, in Gaza.

Philogonius, Bishop of Antiochia.

Hermogenes, Bishop of Caesarea.

James, Bishop of Nisebis, in Mesopotamia, and diverse others.

Thus have I showed the forerunners of our Religion, above two hundred years
before Popery began; and the Professors of the same, in the time of the
Churches flourishing estate, before the Church of Rome declined to that
Apostasy, in which now for these many years, it has continued. Whereby we
may discern, how impudent our Adversaries the Papists are, Campian. rat. 5.
in challenging all the ancient Fathers as theirs; and making no end of
boasting of the Fathers, Greg. Valenc tom. 3. p. 291.
one of them says: The Protestants, in the Questions of Faith, should enquire
on what side the Fathers stand, that it being known, they might embrace the
Doctrine which the Fathers of old judged to be true. We have done as he
advises: We have asked the Fathers, and they have told us; our Elders, and
they have told us, That they have professed and maintained the same Doctrine
and Religion which we profess. True it is indeed, we dare not follow every
one of them in every step, or tie our selves to every one of their Opinions.
The Fathers themselves were men; and being men, might have, yea had their
Errors. Only the Canonical Authors (as the Jesuit himself confesses) as
being from above, Heavenly and Divine, Greg. Valenc. tom. 3. p. 329.
do always hold a perpetual and stable constancy in their Writings: But
other holy Writers are inferior, and humane, failing sometimes, and now and
then, contrary to the course of Nature, Epiph. de not.
bring forth a Monster. Origin taught many things against the Faith, and
mis-applyed many things in Scripture: Epist. ad Iub. aduers. Prax. August. d.
9. Negare.
Cyprian held Rebaptization; Tertullian, Montanisme: And which of them had not
his faylings? Augustine himself says; I cannot deny, but that there are many
things in my works, as there are also in the writings of mine Ancestors, which
justly and with good discretion may be blamed. The Fathers themselves have
denied what some of their Fathers have held before them; yea, some of them upon
better consideration have retracted their own errors; we therefore (according
to Marsilius his advice) receive whatsoever they bring consonant to the
Scripture, Marsil. Defensor. pacis, p. 413.
but what they bring dissonant from it, we reject with reverence.

It is a false slander therefore which the Jesuits and other such like Popish
circumcellions buzze into the ears of their perverted Proselites; Bristo.
Motiu. 14.
That we Protestants disclaim the Fathers, despise their writings, shun the
trial of our doctrine by them, Campian. rat. 5.
because (say they) we know that they are all against us. Whether we or they
do least esteem the writings of the Fathers; let the indifferent Reader
judge. They boast and brag of, but how basely do they vilify them, and
proudly reject them, where they do not fit their humors? Bellar. Romans Pontif.
lib. 4. c. 8.
Little credit (says Bellarmine) is to be given to Tertullian in this matter,
for he was a Montanist; I do not in this point (says Tolet) allow the
doctrine of Augustine, Ambrose, Tolet. Romans 9. p. 421.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Photius. I will sooner believe Anacletus (says
Alphonsus) then either Hierome or Augustine: Though Chrysostom and Augustine,
Alphons. aduer. haer. verb. Episcop.
and some other Fathers say (That Judas received the Sacrament) yet the
constitution of Clement (an egregious counterfeit) says another of them, is
rather to be believed. Turrian. Scho. Graec. in Constable. p. 172.
In the matter touching the Baptism of Constantine the Great, they reject
Eusebius, Ambrose, Hierome, Theodoret, Baron. an. 324. n. 43. and 50.
Socrates, Zozomen, and the whole Council of Ariminum, and say, That they
deserve no credit. In the question about the Conception of the Virgin Mary,
Almain. potest. Eccles. c. 16.
they hold her to be exempted from Original sin, and make it a point of
Faith so to believe, Bann. part. 1. p. 75.
and that it is impiety to think otherwise; yet they acknowledge, that all
the Fathers with one consent held the contrary. Thus do they dodge with the
Fathers, and cast them off contumeliously, when they do not dance after their
Roman Pipe; and yet would seem wholly to rely upon them, and to seek the
trial of their Cause by them.

No wonder then if they find Cauils at our Quotation of them, casting off most
violently whatsoever is alleged by us out of the Writings of those Fathers,
only because they will not be said to have yielded, that Councels, Fathers,
Histories, or any ancient Writers should seem to be of our side. Whatsoever
we produce, they slightly put off with one answer, It is forged. Instance
we in the History of Honorius, the Pope, and show his falling into the error
of the Monothelites; Nicen. Council. 2. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. c. 11.
Council. 6. generali. Pyggh. diatrib. de Act. 6. Synod. Baron. an. 681. n. 13.
Bellarm. vt supra. Baron. an. 181. n. 31. Quem voluissem sensibus potius Canum
quam nomine.
they will tell us, We do belie him: Allege we for proof, the second Nicene
Council; they answer, The Council is forged: Second we yet with the
testimony of the sixth General Council; they will reply, That part of the
Council which contains his Condemnation, is forged by the Greeks: Allege
we the eight General Council, to back it; they will reply, That Council was
deceived by the false Copies of the sixth Synod: Allege we diverse authentike
Histories, that say it; they will answer in a word, by denying their
authority: Allege we further some of their own Writers (as Canus) that
acknowledged it; they reject him, and descant upon his name, wishing, That he
had more wit, then to be so headlong in giving his verdict upon so great a
matter. So when we do object the sixth Council of Carthage, Council. Carthag.
6. c. 3.
stoutly resisting the Pope of Rome, and conuincing him of Forgerie; they will
answer, Apolog. pro Ies. p. 99.
That was no true Council. Make we it plain, that it was a true Council,
and that there were 217. Bishops at that Council, Socrat. lib. 6. c. 18.
who openly withstood the Bishop of Rome, and taxed him for forging some
falsely pretended Canons of the Nicene Council; they will reply, Apol. pro.
Ies. p. 103.
Those Bishops of Africa were deceived in the number of the Nicene Canons:
Prove we this not to be so, by producing forth the Acts of the Council; they
shift it off, Bonifac. 2. ad Eulal. de reconcil. Council. Carthag. Eccles.
Council. tom. 1. Council. Chalcedon. Act. 16.
with exclayming against the Fathers assembled in the Carthage Council, and
say, That the Devil led them to be so saucy with the Bishop of Rome. So
produce we the Council of Chalcedon, giving equal privileges to the Bishop
of Constantinople with the Bishop of Rome; they reply, Apol. pro Jesuit.
The Vicegerents of the Sea Apostolic, Paschasinus and Lucentius, were not
present when that Decree was made, therefore that Decree was not good. We
confirm, that afterward, B. Bilsons difference between Christian subjects and
unchristian Rebels, p. 79.
when they were present, and desired to have that Act revoked, the Council did
confirm it; they reply, The more to blame they were that did it: and exclaim
against that Council for ratifying it, when the Bishop of Rome resisted it. By
these few examples we may see what small reckoning the Papists make of
Antiquity, if it run against the^ never so little; and that notwithstanding
their big pretenses of the ancient Fathers, they are fain to reject the^ at
every turn. Let the^ answer to B. Iuels Challe^ge, to B. Bilsons Treatise, and
to the rest of our writers, who have offered the trial of our cause, and the
controversy between us and them, to be decided by the Fathers; and they shall
plainly see, we want not testimony of Antiquity: and that the ancient
Fathers of the Church (as our learned Whitakers well observes) where they
consent, are with us, and only theirs, in their errors.

I proceed now forward in my Catalogue to the first two hundred years, which
was the time of the Churches persecution, at what time as it groaned under the
tyranny of the persecuting Roman Emperors: At what time by reason of the
great and grievous persecutions, which were raised against the faithful
Christians, they could not have such free meetings, and public congregations,
but were driven from place to place, vexed, afflicted, and tormented; yet even
then there were not wanting thousands who did profess the same Faith and
Doctrine which we now follow, and sealed the Truth of it with their blood. All
which albeit I might here insert in my ensuing Catalogue, as our fellow
professors, Eusebius. li. 8. c. 1.
because (as Eusebius notes) they all adhered to the Doctrine of the Apostles;
neither were they entangled with these newfound Popish Superstitions, neither
heard they of that yoke of servitude which the now Church of Rome lays upon
her followers: yet I will only content my self with a few of them, and that
such as in their writings and actions detested and abhorred those things which
were afterward brought in by the Popish Mystery of Iniquity: of which number
in those times, we have not a few consenting with us, as may appear in this
Catalogue following.

Between the years 250. and 300.
FAbian, Chanemon, of Nilus, Fructuosus, of Tarracona,
married Bishops.

Cyprian, an African, borne in Carthage, who although he had his grievous
errors, yet was a worthy Builder of the House of God, not by word alone, but
also by writing. Augustine de Baptism. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 17. In his
Writings he agrees with us.

Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, a great enemy to Superstition, Eusebius. lib. 9.
cap. 6.

Asclepiades, Bishop of Antiochia; of whom Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem
(being the prisoner of Christ in Caesarea) wrote unto the people in Antiochia,
That it was a comfort unto him, and it made his Imprisonment the more easy,
that he heard of the zeal and constancy of Asclepiades, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
11.

Babilas, Bishop of Antiochia (upon whom albeit the Papists would father many
of their superstitious devises) yet Eusebius, who may be best credited in this
point, shows his hatred of all Idolatry; and therefore (no doubt) likewise
of such Idolatrous inventions, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 39.

Between the years 200. and 250.
TErtullian (who albeit he fell into the Error of Montanus, and held diverse
other Errors) yet where he was Orthodoxe, stood most with us, as

Origin (of whom the Proverb is, Vbi been nemo melius, vbi male nemo prius)
where he writes best, is for us, as

Polycrates, Bishop of Antioch, a married Bishop, together with diverse other
Bishops of Asia, withstood Victor, Bishop of Rome, and opposed certain
Constitutions by him urged, about Observation of Days, Meats, Drinks,
Vestures, etc. Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 26.

Between the years 150. and 200.
POlycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna, who resisted Anicetus, Bishop of Rome, and
withstood diverse Ceremonies, then beginning to be set on foot, Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 26.

This Polycarpus also wrote an Epistle to the Philippians, wherein he
defends the same Doctrine of Justification by Faith, as we do, Iren. lib. 3.
cap. 1.

Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions in France, who though he was entangled with the
error of the Chyliasts, yet where he was Orthodoxe, joined with us, and wrote
in the name of his brethren of France unto Victor, Bishop of Rome, reproouing
him for offering to excommunicate the Churches of Asia, who withstood his
Traditions, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26.

Melito, Bishop of Sardis, wrote an Apology for the Christians to Antonius the
Emperor, Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 13. His consent together with us, about the
Canonical Scripture, and the Apocripha, may be seen in his Epistle to
Onesimus, Melit. Apolog. ad Onesim.

The Congregations at Lions and Vienna in France, how they accord with us, may
be seen by the Epistle set forth in their name, Extat Martyrol. p. 40.

Between the years 100. and 150.
Ignatius, who in the persecution of Traian the Emperor, was for the Christian
Faith delivered to wild Beasts, to be devoured, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 35, 36.

It is written of him, That as he passed through Asia, being under the most
strict custody of his Garders, he strengthened and confirmed the people
every where, as he went, and admonished them especially, and before other
things, to beware and shun Heresies, and vain Superstitions, newly risen up,
and that they should cleave only to the Writings of the Apostles, etc. Ex
Hierom. in Catal. Sanct. Eccl.

Justinius Martyr, who wrote two books of Apology for the Christians to the
Emperor Antoninus Pius; In the which and in his Dialogues he testifies the
sum and substance of the doctrine and Religion of the Christians in those
times, wholly answering with ours now, if we compare them together. Justin.
Dialog. cum Tryph. and Apol.

Quadratus, Bishop of Athens.

Agrippus Castor.

Hegisippus, and others.

Between the years 50. and 100.
SAint John the Evangelist, who for preaching the Gospel, Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 10.
was banished by Domitian into the I Will Path^^s, about the year 97. and after
the death of the aforesaid Domitian, was released again under Pertinax the
Emperor, and came to Ephesus anno 100. where he continued until the time of
Traian, and lived till the year after the passion of our Savior 99. How our
doctrine does agree with his, may be seen if we examine it by his Writings.

S. Peter. Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem. Iacobus Iustus.

S. Paul, Onesimus Bishop of Sardis. Titus.

THE CHVRCHES OF
Rome. Corinth. Galatia. Philippi. Colossos. Thessalonica Crete. Ephesus.
Pergamus. Thyatyra. Sardis. Smyrna. Philadelphia Laodicea.
Between the first year of our Sauiors Incarnation, and the 50. after.
BEsides John the Baptist, old Simeon, Hanna the daughter of Phannel, etc. we
have the Twelve Apostles: SIMON PETER. ANDREW. JAMES, the son of Zebedee.
JOHN. PHILIP. BARTHOLOMEW. THOMAS. MATTHIAS. JAMES, the son of Alpheus.
LEBBEVS, whose surname was Thaddeus. SIMON, the Canaanite. MATTHIAS, chosen in
the place of Judas Iscariot.


JESUS CHRIST HIMSELF BEING THE HEAD CORNER STONE.

THat the Apostles taught the same Doctrine which we embrace; and those
Churches (beforementioned) unto whom the Apostles wrote, did follow the same
Religion which we profess, may appear, if we compare our Doctrine and
Religion with theirs; which, in stead of many others, we may behold in this
brief Table beneath specified.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Apostles, and profession of the Churches unto whom they
wrote:
Agreeing with us PROTESTANTS. Disagreeing from the PAPISTS. Scripture
sufficiency. Traditions. John 5.39. John 20.31. Act. 17.10. Luke 16.29. Ephesians.
2.20. 2. Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. John 4. 22, 23. 1. Timoth. 4.1. 2. Timoth. 3.1.
Reuelat. 22.18, 19. Scripture perspicuitie. Slander of obscurity. Matthew. 7.7.
Romans 10.6. 2. Cor. 4.3. Romans 15.4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. 2. Pet. 1.19. Scripture
authority. Authority of the Church. John 5.34, 36, 39. Luke 16.19. and 1.
Ioh. 5 6. Act. 2.42. and 19, 20. Ephesians. 5.14. Sacraments. Sacraments. Their
number. Math. 28.19. Mark. 16.16. Joh. 3.5. Luke 22.19. Their efficacy. Romans
1.17. 1. Pet. 3.21. The fruits and effects of Baptism. Ioh. 5.14. Ephesians. 4.23.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Artic 31.
1. Cor. 10.11. 1. Cor. 11.10. 1. Cor. 10.16.17. Spiritual eating and drinking
in the Sacrament. 1. Cor. 10.3. 1. Pet. 1.29. Communicating in both kinds.
Math. 26.26. Mark. 14.22. 1. Cor. 10.16. Their seauen-fold number. 1. Cor.
11.23. Reave. 22.18. Their opus operatum. Ephesians 4.5. Their whole taking away
sin. Romans 7.7, 8. 1. Ioh. 1.8. Their sacrifice of the Mass. Heb. 7.24. and
9.15. and 10.10. Real presence. Ioh. 6.35. Act. 3.21. 1. Cor. 11.37. Keeping
back the cup from the lay people. 1. Cor. 11.33.34. The true manner of Gods
worship. Will Worship. Tit. 1.5. Hebr. 13.7. 1. Pet. 1.23. Coloss. 2.18, 20,
23. Math. 15.9. The danger of all sin. Venial sins. Romans 4.15. 1. Ioh.
3.4. Romans 6.23. James 1.15. Prayer. Prayer. To God alone. Romans 8.27. 1. Cor.
1.16. Heb. 10.19. in a known tongue. 1. Cor. 14.15. To Saints and Angels. Romans
10.14. Col. 2.18. In an unknown tongue. 1. Cor. 14.16. The Church. The Church.
It is a congregation of the faithful only, etc. Ioh. 10.16. and 15.14. Ephesians.
5.23. True marks of the Church. Act. 2.4. Ephesians. 2.10. Act. 5.8. Christ alone
the head of the Church. Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.16. Act. 4.11. 1. Cor. 1.11.
Ecclesiastical discipline. 1. Cor. 5.7. 2. These. 3.14. Tit. 3.10. A
promiscuous company. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. 1. Ioh. 2.19. False marks. Math. 24.23.
Popish monarchy. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4, 6, 7. Revel. 13.8. Popish Hierarchy, pardons,
and suspensions. Act. 11.28. 2. Cor. 10.4. Sanctification. Sanctification. Jn
true holiness and newness of life. Romans 16.4. Luke 1.75 Ephesians. 1.4. Philip. 1.12.
Coloss. 1.22. Jn observation of days and meats. Coloss. 2.16. Romans 14.14.
Faith. Faith. An assured confidence. Mark 5.7. 2. Tim. 2.8. upon knowledge.
Heb. 11.1. 2. Cor. 13.5. only in the elect, Ioh. 6.35. A belief in general.
Romans 10.14. Jmplicite. Iam. 2.19. in heretics and wicked men. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
Repentance. Repentance. The gift of God. Genes. 8.21. Romans 8.7. Necessary.
Iam. 1.7. 1. Tim. 2.21. Confession to God. Math. 3.6. Freewill. 1. Cor. 2.14.
Coloss. 2.13. Meritorious. Romans 4.5, 6. Auricular confession. Luke 5.21. Good
works. Good works. Must spring from Faith, Romans 8.8. Galat. 5 6. Tit. 1.15.
H^b 11 6. Are our duty, Matthew 7.17. 2. Pet. 1.10. Before Justification, Matthew.
12.33. Luke 6.43. Romans 11.17. Merit of them, Romans 5.12. Galat 3.11. Heb 11.17.
Subjection to Powers. Exemption from obedience. Romans 13.1, 2, 3. Tit. 3.1. 1.
Pet. 2.13. 1. Tim. 2.1, 2. Jude 1. Places after this life. Purgatory. Only
two, Heaven and Hell, Revel 14.13. and 22.13. Luke 23.43. 2. Cor. 12.3, 4.

I Might instance in many more, yea, in all the differences between us and the
Papists, wherein I might as clearly prove the consent of the Apostles, and
those Primitive Christians together with us, and their dissent from the
Papists; and consequently, prove effectually our Church to have been in that
ancient Primitive Church. But these proofs may suffice, in stead of many; and
by these, we may learn what we are to judge of the rest: referring the
trial of our whole Religion (in all and every point thereof, wherein we
differ from the Papists) unto the touchstone of the doctrine of our Savior
Christ and his Apostles, and to that which in the writings of sacred Scriptures
is commended unto the Churches; which indeed is the only true rule to examine
by, and to end Controversies.

But our Romanists will none of that; for they cannot endure their Religion to
come under this trial of Gods word; neither will it content them that we make
trial thereby, See the Fisher caught in his own Net.
which was the reason that Fisher in the late conference, neither could deny
that Christ and his Apostles taught the same faith and doctrine, which the
Protestants now profess, nor would abide the trial by it, but fled from that
to the practice of ensuing times, and more remote: Canus, loc. li. 3. c. 3. p.
151.
for Canus a Writer of their own, confesses, That the most points of the
Roman faith are not contained in the Scripture: Andrad. Orth. Exp. lib. 2.
And Andradius speaks plainly, That many points of the now Romish faith
would reele and totter, if they were not supported by the help of Tradition.
Therefore our Mass Priests will not endure the resolution of the now depending
controversies between: us and them, should be tried by the authority of the
Scriptures. Take from them (says Standish) their English damnable
translations, Standish, ca. 6. pro. 3.
and let them learn to give as much credit to that which is not expressed, as
to that which is expressed in the Scripture. Brist. Mot. vlt.
And Bristo teaching his Scholar how to deal with a Protestant, bids him,
First get the weak and proud heretic out of his weak and false Castle of
only Scripture into the plain field of Traditions, and then like cowards they
shall not be able to stand. Alas, what small foundation has that Religion of
theirs, which is only supported by Traditions? what comfort can there be in
that Religion, which is afraid to be tried by the Scripture?

Hitherto I have showed the ascent of the Protestants Church, from before
Luthers days, even to the time of our Savior Jesus Christ and his Apostles,
and found our Church (which the Papists traduce as a Nouice) even in the
primitive Church; our Religion (which they tax as a new Religion) to be the
first Religion Christian: I could now derive it from an higher strain, and
show it in a more ancient time, before Christ was manifested in the flesh,
even in the days of the Prophets, whose agreement with us, and disagreeing
from the Papists, I might evidently convince out of their Writings; Before
them, in the time of Moses, and under the Law; Before the Law, in the
Patriarchs; Before them, and before the Flood, in Noah, Enoch, Abel, and so
bring it to the very beginning, even to the time of Adam. But this would be a
needless labor: for if we prove (as already has been proved) That our
Church has been as ancient as the time of Christ and his Apostles; the other
must needs follow, That it is as ancient as Adams time, and from the
beginning: Cantic. 6.9. Ephesians. 4.
Because the Church of Christ is but one, and there is but one Faith, one Lord,
one Baptism. The Fathers before the Law, 1. Cor. 10.3, 4.
and those who lived under the Law, though they and we differ in some outward
Rites and Ceremonies, 1. Cor. 3.11.
yet for substance embrace one and the same Religion, have one and the same
Truth, one and the same Foundation: Ephesians. 4.11.
That Church which was founded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone, ever was from the beginning,
shall ever be to the end of the world. Such is ours, and such is our Religion:
Therefore we conclude, That our Church and our Religion is no vpstart; but the
true Church of Christ, the ancientest and only Orthodox Religion.

And now (O ye seducing Papists, ye Jesuitical Fry, and Seminary Frogs, which
are crept up out of the mouth of the false Prophet, and sculk abroad to seduce
people) what have you to say for your selves? with what face can you impute
nouelty to us? Reu. 16.14, 15.
how dare ye buzze into the ears of your Proselites, That our Religion was
never heard of until Luthers days? peradventure you take your aim at this,
because the name of Protestants came in near about that time. The name indeed
arose upon occasion of a Protestation made by the 14. principal Cities, and
diverse Princes of Germany, at the Diet of Noremberg, Ioh. Sleid. lib. 3. Hist.
of the Trent. Council. lib. 1. p. 48.
appealing from the Pope unto the Emperor, and to a general Council, in
which protestation was contained a declaration of their faith, and of those
grieuances which they had against the Church of Rome; for which, by their
adversaries, they were termed Protestants. Now we although we are not ashamed
of that name, yet stand not so much upon the name, glorying in no name so much
as in the name of Christians. And that such protestations were made, such
declarations of the same Faith which we profess, by the Bohemians, Waldenses,
etc. already has been made manifest. But how long time is it, I pray, that
the name Papist (whereof of late they were ashamed, and wherein they now so
much glory) was known or acknowledged in the world? Act. 11.26. Optat.
Mileuit. lib 2. cont. Parm.
or whence is it that (leaving the ancient name of Christians) they rather
(with the Donatists) appropriate unto themselves the name of Catholics?

Doubtless, howsoever they brag and boast of Antiquity, we may apply that
of Bildad unto them, They are but of yesterday: Job. 8.9.
for how could a man know what it was to be a Papist; Trent Council concluded,
An. dom. 1563.
or what was the body of Religion before the Council of Trent had defined it,
which was since Luthers time? Let them show where their Papal Supremacy was,
before the time of Pope Goodface the third: Platina.
or their Latin Service, before the year 680. Jacob. de Vorag. in vit. Gregor.
Exposit. Romans ord. ann. 1215, 1222. ex Act. Romans Pontif. 1414.
or their Romish Mass, before Adrian the 1. Anno 780. or their Agnus Dei,
before Pope Sergius, an. 700. or their Transubstantiation, before the Council
of Lateran: or their elevation and adoration of the Sacrament, before the time
of Honorius the third: or their receiving of the Communion in one kind only,
and the absolute forbidding of the contrary, before the Council of Constance:
Johan. Scot. lib. 4. did. 17. artic. 3. Idem, ibid.
or their absolute necessity of Auricular Confession, before Innocent the
third, in his Council of Lateran: or the prohibition of Marriage to the
Clergy, before the same time? I might instance in many other points of
Popery, which howsoever they may carry some show and shadow of Antiquity; yet
being duly considered, they will appear to be but late inventions, peeced and
patched together by their Popes, as each of them in their succession was minded
to add something, to make up the full measure of the mystery of Iniquity.

Neither let them boast (as of commonly they crack) of the ancient Church of
Rome, Rhem. annot. in Act. 11. sec. 4. Idem, in Ephesians. 4.13.
so famously renowned by the Writings of the Apostles, and commended and
appealed unto by the ancient Fathers: for the name and show of the Roman
Church, See M. Fox his description of the difference of the now Church of Rome,
and the old. Acts and Monum. first 26. pages.
is but an empty show of Names, and Titles; this present Roman being in a
manner wholly departed, in the Questions controuerted, from the ancient, and
retayneth nothing but the Title. The true, ancient, and Apostolic Church of
Rome, so much commended by the Fathers, and sought to by the World, professed
another kind of Faith then this does, and the same that we now defend against
them: That Church affected no such proud and swelling Titles, it usurped no
such transcendent Jurisdictions, it observed no such foolish Superstitions, it
maintained contrary Doctrine to their now Errors. To what purpose then should
any stick upon the name of the Roman Church, when the true Faith is changed?
Or what do the Prerogatives and Royalties of the ancient Church concern
this, that is turned to another Religion? Or who regards an House of stately
Building, or anticke memory of ancient Antiquity, when the Plague has
infected it, and Thieves possess it?

Leave therefore, ye Romanists, to crack of your Antiquity, or to traduce us
of Novelty; we may take up the words of Nicephorus, Council. Ephesin. page 307.
the Patriarch of Constantinople, in an Epistle to Leo, Bishop of Rome: We
also have the Name of Rome (the true and ancient Faith of Rome) among us,
being built upon one and the same foundation of Faith; in matter of Faith we
follow them: Wherefore let S. Paul glory and rejoice in us also, and joining
new things with old, and comparing us in Doctrines, and Preaching, let him
glory in us both alike; for we as well as they, following the Doctrines and
Institutions wherein we are rooted, are confirmed in the confession of our
Faith, wherein we stand, and rejoice, etc.

As for you (my poor seduced Countrymen) who suffer your selves to be seduced
and misled by these Popish Circumcellions, take heed and beware how you favor
these Merchants of the Romish Strumpet, who under fained pretenses and subtle
insinuations go about to make merchandise of your souls: 2. Pet. 2.5.
These latter days (says the Apostle) are perilous times, and these Popish
Priests and Jesuits (I may say) are perilous seducers: ^. Tim. 3.1, 6, 7.
They of this sort creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with
sins, and led about with diverse Lusts, ever learning, and never able to come
to the knowledge of the Truth. Listen not unto them: It is not good for Eve to
fall to conference with the Serpent; Genes. 3.
no, nor for Adam neither to suffer E^e and the Serpents parley, or to incline
unto them, least he also be partaker in the Transgression. Consider what is
the end they aim at: not Religion, but the Sovereignty of their high-towring
Church; not the Consciences of men, yielding to their Ceremonies and
Superstitions, will satisfy them, unless they have their wills in ouer-ruling
all, and bringing them under their Antichristian Yoke. How do they disturb
Thrones, and fill the World with Anarchie and Confusions? and whose souls they
should win to God, by ministering the Word and Sacraments, their blood they
sacrifice to the Devil, by stirring them up to Treason and Rebellion. Beloved,
1. Ioh. 4.^.
believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God, or no A
Fool (says Solomon) believes every thing. Prou.
And surely it is their folly, who suffer themselves to be seduced, by giving
too easy credit to the slauering insinuations of these Popish Teachers, and
are hereby brought into a great dislike of our Church, because they believe
their words, and do not make search and inquiry after the truth of the same.
Beware least that dreadful judgment of God fall upon you, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 10, 11.
Because they received not the knowledge of the Truth, that they might be
saved, therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe
lies.

You will say, That you are no Changelings, That ye are of the old Religion,
That you keep the old Faith, and will live and dye in the same Religion which
your forefathers professed. Poor souls; Popish Religion is not the oldest
Religion, but a late vpstart, a Model of Superstition: your Popes Catholic
Church is but an Impostume, grown in the Church. We confess, that for a long
time, the Christian World has been annoyed with it; yet even in the time, and
before the time of this declining from the Truth, our Faith and Religion has
ever kept it self unspotted. The true cause, why during the former
ouer-clouding times of Popery, the Exercises of our Religion have been
neither so frequent, nor so public as now it is, either in place or persons,
was the persecution of Popery, and the general corruption of the Papacy,
which as a Leprosy infected, and as a Mist obscured the Times; so that
sometimes not the true believers themselves (such I mean as are come to our
knowledge) were void of error in every point, though they firmly held the
foundation. And if it pleased God in process of time to give more liberty to
the persons, and more purity to the Doctrine, why are we unthankful? and why
should any envy, if the Truth has grown more ripe in our Age?

And if there be any yet among us (I would to God there were not too many such)
who stand as Newters and lookers on, not regarding any Religion, nor caring to
join themselves to either side, until they see the sequel and issue, whether
the Protestant or Popish Church is likeliest to be most praeualent: To such I
say (as Elias said to the people of Israel:) How long halt ye between two
opinions? 1. King. 18.21.
If the Lord be God, follow him: But if Baall, then follow him. Let them
consider and call to mind whither of the two Religions savor more of grace
and of the spirit of God, whether does attribute most to God, whether has
been most favored by God: Let them consider the damnable positions, the
horrible combustions, and hellish proiects of Popery, and the saving counsels,
peaceable prosperity, and heavenly blessings which have accompanied ours; let
them (as the Apostle counsels) prove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
and hold fast what is good.

If they doubt whether of them carries greatest show of either verity or
Antiquity, I say unto them, as it was said to St. Augustine at the time of his
conversion, Toll, lege, Take up this book and read: or rather as the Lord
speaks by his Prophet Jeremy, stand in the ways and see, Ierem. 6.16.
Ask for the old paths where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest for your souls.

Lastly, to the true members and vnseduced Protestants of our Church, I say
with the Apostle to the Corinthians, Brethren you see your calling, 1 Cor.
1.26.27, 28.
albeit not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called, But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the
wise; and weak things to confound the mighty, etc. yet some noble, some
learned, some Worthies, have embraced the same Religion together with us, and
that in all ages and times of the world. What would we have? what can we
desire more? we have Verity and Antiquity for us; we have the Patriarchs, the
Prophets and Apostles on our side; we have the company of innumerable Martyrs,
who have scaled the Truth thereof with their blood: we have the fellowship of
many Churches in diverse Nations, Being therefore Compassed about with so great
a clouds of Wanesses, Heb. 12.1.
let us follow the footsteps of those who have walked before us in this way of
righteousness, and run with patience the race that is set before us. What
though Papists rave, and rage, and plot; and seek by all means to bring our
Religion into disgrace, yea, If it were possible, to cut of the name of Israel,
Psalm. 83.4.
that it might be no more in remembrance; Psalm. 82.12.
Yet these adversaries of the Lord shall be found liars, but the true Church of
God shall endure for ever. Consider what great things God has done for us, and
how mightily always he has defended and approved our Religion; how
miraculously did he preserve it, manger all the fury of the Lion, and the
wild Boar, of the Devil and Antichrist, even in the time of their greatest
persecutions: how wonderfully has he from time to time detected and defeated
all plots and proiects, conspiracies and trecheries of the enemies? what
strange deliverances has he given unto us? By this we may know that God
favors us because our enemies prevail not against us. Psalm. 4^.11. Psalm.
46.11.
The God of Jacob is with us, the God of Hoasts is our refuge; he has given
unto us a David, a man after his own heart to rule over us, a Iehosophat,
whose heart is set to seek the Lord, a Josias whose chiefest study is to
build up Gods house, and whose chiefest Title is to be the Defender of the
Faith; he has taken away our fears, by the happy return of our most
hopeful Prince, and redoubled our joys in his forward zeal for the
furthering of true Religion; he has blessed us with an Honorable assembly of
States in the high Court of Parliament, and united their hearts and minds to
seek the promotion of his glory, and the public welfare of the Commonweal;
he has stirred up the hearts of all faithful Subjects within this Island to
pray, and cry Grace, Zech. 4.7.
Grace, to that Parliamentarie assembly. What now remains, but that (as the
Apostle counsels) We stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free: Gal. 5.1.
and (as our Savior does admonish us) that we be faithful to the death,
Revel. 2.^0.
constantly professing, and religiously perseuering in that Religion which we
have learned out of the Scriptures, and which has been practiced so long
agone, in all Ages, by so many Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Bishops,
Confessors and holy Martyrs; That so we may glorify God, and stop the mouth
of the adversary, and both by life and doctrine confound Popery, till that
mystery of Iniquity be fully revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming; which we
beseech the Lord to hasten. Even so Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

FJNIS.

