THE WORLD possessed with Devils, conteinyng three Dialogues.

1. Of the Devil let loose. 2. Of Black Devils. 3. Of White Devils.
And of the coming of Jesus Christ to Judgment, a very necessary and
comfortable discourse for these miserable and dangerous days.

Luke. xxi. Watch ye therefore at all times and pray, that ye may be
worthy to escape all these things that shall come: And that ye may stand
before the Son of man.
Imprinted at London, for Ihon Perin, and are t^ be sold in Paul's Churchyard
a^ the Sign of the Angel. 1583.

To the Reader.
I Have entitled this Book (the world possessed with Deuilles) for two
causes. The one, because I show there, how the Devil rules the world, he
guides and governs worldly and carnal men as if they were possessed with
Devils, and given over by Gods just judgment: the other, because that in
holy Scripture, the world is many times taken, for such as are not lead by
the Spirit of God, but serve the devil as their prince and God, in stead of
their true God, and acknowledge him for their Creator, Father and Savior.

The title and sum of the first Dialogue.
This Dialogue is called the Devil let loose, both for the reason before
mentioned, and also because of fit matter seruyng to the same purpose.

First, there is talk of the great covetousness that now reigns in the
world, and specially of the covetousness of old me^: afterward of the old age
and dotage of the world, and the division of the ages of the same, which is
set forth in the last book, fathered upon Esdras in the Apocripha, and
conference of the contents of that book with that which Hesiodus has written
touching that matter.

Of the decay of virtue, and increase of vice, and the Prophets of Jesus
Christ and S. Paul thereupon, touching the latter days.

Of the frantic and decayed world, which can not abide to be molten
again, and restored to the first estate.

Of the world wholly possessed with the Devil.

Of the Devil let loose in the Apocalips, and of the red Dragon.

Of the Parable and similitude of the wicked spirit, wandryng in the deserts.

Of the judgment of God upon the Jews, and of the example thereby given to
Christians.

Of the coming of Jesus Christ, of Mahomet, and of the Pope.

The true Physic for the diseased, frantike and possessed world.

The faults of worldly Physicians, and of their drags: and the cause why they
can not cast out Deuilles, nor appease the winds and tempest, that bluster on
the Sea of this world.

Of the true mean to appease them, and to drive the Devil out of the world,
and the power of the Gospel.

Of the state of the world, and namely of the course of Kings and Princes.

Of the complaints of the Prophets for the wickedness, vnrightousnesse, and
theft that is amongst men.

Of the Anatomy that the Prophets have made of man and of the world.

Of the greatest crime and danger that is now in the world, and how
dangerous a thing it is to be a good man.

The first Dialogue of the world possessed with Deuilles called, the devil
let Loose.
Tobie. Theophrast. Jerome. Eustace. WHen we last commoned together
Theophrastus, touching the state of this present world, thou tookest occasion
to talk of the age of the same. And because thou waste then interrupted, I
would thou would now go foreward with that, that thou haste to say therein.

Theo. We spoke before of the great coueteousnesse that reigns now a days
among men. Commentaries of Origin upon Job.
There are certain commentaries upon the book of Job, which some say are
Origens, notwithstanding that the style of the same is nothing like Origens
style. And therefore, learned men which are able to judge of such things,
take not Origin to be the aucthor thereof. But whosoever be aucthor, he
brings in certain reasons, by which he does show the cause of that great
coueteousnesse of which we spoke.


Tobie. What says he?


Theo. He first says: The cause of the great coueteousnesse, which now
reigns.
that this world draws to an end. And therefore may be likened to a man
that seeks toward his end as fast as he can: and this is the cause that he
gives his whole mind and study to dead things: that is to say, to yearthly
things, which are as it were dead in comparison of heavenly things. For, as
they neither can deliver men from corporal or spiritual death: So can they
not follow them after this death, but die with them.


Tobie. Hereby then thou meanest, that the more yt men draw to the yearthward,
and the nearer they are to their grave, the more desirous are they of yearthly
riches, which is but earth as they are. And so the less they have of it, the
more they desire it, how say thou Jerome.


Jerome. Thou put me in remembrance of that that Cicero says (touching
this matter) of old men. Covetousness in age.



Tobie. Why, what says he.


Ierom. He compares them to a warfaryng man, Cice. de senect.
which has a journey to go.


Tobie. The comparison is very proper. The voyage of man's life.
For, all this life is nothing but a voyage, which we have to go whilst we
live.


Ierom. Now, thou know that they, which have a journey to go, make first
provision of all such things, as they must carry with them, and such things
as are necessary for them, whether it be victuals or money.


Tobie. If they did not so, they might seem to want discretion.


Ierom. But if they be wise and discrete, they will burden the^ selves with no
more then they needs must, but will make their preparation and provision,
according to the journey and way that they have to go.


Tobie. It is certain, that they which have a hundredth or two hundredth miles
to go, have need of greater provision, then they which have but five or six
miles.


Ierom. What would thou say then, if a man which has but a mile or two
to go, would be more careful for his charge, make greater preparation for his
voyage, then if he had five or six C. miles to go.


Tobie. I would take him to be a very fond and vndescrete man: for what needs
he to trouble him self more, then that the necessity of his voyage requires.


Ierom. Yet the most part of old men do so. Care ^oges of a voyage* Cice. de
senect.
For, the elder that men wax, the more covetous and niggishe they are.


Tobie. Then the less time they have to live, the more fear they have to want.


Ierom. Therefore Cicero says, that these old dotards that are so nere and
covetous, and are so afraied to want, the less way they have to go on their
voyage, the more care they have for charges, and make the greater provision.


Tobie. In good sooth that is great folly and madness.


Ierom. Therefore it is not said without good reason, that where as all other
vices wax old as men do, coueteousnesse waxes young again in age.


Tobie. Then to our former talk, we may well say the like of the world,
and of his age, even as Theophrastus did put us in mind: and therefore go
foreward Theophrastus, with that that thou have further to say, as touching
this matter.


Theo. The Author of those commentaries upon Job, which I even now alleged
uses a comparison, touching the richesse that men gather in their age, not
unmeet for our matter.


Tobie. Whereto does he liken them.


Theo. To hidden stars. The use of richesse in age.
For, as stars serve to no use when they are hidden, but when they show
light unto men: so riches being hidden serves to no use, whether they keep
them locked in their treasures, without the use thereof, or else leave their
riches to the wide world, when they them selves are hidden and laid up in
their graves.


Tobie. Hereby then thou meanest to prove, that the gredie and insasiable
desire of riches: which now adays so ragyngly reigns among men, is a sign
and witness of the old age and dotage of the world, whereby we may judge that
the end thereof draws nigh.


Theo. So it is. The fowerth book of Esdras. Chap. 5.
Furthermore although the fourth book of Esdras be holden for Apocripha, yet
are there many good sentences contained therein, which well agree with the
matter whereof we talk.


Tobie. I would feign hear them.


Theo. He says thus: Ask the womb of a woman and say unto her: why must
thou have time before thou bring forth? Require her to bring forth ten at
once. And I say, surely she can not, but by distance of tynie. Then said he
unto me: so have I divided the number of the earth by times, when seed is
sown upon it. For, as a young child begets not that, that belongs to the
aged, so have I ordained the time which I have created. I asked again and
said: seeing thou have now showed me the way, I will proceed to speak before
thee: For our mother whom thou have told me, is young, draws she nere unto
age? he answered me and said: ask a woman that traualleth, and she will tell
thee. Say unto her: Wherefore are not they whom thou have now brought forth,
are those that were before thee, The stature of a man d^minished.
but less of stature? And she shall answer thee, some were borne in the
flower of youth, others were borne in the time of age, when the womb failed.
Consider now thy self, how that ye are less of stature, then those that were
before you. And so are they that come after you, less then ye, as the
Creatures which now begin to be old, and have passed over the strength of
youth.


Tobie. Me thinks these words tend to show, that as the woman and the
woman's womb waxes old, so waxes the earth old, which is the mother of us
all, and likewise all the world, with all things therein contained.


Theo. We se the experience thereof daily. But mark what the same author says
further of this matter. The world (says he) has lost his youth, and the
times begin to wax old. 4. Esder. 14. The division of the ages of the world.
For the world is divided into xii. parts, and x. parts of it are gone
already, and half of the tenth part. And there remains that, which is
after the half of the tenth part. Therefore set thine house in order, and
reform thy people, and comfort such of the^ as be in trouble, and now
renounce the corruption. Let go from thee mortal thoughts, cast away from
thee the burdens of men, and put of now thy weak nature, and set aside thy
most grievous thoughts, and haste thee to depart from these times. For
greater evils then those which thou have seen now, shall they commit. For, the
weaker that the world is by reason of age, the more shall the evils be
increased upon them that dwell therein. The old age of the miserable world.
For, the truth is fled far away, and lies at hand. And after he says:
thus the world is set in darkness, and they that dwell therein are without
light. For, thy law is burnt, therefore no man knows the things that are
dooen of thee, or the works that shall be done.


Tobie. These words signify not only that the older the world waxes, The
decrease of virtue and increase of vice.
the more the stature and age of man deminisheth, and the natural strength
weakeneth: but also that all virtues decaie in him, and al vices increase.


Theo. If virtue fail, necessarily vice which is the contrary must reign,
sith vice is want of virtue, as sickness is want of health, so that the more
that health decreaseth, A prophecy of Jesus Christ and S. Paul touching the
last days.
the more sickness increases. And therefore our savior Christ, speaking of
those last days, and of this age of the world, said not without cause.
Think thou that when the son of man shall come he shall find any faith
or uprightness on the earth. Matthew. 14.
For, Luke. 21.
because that the wickedness shall abound, 1. Tim. 4.
all charity shall be cold. 2. Timo. 4.
Hear also what S. Paul writes: Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in
the latter times, some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto
spirits of error, and doctrines of Deuilles, which speak lies through
hipocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot iron. And again: This
know also that in the last days shall come perilous times. For, men shall be
lovers of their own selves, coueteous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy without natural affection, truce
breakers, false accusers, inte^perate, fierce, dispising of them which are
good, traitors, heady high minded, lovers of pleasure, more the^ lovers of
God, having the show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof.


Tobie. S. Paul has just occasion to call those days perilous, in which
such men shall live, and without doubt we even now are come to that line. For
now adays we see few other but such as S. Paul has described unto us,
after the manner that thou have rehearsed.


Theo. Therefore there are few, which may be compared to our ancient fathers
in any thing at all. For, as we have already said, eue^ as the force of
virtue decreaseth day by day, in this weakness and old age of nature, so
contrary vice, love of pleasure, impacience, unstableness, vnfaitfulnesse,
ignorance and folly increase.


Tobie. When I call to remembrance what Jerome has heretofore spoken,
concerning the difference of ages, and the decaie thereof, I find that it well
agrees with all that thou haste now spoken. So that if none complained, but
only the Prophets and Apostles, and other the true servants of God, of the
corruption and disorder, which at all times has been in the world, and the
empairyng thereof, which has always increased, I would less marvel. But
we may well perceive that the wickedness of men has been of long time
marvelous, and that it has from time to time so woonderfully increased, that
even the Gentiles them selves (who had not the true knowledge of God, nor
perfect knowledge of virtue and vice,) have made most grievous complaints
thereof, as Jerome has often recited unto us.


Ierom. I have recited unto you, the discriptio^ that Ovid has made of the 4,
ages but I have not yet showed after what manner Hesiodus describes it, out of
whom as well Ovid as other Poets, have gathered their writings. For as I have
before told Hesiodus is one of ye most ancient Greek Poets that we have. And
because that which he writes of this matter, agrees very well with many of
the points which Theophrastus has alleged, but chiefly out of the books of
Apocripha, which bear ye name of Esdras, I will recite that which he writes
of the 4. ages, speaking first of the golden age, thus much in effect.

We must believe that Gods and men,
together first were framed, Hsiod. open. and dies. Lib* 1.

When golden age ouerspread the earth,
and Saturn ruled above.
Men lived like Gods and void of care,
no labors toil their land,
Ne tedious age ne sickness grief,
did once their minds remove.
From spotless life from pleasant cheer,
and Death was but a sleep,
And fertillyearth her pleasant fruits,
did yield withouten toil:
Their goods were common minds were on
no hatred here could creep,
O happy age whose merry minds,
were placed on such a soil.
Now hear what Iuuenall says touching this Golden age: Iuuenal. sat. 13.
In time past poor men lived in field without fraud or deceit. And anon after
he says.

They thought it shame and worthy death
if youth by age had paste,
Not showing honor unto them,
and would the bearded man:
Should reverenced be of youth,
though they excede in corn and Maste
Such honor bear they unto age,
such reverence beardes had than.

Tobie. Iuuenall touches among other points one, wherein there is great over
sight at this day. For, youth is now so ill manered, so proud, so stout, so
ouerwening so shameless and so unbridled, that instead of honoring their
elders, they despise the^ which is worthy of great blame.


Ierom. They are blame worthy in deed, for they pervert both the order of God
and nature, for God has given express commandment to honor age, and to
reverence the horie heared and graie bearded: And though GOD had not so
commanded, Law to honor elder^ Leuit. 1^.
nature ought herein to be a Schoolemistres unto us, except we will willingly
resist her as Monsters.


Tobie. We may easily think this to be true, for that the Gentiles them
selves were constrained to acknowledge it a duty. And they learned not by the
holy scripture and laws of God, The law (...) nature.
to honor their elders, for that it was not given and reueiled to them as to
the children of God: but have learned it by law of nature, which is common
Schoolemaisters to all.


Ierom. This Schoolemaisters nature, of whom thou speak, has so emprinted
this in the hearts of all men, that even they which will neither hear nor
obey it, are nevertheless, constrained to confess it, both to be right
honest and of duty as the Ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians did well declare
to the Athenians. A taunt of the Lacedaemonians to the Athenia^s.
For on a time there were certain common Plays at Athens with Scaffoldes
made, whereupon these Ambassadors were placed very honorably, there was a
poor old man an Athenian, which gatt up as the rest did, but all the seats
were taken up, and because he could find no seat, but was feign to stand, all the people laughed him to skorne, saving the Lacedemonian Ambassadors, which
rise from their seats to give him place: The Athenians seeing this courtesy,
liked it well and gave them great praise. Whereby they showed that they knew
what was honestand praise worthy: but none of them desired to have this
praise. Therefore the Ambassadors said: The Athenians can judge both of
courtesy and honesty, but they use it not.


Tobie. Then are they of the number of those, that know much good manner, but
use none: and surely these Ambassadors both shamed and taunted them as they
deserved. The dispising of fathers and mothers.
But to come to our matter, though young men despise their elders, we need not
marvel if they care not for their elders, to whom they owe duty because of
their age, seeing there are so few, that honor and reverence their natural
fathers and mothers as they ought, neither can away with them.


Ierom. It is not at this day alone that Children have neglected their duty
toward their Fathers and Mothers, but also the one against the other, and
chiefly against God. And therefore Hesiodus speaking of the silver age, touches
it somewhat to this effect.

The children of the silver age, The silver age.

did next succeed the gold,
Unlike the first in wit and deed,
and under Mothers wyng:
Were busied in their parents works,
tell they were waxen old,
And simply lead a toilyng life,
and knew none other thing.
And when they came to perfect age
and fell to shift for food,
Their life did wast, and pinyng care
did fret their peeuishe breasts:
And enemies styng between these fools
began breed much hateful mood,
And careless thynking on their goods
despise their heavenly hests.
He speaks like a heathen of their religon which was diverse according to the
diversity of the Country, for they had diverse Gods which they held as
Patrones, as our Papists held of their Saints. And because they had diverse
manners of Services and Ceremonies, and diverse using thereof, as our Papists
have in their religion. Hesiodus conde^neth those which follow not the manner of
Religion of their own Country. And then anon after he adds the punishment
which God laid upon them, agreeyng to Ovid, which had written more at large
of the flood, as far as he knew, followyng the holy Scriptures as other
Poets did, Gene. 6. 7. 8.
which wrote before him, which is thus much in effect.

When Jove once saw that they despised
to yield the Gods their due:
In wrath with waves he drencht the earth,
and formed it a new.
And from thence he comes to the brason age, whereof he speaks thus much.

Next after came the Brazen world, The Brazen age.

unlike the silver far.
Men made of Oaks of courage stout
delightyng much in war.
No rest, no law, a stony world,
with lofty looks and grim:
No force could fear their fiery mood
and large of bone and lim.

Tobie. When Ovid speaks of the four ages, (as far as I perceive by that,
that thou have rehearsed of his Metamorphosis, he makes no mention of the
decay of strength in man's body, but only of the decrease of virtue and
increase of vice. But Hesiodus, writes of both, and me thinks he does not
much disagree from that which is written in the holy Scripture, touching of
ancestors before the flood, and anon after. For even at that time the strength
of man began to deminishe and decaie. Is it not true Theophrastus?


Theo. Jacob bears witness of that before Pharo: Gene. 4.7.
saying. The whole time of my Pilgrimage is an hundred and thirty years, Gene.
47.
fear and evil have the days of my life been, and I have not attained unto
the years of the life of my fathers, in the days of their Pilgrimage. Psalm. 90.
And David after him, says of his time: The time of our life is threescore
years and ten: and if they be of strength, fourscore years: yet their strength
is but labor and sorrow, for it is cut of quickly, and we flee away.


Tobie. Yet notwithstanding methinkes Jacob and David, were long before the
time that is compared to the Iron age, whereof Jerome has not yet told us the
description that Hesiodus makes.


Ierom. If thou will hear it, thus much he says in effect.

But now the Iron age is come, The Iron age.

with daiely care and pain:
With creasing strife, (so would the Gods)
yet some release again.
Of quiet life somewhiles they grant
t'aswage the heavy grief:
But doubtless when horie hears once come
they dye without relief.
The child unlike the father is,
the gest fears trust less host:
And friendly promise soon is broke
hot strife does rule the roast.
Age is despised, and youth ashamed,
to yield their parents praise:
They mind no goods, ne render food,
to friends that were their stays.
What should I speak of cruel rape,
or Towns by force distroyde:
No other may stand: ne right maintaind,
and goodness still avoid.
And wicked worldinges make of them
that mischief still invent:
Thus void of duties knowledge all,
to wickedness are bent.

Tobie. These are goodly virtues in deed, this agrees well with that, which
Theophrastus spoke of before.


Theo. Hence come the troubles and confusion that now reigns in the old age
of the world, which is the cause of his great disease and dotage. Wherefore
we have good cause to pray with David: Psalm. 71.
saying. Cast me not of, Lord in time of age, forsake me not when my strength
fails.


Tobie. I believe all that thou have spoken: and shortly to tell thee mine
advise, me thinks the world is new in his old dotage, and the older he
waxes, the more he raueth: The ragyng world like an old ape or bear.
he is like unto these old Apes or Bears, which the older they wax, the
more mischeeuous they are. Wherefore, I am afraied least his end be at hand.
What think thou Jerome.


Ierom. It is to be feared: for it is dangerous when a man given to sickness
falls often sick: but when he falls to ragyng and madness, it is a
manifest sign of death. Pope Leo and Clement of the house of Medicis have
given evil medicines to the world.
Doubtless the world is very sick seeing he has been so long in the
Physicians hand: and great cause of despair of health is in him, for that
the Physicians have given him over, and he now falls to raging, which
increases daiely, so that it is to be feared least he run wholly madd up and
down streates and Countries, as Nabucadonozer did. For if the head be mad
what shall become of the members.


Tobie. What meanest thou by the worlds Physicians and his frantike head.


Ierom. Know thou not, that Popes are commonly called Gods on earth.


Tobie. Yes, but what of that.


Iero. Know thou not that Pope Leo, Medicines in English, Physicians.
and Pope Clement the last of those names were of the house of Medicis.


Theo. Thereby thou will conclude, that the world was in the hands of the
Physicians when these Popes governed.


Ierom. I mean thereby, that it was a very evil sign, and in manner a
foreshewyng and prognostication of the things that we have spoken: but it was
a great sign when Paul Defornese succeeded them, The world is frantike.
for that his name soundes much upon Fransie, unto which we say the world is
fallen. But let us hear what Theophrastus will say to this matter.


Theo. When I would consider this world, I remember a comparison that the
Prophet Esaias uses, Esaias. 30.
to show forth the state and overthrow of the wicked which were in his
time. He shows them that they shall be deceived in their vain hopes, and
that their confidence in iniquity shall be like an old ruinous wall, which
shows to be whole, but shall suddenly fall to the ground, and ouerwhelme all
those that are about it. The world in decaie.
And when I consider this world, me thinks it is like an old ruinous
buildyng of which the said, mortar, and stones is so old, that they fall away
by little and little, what shall we think then of such a building but sudden
overthrow ear we beware.


Ierom. Thou put me in remembrance of a melancolike man, Gal. de loc.
affect.
that Gallen makes mention of. This man had heard the fable that the ancient
Poets fained of Atlas bearyng the heavens on his shoulders, The fable of Atlas.
and being overcome with melancolike humor was sore afraied least Atlas being
weried the heavy burden, De fac qui appar. in. lum.
should either let it fall, or throw it of on his shoulders, and so crush
both him and all the world to pieces. Plutarch also makes mention of an
other, which was sore afraied least the Moon should fall, and greatly pitied
and lamented those Nations which were under the Moon: as the Etheopians, and
those of the I Will of Taprobana. He would also have feared least the Sky should
have fallen, if it had not been holden up by Atlas Cullumms.


Tobie. We use a common proverb to those that be fearful: what and the Sky
fall, then we shall catch larkes.


Iorom. Aristottle says: that the beginning of this proverb came, that some
rude and ignorant elders believed that the heavens were sustained by Atlas, and
not only Poets, but also some Physicians have affirmed it, natural
Philosophers have affirmed the same.


Tobie. I care not whence the proverb came, but I am sure if that should come
to pass, we should catch more fools then larkes, for there would be a
great many catched in those nets. And I doubt not but all that heard this
poor soul, had good sport at him. But I doubt much least men now adays
are more diseased, Diversities (...) folly.
and farther out of their wits, then those or such like Melancolike men as
thou talkest of are: for they feared that which they need not, and we fear
not that which we should fear. We see the world fall in decay, and yet think
it should last for ever.


Ierom. Thou have prevented me of my saying: but to that I will add that which
Horace says touching this matter.

Some kind of fools to fearful are, Horace ser. Lib. 2. sat. 3.

and think each pleasant way,
With fires, with rocks, with diches deep,
beset and so their stay.
An other sort far different,
no wiser then the first:
Will headlong launche to dangers deep,
not castyng erst the worst:
No flood, no fire, no rock, no bryer,
can stay their brainlesse wit,
Cry father, mother, wife, or kin,
beware the rock or pit.
As much they hear as dronken Fuse
which Ilions part did take:
And slept when Catie cried full often,
good mother now awake.

Tobie. I perceive Horace speaks of one sort of fools, which fear great
danger where there is none, and with great trembling are afraid of their own
shadow.


Ierom. There is a proverb of those that fear their own shadow: but
contrariwise there are other fools, that fear no danger, though they see it
before their eyes or be warned of it. There is neither freende nor foe shall
council them, or diswade them: but they will headlong throw them selves into
present mischief, and will not change their mind, though all the world had
sworn naie.


Tobie. But I do well understand what Horace means, by talking of Fuse,
Ilion, and Catien.


Ierom. He tells of a pleasant chance that happened in a Tragedy which was
played, as we at this day do play stage Plays: wherein Fuse was one of the
Players, and played the part of Ilion the daughter of King Priam, and Catien
played the part of Polidore the brother of Ilion. Now in the Play Ilion should
sleep, and Polidore should appear to her in a dream, and waken her and her
mother Hecuba and cry, mother, sister. And because Fuse his part was to
sleep, he victuailed himself with good siropps, and drank his skin full,
and fell so fast a sleep, that they could not play: so Catien that played
Polidors part, with his criyng mother and sister never so loud could not once
wake^ Fuse out of his sleep. Yea Horace says: that if there had been a
thousands Catiens and had cried till their hearts had aked, they could not
have wakened him, he slept so soundly: which when the people saw, they all
cried with one voice, mother, mother: and so all the Tragedy was turned to a
laughter.


Tobie. But to what purpose does Horace allege this example.


Ierom. Mary to this purpose: to tell of those that will run headlo^g into
present danger, and though men admonish them never so much, and cry to them to
diswade them, they will no more hearken to father or mother, brother or sister,
freende or foe, then a dronkarde ouerladen with Wine, which can no more be
wakened, then Catien could waken Fuse with all his criyng. And thereby
concludes, that the aduenturous fools of these days are like, which can not
perceive in what danger they are, nor do more esteem the admonition and
warnyng that is given them, then if they had not heard it, or were without
sense. Wherefore it is much to be feared least it happen to us as it did to
those that were drowned with Noes flood. ^en. 7. 8. 19.
Whose example Christ lays before us for the same cause, ^ath. 24.
or as it happened to those of Sodom and Gomorha, These. 5.
which were suddenly consumed with fire from Heaven. And that when we say
peace, peace, our overthrow come not suddenly on us, before we have leisure to
end our business. For if our age were of Gold, The new mel^yng of the World.
Silver, Brass, Iron, or any other metal, it might be molten again and
made a new, but being as it is, I have small hope. What think thou
Theophrastus.


Theo. If I had any hope, I should rather hope, that God would do as he has
promised by his Prophets: he says he will gather together all the Gold,
Silver, Brass, Copper, Tin, Lead, Latten, and all other metals, and will
cast them into a furnase in the midst of Jerusalem, to purge them, and to
try out all the dross and falshoode. But it is very hard to do this, for
the disease is incurable.


Ierom. We may well say with Titus Liuius, that the world is so corrupt,
that we can neither away with the vices, nor the remedies necessary for the
same.


Theo. He is a very waiwarde and impatient patient, and therefore is like an
old year then pot, which when it is once cracked, can neither be molten,
sowed, nor me^ded again, but the shardes serve either to lade out water, or to
fetch fire in. And yet I am afraied least that happen unto him which the Lord
by his Prophets threatens the wicked withal: saying, that he will break them
like an year then pot, and will not leave so much as one piece or sharde to
carry either fire or water in: Or else that which David Prophesies of the
wicked, saying: They shall be all pulled up like thorns, which no man handles:
and if any man touch them, he shall be fenced with Iron, or the staff of a
spear, and they shall be wholly burnt: David does rightly compare the wicked
to thorns, which every way do hurt: for they do not only hinder the
earth from bearyng fruit, but also prick and hurt the^, that either come
near them or handle them. Therefore the Lord threatens the wicked as unruly
thorns, that he will not only cut them, but wholly pluck them up, and
because none dare come near them or touch the^: he has promised that their
hands shall be fenced with Iron that they may handle them, and to give them
forkes to throw them into fire, to burn and consume them to naught.


Tobie. I once complained that men transfigured themselves into brute
beasts. But I am now more afraied, least they become worse and more furious,
then ye man which was possessed with a legio^ of Deuilles: which dwelte among
the graves, and could neither be tied nor chained, but he brake them. I
remember an old wives tale in our country, that S. Barnard had the Devil
chained on the hill where his Abbey stands: and because he went about to
gnawe the the chain a sonder to get away: the Smithes there about every
mo^daie, before they went to work, strike three strokes with their hammer on
the Andfild to mende and repair the chain which he had gnawe^, least he
should break it in sonder and get loose. If it be so, it appears that S.
Barnard tied him not sure enough or else that the Smithes did not their duty
to mende his chain, for it seems now, that he is not only broken loose
himself, but has opened hell gates for all his companions, and so they are
spread over the whole world. I know not what rule they keep in hell, but I
think verily that the devils are broken loose, Apoc. 12.
and go about to make an other hell in this world, that they may have a
hell, as well for quick as for dead.


Theo. Thou art well seen in old wives tales. But to speak in earnest, I am
afraied least that Devil, that is spoken of in the Apocalips, which was bound
for a thousand years, be let loose and have more liberty now then ever he had:
And least that Read Dragon, which is all embrued with the blood of Martires,
who with his Angels fought in the heavens against S. Michael and his Angels, be
thrown down from heaven, that is to say: from the church of Jesus Christ
by the power of his Gospel, and that he is fallen on the earth with his
Angels, that is to say, into the hearts of the wicked, reprobate, and worldly
men whom he fills with rage and fury, to overthrow the whole Church of
GOD. Wherefore, Apoc. (...).
we may well say with S. Ihon Woe be to the inhabitants of the earth and
the sea: For the Devil is come down among you in great wrath, knowing that
his time is short, he is in greater rage then ever he was, fearyng the loss of
his kingdom. It is good reason, that it should happen to Christians, as our
savior Christ did foretell unto the Jews, Punishment of Jews.
by the similitude of the wicked spirit, which walked through desert and dry
places to seek rest but found none: Matthew. 12.
then he said: I will return into mine house from whence I came and when he
came he found it empty, swept, and garnished: then he went in, and took unto
him seven other spirits worse then himself. And the end of that man, is worse
then the beginning.


Tobie. This parable seems very dark to me, what means our Savior Christ
thereby.


Theo. Even so happened it to the Jews. Exodus 13. 14. 19. 20.
The lord carried them out of Egypt, and gave them his law, Psalm. 78.
whereby he drove the Devil from amongst them. But through their Idolatry and
Sin, he gave them over to the hand of Tirantes, which Moses told them of
before, by whose means Satan went about utterly to destroy the people of GOD.
It appears more plainly in the Books of the Judges, Samuel, the Kings, the
Chronicles, and the Machabees, that they were many times afflicted by Gentiles
and Idolaters, which were their neighbors, and principally by the Assirians,
Babilonians, and Greeks, but especially by Antiochus Epiphanes, who rightly is
taken for the figure of Antichrist, by reason of his heinous enterprises
against God and his word. 1. Esdras. 1.
But the lord being always merciful to his Church, after he had chastised
them for their sins did deliver them from these great mischieues, and gave
them some respite and consolation. But they afterward forgot again the
scourage of the lord, and behaved them selves worse against Christ his
Apostles and disciples, then ever their predecessors did against the Prophets?
Daniel. 9.
Therefore they could look for nothing, Romans 10. 11.
but only the visitation of God, more sharply and terribly then before, and
that he should destroy and wholly overthrow the^, giuyng them over to the power
of satan which he did, when he called the Gentiles to the grace of the
Gospel, and rejected them, and gave the^ over into the hands of the Romans,
Matthew. 24.
who have more cruelly handled them, Luks. 21.
then any of the tyrants before that time. Wherefore Jesus Christ said not
without cause, Matthew. 2. 4.
that there was never such tribulation nor vengeance of God, The Jews are
amanifest example of the judgment of God.
since the beginning of the world: of which vengeance the scatteryng of the
Jews throughout all the world, is witness to this day. Whereby we may well
perceive, how God has reserved them, as a witness of his just judgment, to
al those that stand against Jesus Christ or his Gospel. For there is not a
more miserable nor cursed people under the cope of heaven: by whom God has
showed us a great example, if we ca^ beware. But we seem to be holy like the^:
they had the example of Sodom and Gomorha before their eyes: Gene. 19.
for they might almost se from their own Country, the cituation of the
tounes, which by fire and brimstone sent from heaven, were consumed by the
just judgment of God: whose witness remains on the yeareth for ever. For,
where as before it was compared to Paradise, now it remains so in Gods curse,
Gene. 13.
that it bears no fruit that can sustain man, but it turns immediately
into smoke and ashes. Stra. lib. 16.
As the Heathen Historiographers and Cosmographers witness, Cor. tac. li. 23.
The Israelites
and namely Cornelius Tacitus, and Strabo, although they knew not the judgment
of God, from whence it proceaded. The Israelites which held Samaria, had there
a plain spectacle before their eyes, but they could not beware by it, but so
far provoked the wrath of God, that he driued them by the Assirians, from
the land that he had given them. Likewise their brethren of Judah saw all these
examples and judgments of God manifestly, Judah.
and could not amend, but did worse then Israel: wherefore God punished them
like wise by the Babilonians. Their successors might have been warned by the
examples and punishments of their predecessors. But it behooved them (as our
savior Christ told them) to fill up the measure of their fathers. Matthew. 23.
And therefore God must needs use extreme vengeance toward them, and so
curse them as we at this day se, from one end of the world to the other.


Tobie. I am afraied least the like happen now to us Christians.


Theo. It is sore to be feared: For now Jesus Christ is come, which has
driven and discovered satan, that quietly reigned in the world, and called
the Gentiles and Painims, from whom we sprang, to the grace of the Gospel,
which ever before served the Devil and his Idols. But we very unthankfully
receive the grace that God has showed us. Therefore we may se what vengaunce
God has used toward the East Churches, and against all the Churches of
Asia and Africa, by that false Prophet Mahomette, and by the Turk his
adherentes: The most Churches of Europe ought to take heed by their example.


Tobie. Thou say true, but we will not pass for it, till we be as they
are, and till the same light upon us.


Theo. If we be not wholly blind, we may se how the Lord has poured out
his wrath, and exercised his vengaunce upon us, through that Romish
Antichriste, for what disolatio^ and ruin has he brought the Christian
Church in. Now after all this great desolation and ruin, which is fallen on
all Churches, Jesus Christ has vouchsafed to visit us once again with his
Gospel, which we receive even as the Jews did. Wherefore I look for none
other thing, but Gods just judgment upon us, even as they had, and have to
this day: and there is none other likelihood, but that the utter consumption
of the world is at hand, The destruction of Jerusalem, a figure of the end
of the world
when their wickedness shall come to the fullness, as theirs of Jerusalem did,
which was a figure of that last judgment of God that we look for. And that was
the cause that our savior Christ joined both together, in the answer that he
made to his Disciples, Matthew. 24.
when they questioned with him, of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the end
of the world.


Tobie. Then have I good cause to say, that the world is possessed with
Devils.


Tobie. Naie, it is to be feared, least we become worse: and least that wicked
spirit come again, with vii. other spirits worse then him self, and that our
state be worse then ever it was. The true Physic of the diseased and
possessed. world.
For the likelihoodes be very great, the danger is such, that it is
impossible for any to remedy, but only our Savior Christ, who alone has all
power to command Devils, whom they fear, and whom only they obey. Matthew.
8. 17.
But seeing we have forsaken him, driven him away from us, and will not receive
him again, Mark. 1.
when he offers his grace: it is no marvel tho there be many in the world
possessed with devils, seeing he is gone that had only power to cast them out.
And therefore we are like those, that bound and chained the possessed man, that
dwelt among the graves: for, though they tied him never so fast, it was to no
purpose, he brake all, till our savior Christ came, which healed him, and
made him as meek as a Lamb. Which worldly men could not do, by all the
means they could devise. The Phisitio^s of the diseased world.
There are many now adays, that go about to heal the diseased, frantic, and
possessed world, and to drive the devils out of him. And think to do it, by
their own pollices, counsels, authority, power, and richesse, and by the
coniurynges and adiurynges of their Ceremonies and Traditions, but they make
him worse, as we have proved of long time, and do yet see it daiely before
our eyes: what think thou Jerome.


Ierom. Me thinks when the world comes out of such Physicians hands, he is
like to those that are lead to S. Matunes in France: for if they be but
frantike when they are led thither, they return from thence stark, staryng
mad. Also I fear me, least the coniurers that thou speak of, shall be
rewarded as the seven sons of Sceua the Jew, (which likewise were
Coniurers) were, who in going about to cast out the Devil out of the
possessed man of Ephesus, so provoked him that he ran on them, Acts. 19.
overthrew them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of the house
naked and wounded.


Theo. The like shall happen to all those that go about to appease the trouble
and fury, that now possesses the world, if they used any other mean, then
the power and wisdom of the word of God. For devils can not be cast out, but
only by our savior Christ, or his disciples which come in his name, power,
and strength. For, it is Jesus Christ of who^ it is written: yt he appeaseth
the noise of the seas, and the noise of the waves thereof, Psalm. 65.
and tumults of the people. Wherefore there is none but he that can deliver ye
little ship of the church of God, from ye swallowing gulphes, Matthew. 8. 14.
and troublesome seas of this world: Ihon. 6.
for it is only to him, yt the winds and tempests obey, which are creatures
without reason or understanding, neither hearing nor seeing: therefore they fear
and acknowledge none but God, to be their master and governor. The true
coniuryng of Deuilles.
There is none other coniuration, that has any power over the^ but only the
name of Jesus Christ: and he that comes in any other name, or brings any
other doctrine, shall not heal the disease, but rather increase it. And it is
not enough to come in the name of Christ, and to bring his doctrine, but it
must be done with his spirit, and faith. For, the sons of Sceua did use the
name of Christ, when they Coniured the wicked spirit, yea, the name of Jesus
which Paul preached: Acts. 16.
but he obeyed the^ not, for they took the name of Jesus in vain, not having
such faith in him and in his word, as Paul had: and therefore the Devil
answered them, that he knew them, but feared them not. Many also in these
days come in the name of Christ, and boast much of his Gospel, but because
they are without faith and affection, toward the church of Christ, their
doctrine is of no great force. For, the power of Jesus Christ and his
doctrine, consists not in words, but in faith: his troth lies not in the
tongue, but in the heart. For the Gospel is no Gospel, nor the word of God is
no word, but only the dead letter, except it be joined with the power and
efficacy of the holy ghost, who is the aucthor thereof. Neither has it any
great power in him that utters it, except it be uttered in faith, so that he
may truly say with David and S. Paul, Psalm. 116.
I have believed, 2. Cor. 4.
and therefore have I spoken. And, we also believe, and therefore speak. For,
to usurp the word of God, only in ye mouth, without the faith and trothe of
the spirit of God, is to abuse the name of God, as the false Prophets,
Hirelynges, and Enchaunters do: for, the kingdom of God consists not in the
word, but in the power and efficacy of the same.


Tobie. I believe thee very well: and seeing that there is so little faith in the
world, I do not much marvel, though the word of God take so little effect
in many now a days, as well the Preachers as the hearers. Furthermore, you may
well call this world a ragyng sea, for it is tossed and turmoiled on every side,
with horrible and violent winds of ambition, vainglory, avarice, extortion,
Pride, arrogancy, presumption, over wenyng, envy, hatred, malice, and
vengeance: which have so swollen and moved it, and tossed up the waves so
high, that I look every hour when it shall over flow, and droune up the
earth, as Noes flood did.


Theo. The Geographers, and natural Philosophers write, that there are four
principal winds that blow on the earth: besides them there are other, every
one in his place, but none of the^ writes commonly of more then of xii. in
all, and the violent blusteryng of one or two of these, is sufficient to
trouble both earth, sea, air, and to overthrow altogether. Let us not then
marvel though the sea of this world, be wonderfully troubled, and we in
great danger, considering that there are more then xii, yea, xii.C. or xii.M.
contrary winds, that cease not daiely to bluster and blow one against an
other. What waves will they make? What tempests must they move? And yet we
are in worse case.


Tobie. How is it possible to be worse.


Theo. Thus, those me^ that sail on this sea, are all in one danger, and
therefore they ought to lay hold on their tacklyng, and set hand to the ores,
and so help the mariners and governors, to save themselves from dannger, and to
avoid present death: but they are so ouerthwarte, and so hate one an other,
that to be reue^ged the one of the other, they bore holes in the Ship, wherein
they them selves are, to droune their fellows, who cannot be drouned without
them.


Tobie. I do not well understand thee.


Theo. When a ship is full of holes, are not all they in great danger that are
in it?


Tobie. They are not very far from their death.


Theo. What would thou say, if there were some in the Ship, that would
bore holes in it, to droune their fellows.


Tobie. I would say, yt they were not well in their wits, and that they were
both murderers of their fellows, and of themselves.


Theo. Even the like is daily used among men. For we se that they do not only
hinder themselves, in sekyng to hinder other, but also undo the^ selves, in
seking to undo other. It is even as much, as though the brother, should go
about to droune the brother, or one neighbor an other: so that they are not
worthy to be called me^, but rather sea monsters, whales, and such other
great fish, as eat up the little fish. I would ask thee a question. If thou
should se a man tear his face, pull out his eyes, cut his nose and his
ears, break his head against the walls, and thrust a knife in his own
throat: would thou think him in his right wits?


Tobie. Who would not Judge him stark mad?


Theo. If we mark the trade of the world now adays, we can not but Judge
him such a one. For, sith we are all one body, he that goes about to hinder
or undo his neighbor, does he not lay hands on him self? Does he not
disfigure his own body, and like a madd man tear his own members? And so
undo himself.


Tobie. Do you then marvel though I complain, and that my wits be so
troubled, that I wotte not what to say: I see that Truth, Right, Justice, and
Equity, are not to be found on the earth.


Theo. Where shall we seek them then? Princes Courts.
In the Popes court, or in the courts of Princes, or great lords that
persecute the church of Christ? Who does now maintain truth and justice,
but only such as David describes these of Saules court to be? that is, his
mortal enemies: of who^ he complains thus. Psalm. 59.
They go to and fro in the euenyng, 1. Samu. 19.
they bark like dogs, and go about the city. Behold they bragg in their
talk, and swords are in their lips. Even as they that were sent by Saul,
went and came, and closed David's house, when Saul sought to put him to death,
to the end he might not escape, and as they rored and howled like dogs that
pursue wild beasts, even so do they now adays, seek after the true
servants of God. We may add to this saying of David, that that he says in
an other Psalm, of the nature of the wicked, Psalm. 10.
thus. He says in his heart, I shall never be moved, nor be in danger. His
mouth is full of cursyng, deceipte, and fraud, under his tongue is mischief and
iniquity. He lies in wait in ye villages, in the secret places does he
murder the innocent, his eyes are bent against the poor. Wherefore does the
wicked condemn God? he says in his heart, thou will not regard. Hear also
what Micheas says touching the same matter. Micha. 7.
The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none rightous among
men, they all lie in wait for blood, every man hunteth his brother with a
net. To make good for the evil of their hands, the Prince asked, and the
Judge judged for a reward: therefore the great man he speaks out of the
corruption of his soul, so they wrap it up. The best of the^ is as a brier and
the most rightous of them is sharper then the Thorn hedge.


Tobie. All this we see in our time.


Theo. Therefore we may well say, that it is the time whereof Esaie
complains, Esaie. 59.
saying: Roma. 3.
Your hands are full, Psalm. 7.
and poluted with blood, and your fingers with inquitie. Your lips speak lies,
and your tongue murmureth wickedness. There is none that cries for justice,
none judges according to trothe, but trust in vain things. They speak
things of naught, they conceive labor, and bring forth iniquity. They have
broken the serpe^ts eggs: and they spin the spiders web. He that eats of
their eggs shall dye, and if they be broken, there will come forth a
Cockatrice. The work of wickedness is in their hands, their feet run to
do mischief, and they make haste to shed the blood of ye innocent. Their
thoughts are thoughts of vanity, wast and perdition is in their way: they
have not known the way of peace, and there is no judgment in their paths.
They so perverted their own ways, that whosoever walks in the^, shall not
know peace. And therefore hear what council Michea gives us against such
people. Mich. 7.
Trust ye not in a fre^d neither put ye confidence in a counceller, keep the
doors of thy mouth, from her that lies in thy bosom. For the son reuileth
the Father, the daughter rises up against her Mother, the daughter in law
against her mother in law, and a man's enemies are the men of his own house.
Therefore I will look unto the lord: I will wait for God my Savior, my God
will hear me.


Tobie. I promise you, this is very good counsel.


Theo. Who ca^ deny, but that Esaias was a great Phisitio^, and did better know
the Nature of man, then ever did Esculapius, Hypocrates, or Gallen, which are
esteemed the princes of Physic? For in their lives, they never made so good and
true Anatomy of man, as the Prophet has done in this place, even now
alleged, neither did they ever describe so truly and lively, all the parts of
the body, to make us the better to know and understand all the nature thereof.
A prophetical anatomy of man and of the world.
For he makes an Anatomy both of body and soul, wherein he so aptly
describes all the parts with their properties, yt there is nothing that ca^
be added unto it. He first shows generally, what whole man is, then comes
he to the principal parts of him: that is, the head and the heart: and from
them, to the tongue and the mouth: the hands and the feet, to the end his
Anatomy might be perfect, and for further declaration thereof he says: Esaias.
5^.
judgment is turned backward, and justice stands a far of, for truth is
fallen in the ^^reate, and equity cannot enter. Yea truth fails, and he that
refraineth from evil, makes him self a pray, and when the Lord saw it, it
displeased him that there was no Judgment. And when he saw that there was no
man, he wondered that none would offer himself: therefore his arm did save it,
and his righteousness it self did sustain it.


Tobie. I would he would yet say more, for there was never more need. I
believe when the Prophet spoke this, he foresawe, by inspiration of the holy
ghost, the trade of the world now adays: for it is impossible better to
painte out our time, or with liuelier colors, then he has done. For, what is
the world now, but a wild Forest and desert of horrible theftes and
murders? For there is now almost no justice, but in the force of the hand and
sword, whereby he carries away the price, be it right or wrong. Is not this
true Jerome?


Ierom. Ovid says touching this matter that they fear no laws, but justice
and equity are constrained to give place to force and violence: and right
being overcome, is thrown down, and laid under the sword And anon after
speaking of the Iron age in his Metamorphosis, he concludes.

L^ now lies pity under foot,
and Lady Justice last:
Of heavenly virtues, from this earth,
in slaughter drouned paste.
He means as much in effect, as Hesiodus before him had said, which is
thus much in sum.

Now shamefastness and Justice eke,
clean clad in white araie:
Are fled from hence, and bootlesse
griefs, have left to men for aie.
Seeing then that it appears, that there is nothing, but will and might in
place of reason and right, it is like the example that Homer brings forth of
king Agamemnon, who said: if ye will not give it me, I will take it.


Tobie. That sentence was very tira^nous but what other thing is used almost
now adays? And Hesiodus speaking of the like thing, brings forth an example
of the Hawk and Nightingale, wherein he does as it were reprove tyrants, and
shows how the small and weaker sort, are constrained to suffer wrong and
extortion, of the stronger and violent: and that tirantes are among men, as
priyng foul are among birds, his words are thus much in effect But now to
Kings a tale I tell,
which happly erst they knew:
The Hawk fast caught the Nightyngale,
and high in clouds she flewe.
This silly bird, when she so felt
those gripyng tallents smart:
With mournyng voice she waild her hap.
when Hawk with cruel heart
Began say, thou wretch why wailest thou?
thy better has thee quaild:
Though thou in song more pleasant be
my power has now auaild.
I may thee bear from place to place,
and suppe on thee this night:
I may thee keep or else release,
who can resist my might?
Hereby you see what folly it is,
to strive with higher powers:
Might, now is right, so for thy meede:
thou getst but stormy showers.



Tobie. Truly poor men that are in tyrants hands, are like the Nightingale
in the hawks tallents, for, sing they never so sweetly (as the common
Proverb is) the belly has no ears, let them talk, reason, and show as much
law for themselves as they will, it helps them even as much, as did the sweet
singyng of the Nightingale out of the Faulcons tallentes. For, tyrants hear
with none other ears, nor other reason then their own, that is their will,
therefore, whosoever resists the^, is never the nere, for he wrappeth him
self in more danger, and moves them to more wrath.


Ierom. Therefore, we may well say of this matter, that we daily prove that
to be true, that king Pirrhus answered to one of his young children, which
demanded of him, to who^ he would resign his kingdom, he answered. To him
that has ye sharpest sword emongst you: there is almost none other reason in
the world now adays.


Tobie. When I consider the states and trades of diverse cities and tounes, me
thinks they be like a den of thieves: for there is almost no occupation, art,
or practice, but has his pillyng and pollyng, wherewith he cutteth poor men's
throtes. The state of the world.
And when I consider ye friendship and agreement that countries, cities, tounes,
villages, neighbors, kinsfolks, friends, brethren, sisters, and generally all
men bear one to an other, me thinks I see, Griphons, Lions, Bears, Bores,
Wolves, Dogs, Hoggs, Foxes, Snakes, Vipers, Scorpio^s, Cockatrices, Egles,
hawks, and other priyng birds, with all kinds of wild beasts, shut up
together in a park or iron cage, which fight, sting, bite, tear, devour, and
consume one an other And who in this case dare come nere them to set the^ at
one. For they will as soon fall upon him that comes to do good, as on him that
comes to make debate, yea, rather souer, The greatest danger now a days.
and his danger is greater. For, it is the greatest and most dangerous state
now adays, to be an upright man. For the French proverb says: he yt makes
himself a sheep the Wolf will eat him. Wherefore, we must play the wolfes
with wolfes, and wicked with the wicked, if we will be at quiet, yea, it so
rages now adays, that a man cannot know his friend from his foe. And
therefore, A deaf man in a chafe.
they yt meddle to reform or set a stay in this matter, are used as if they
had to do with a deaf man, who when he is stricken or angered, strikes the next
that comes nere him, of ye next that he metes, whether they be his fre^des or
his foes: wheither they come to hurt him or to help him: for, lack of hearing
and understanding, he is not able to judge of his friends from his enemies, but
al adue^tures without respect, lays on lode as though every man were his
enemy.


Ierom. If it be so dangerous to have to do with a deaffe man, how much more
dangerous is it, The world deaffe, blind and possessed
to meddle with him that is both deaffe, dombe, yea, and possessed with a
Devil, as many are in these days? Thou have heretofore compared the world to
one, possessed with a Legion of Devils but as the possessed (which our Savior
Christ healed) were of diverse sorts, so are they that now adays live in the
world.


Tobie. Why, how know thou that?


Ierom. Ask of Theophraste how many sorts our Savior Christ healed, as he
finds in the Scriptures: and then thou shall easily know, if all those
diverse kinds of devils, which then tormented men are not now as rife, as ever
they were, or worse, and if there be none possessed with devils now, which
torment others also.


Tobie. Tell what thou think of this matter Theophrast?


Theo. I am contented so to do, but before we enter any further in this
matter: I must desire leave to look home, and I will come again straight.


Tobie. That is good reason, for we will not trouble thee, if thou have other
business.


The title and sum, of the second Dialogue.
THE second Dialogue is entitled (Black Deuilles) because that mention is
made herein, of the most furious possessed with Deuilles, which dwelt among
graves and deserts, and of such men as are like unto them, and namely of
such as be tyrauntes, persecutours, and open enemies of the people of God.
For, this sort of Devils and possessed, are less transfigured into Angels
of light, then such cloaked enemies as make show of friendship and
familiarity.

As concerns the principal poinctes, whereof this Dialogue treats, first
there is talk of diversities of such Deuilles and possessed, as our Savior
Christ healed.

Afterward there is showed thee, in what sense wicked men may be holden
for possessed, and what manner of possessed they are.

Of good and evil Angels, and what they do about men.

Of the power, malice, and practices of the Devil, and how ware men ought to
be of them.

Of the remainyng of the possessed in graves or deserts, and the causes
thereof.

Of such as are given over to the Devil, and of the just judgment of God on
the wicked, and the Image of their hell.

Of such men as are of wild and unbridled nature.

Of the torment of the Soul and Conseience.

Of the power of the brideled Devil.

Of tyrauntes possessed with Deuilles.

Of the Crounes of the red Dragon, and their signification, and of the
judgment of God on all persecutours, that have persecuted the people of God.

Of the nature and difference of Black Deuilles from White Deuilles, and how
dangerous as well the one as the other is.

The second Dialogue called Black Deuilles.
Tobie, Theophrast, Eustace, Jerome. NOw that thou art come Theophraste, I
pray thee show us (ccordyng to thy promise) the diversities and Natures of
those that were possessed with Deuilles, whom our Savior Christ healed.

Theo. The Evangelists witness, Matthew. 12.
that he cast out many wicked spirits, Mark. 8.
that tormented the possessed, whereof they write not at large: but there are
some other of whom they write more largely and specially amongst which also
there were great diversity.


Tobie. Whereupon do thou gather that diversity, whereof thou speak?


Theo. We may gather it, The diversity of the possessed healed by our Savior
Christ.
either by the multitude of wicked spirits, that then tormented the possessed,
or by the time when they began to torment them, or by the workyng of wicked
spirits in them, and the evils which the Deuilles did them, or by the
quality of the persons so possessed.


Tobie. Show us the example of all these diverse sorts possessed, so that we
may better understand, this thy distinction.


Theo. There were some, which were not tormented with one wicked spirit only,
but with many, some likewise were possessed and tormented with the Devil from
their childhoode, and youth: some other in their age, some also there were,
which were not only in great fury and rage, by reason of the Devils which
possessed them, but also were both blind, deaffe, and du^be. And touching
those that were possessed, they were not all of one quality, as we shall
perceive more at large in this place.


Tobie. I do not so much demand of thee, A Legion of Deuilles in the
possessed.
the example of those that were tormented with many evil Spirits, because we
have already talked thereof, in talkyng of him that was possessed with a Legion
of Deuilles.


Theo. Saint Matthewe makes not only mention, Matthew. 8.
of one that was so tormented with a number of Deuilles, but says that
therewere two: Although Saint Mark and Saint Luke, make mention but of one
only, for that the story of him was sufficient for them, to manifest that
thing that saint Matthew minded to set forth, for the power and grace of
Jesus Christ, in the story of the two possessed, of whom he writes. To these
two we may add that, which saint Luke writes of Marie Sagdaline, Luks. 8.
saying: That our Savior Christ cast out seven Devils from her, wherewith she
was possessed.


Tobie. What have thou to say of these kind of possessed, The errors of the
Papists touching Mary Magdaline.
and namely of Mary Magdaline: for there are many that understand that those
seven Deuilles which our Savior cast out, were the seven deadly sins which
had overcome her. Have not thou heard the like Eustace.


Eust. Yea, I have heard our Preachers preach so, which say that she was a
common Harlot, before she was converted to Christ, but when he co^uertrd her,
he drove out seven Deuilles out of her, that is to say: the seven deadly
sins, whereunto she was subject like a poor miserable sinner, given over to
all filthiness. I think Theophrastus will not say the contrary.


Theo. If I should show how many kind of ways your Preachers are deceived in
this thing, and you with them, I should spend to much time, and go to far
from the chief matter whereof we now talk: wherefore I will but glaunce over
the points which serve least to our matter.


Eust. Wherein is it that our Preachers are deceived and we with them?


Theo. First, Luke. 7.
in that they take Marie Magdaline, Ihon. 12.
and Marie the sister of Lazarus and Martha, Luke. 7. 8.
and the sinner of whom S. Luke speaks, al for one woman, where in deed they
are three several women, as it is easy to be proved by the Histories of the
Gospel: if I had time to talk of it, but that I will leave till more leisure.


Eust. What have thou to say more.


Theo. That your Doctors herein do show their ignorance, The number of
mortal sins.
in forgiuyng such number of mortal sins, as if there were but seven.


Eust. Why, think thou that there are more?


Theo. Yea, I say that all sins are mortal of them selves, for that they
deserve death, even eternal death: and so remain continually mortal to the
reprobates, in as much as they neither ask nor obtain pardon through Jesus
Christ, The difference between mortal and venial sins
which makes them venial to the elect of God, through steadfast faith in him.
But because this is not to our matter, I will wade no further in it.


Eust. Think thou then, The seven Devils which were in Mary Magdaline.
that those seven Deuilles that were in her, of their very nature and
substance?


Theo. No man can deny it, except he will manifestly gainesaie S. Luke and
overthrow his meaning, for he speaks not in this place of the forgiveness of
sins, which Sinners obtain through Jesus Christ: but he manifestly
speaks of the merueilous works of Christ, through which, he not only
delivered the possessed of the wicked Spirits which tormented them, but also
he healed many of diverse diseases, infirmities and sickennesses. Wherefore,
there is no cause why they should here take those Deuilles for the seven deadly
sins. The difference betwixt the possessed, and those that the Devil
dwells in by sin.
For if we will understand hereby that our Savior Christ drives Devils out
of those, who he delivers out of their hands, and withdraws from sin:
we may rightly say, that he woorketh many such miracles daiely. But they
are miracles in the soul, whereof S. Luke speaks no whitt in the place here
alleged, but of such miracles as were manifestly done in the body it self.
For although the Devil dwell in those that are subject unto him through sin:
nevertheless, we do not properly call them possessed with Deuilles, except
they torment their body, or so trouble their mind, as it turn into a fury
or rage. And if we should take the Deuilles for mortal sins, in all the
possed that the Evangelists make mention of, we could not then say, that our
Savior Christ did cast out Deuilles of very nature and substance of the
possessed who^ he healed, but only that he delivered them from their sins.
For there is no more reason to drive us to take those devils (which possessed
Marie Magdaline) for sins, then of any other so possessed.


Eust. I perceive well enough that I spend my time in waste to dispute with
you. For your new Divinity condemns all the doctrine of our Doctors and
Preachers, and ye like nothing but only your new opinions.


Theo. Our opinions are not new, neither do we condemn the doctrine of your
Doctors and Preachers, nor of any other, but where they are contrary to the
pure word of God. And if we condemn any doctrine by this word, it is not
we that condemn it, but God himself: whose sentence we do but pronounce as
heretofore his Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists have done.


Eust. Seeing you expound the holy scriptures as it pleases you, I will let
Tobie and you go forward with your matter.


Tobie. I deny not for my part, In what sense the wicked may be holden for
possessed.
but that the possessed which ye Evangelists speak of, were verily possessed
with Deuilles: otherwise then sinners, wicked and reprobate are commonly
possessed with sin, through which the Devil dwells in the^. But on the
other side, may we not rightly hold the wicked and reprobate for possessed,
which give them selves over to the devil, and do the works of the same? For
though they show fairer countenance, the^ those whom we properly call
possessed, and show them selves not so furious, nevertheless, they many times
execute stronger and horribler things, then they do, which are even holden
for very possessed.


Theo. I do not only agree to that that thou have spoken, but I say further,
that this sort of possessed are much more dangerous the^ the other, if a man
could know them. For, the less they are known the more hurt they do, not
only to other men, but to their own selves. And because men can not well
perceive how the Devil hurts their souls by means of sin. God has set
forth this Image before their eyes in the persons of the possessed which are
known to be such, to the end that by the^ they might learn to know, by the
tyranny which the Devil executes on their bodies, what tyranny he uses on
their souls when they are given over to him. Now, when we read that which
the Evangelists have written of the possessed, let us consider in them, the
estate of poor sinners which are in the power of Satan.


Tobie. What say thou to the first, touching the possessed, which are
tormented with many Deuilles.


Theo. Thou know that it has been a common opinion among Christian men of
long time, that God has given to each man a good Angel to keep him, and
likewise that every man has an evil Angel that strives with the good, and
goes about to hurt and wholly overthrow him whose evil Angel he is.


Tobie. Yea, I can yet say the prayer by rote that was taught me when I was
young to bequeath me to my good Angel. But tell me I pray thee, think thou
not that every man has a good and ill Angel?


Theo. Thou may here perceive by the histories of these possessed which were
tormented with so many Diuelles, that they had more then one evil Angel a
piece, for they had as many evil Angels as they had Deuilles within them.


Tobie. If God suffer many Deuilles at once to fall on one man, to hurt and
destroy if they can, I doubt not, but that he gives also when it pleases him
many good Angels to his children, to guard and defend them from those wicked
Angels, which are plain Deuilles.


Theo. The holy Scripture makes no express mention that God gives any
certain number of Aungelles to his elect, Of the guard and ministry of
Angels.
to conduct and defend them, Psalm. 91.
but it generally teaches us, Hebru. 1.
yt God has created Angels to serve those that are appointed to life
everlasting, Math. 4. 18.
and that they be assigned to them, Psalm. 34.
to defend them. And therefore the Psalmest says: That the Angels of the
Lord are camped like an host, about them that fear the Lord. Furthermore,
we read that the charge of a whole Country, kingdom or Empire is given by
the Lord to one Angel, Daniel. 10.
as Daniell does plainly declare. Likewise we read, that God has sometimes
sent many Angels to keep and defend one man, as witnesses the vision of
Heliseus servant: 2. King. 5.
when the Lord caused him to see the succor that he sent Heliseus his master.


Tobie. Seeing we have so many enemies, and so cruel, we have great need
of Gods sauegarde, and that he send his Angels to keep, guide, and defend
us, or else we should surely be but very ill kept.


Theo. Although our good God and father, Wakefulnesse against snares and
assaults of Satan.
has very well provided for that from the beginning: nevertheless, we must
not be careless, but watch continually, as warriors do, that look every
hour for the assault or allaroms of their enemies. And therefore, 1. Peter. 5.
after S. Peter had admonished the faithful to cast and lay all their care on
God, assuring them, yt God would be careful for them, he exhorts them after
this manner: be sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil as a roaryng
Lion walks about, sekyng whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the
faith. Seeing then that the lord has warned us of the malice of our enemy,
and of the desire that he has to hurt and overthrow us, and the diligence that
he uses therein, and likewise of the duty on our part to resist him, and the
means that God gives us to defend our selves, against that so dangerous an
enemy, certainly we ought not to be careless and slothful therein. For, if we
despise the warnynges, that God by his word has given us, and care no more
for them, then if we were out of danger, do we not deserve that God in just
judgment should give us over, into the hands of our adversary, as children
of rebellion and disobedience. To te^pt God.
For, we are forbidden tempt God: Dan. 6.
and we both tempt him and mock him, Math. 4.
when we despise his warnynges, and use not the means, Luke. 4.
which he in his word has declared unto us, Psalm. 95.
and by which he will help and succor us. Heb. 4. 4.
And therefore the examples of the possessed, 1. Cor. 10.
that we spoke of even now, The Deuilles diligent to hurter
may serve to waken us, that we be not suddenly overcome with so cruel an
enemy, Job. 1. 2.
who as he desires nothing but our utter destruction, Math. 12.
so he cease neither day nor night, to range and rome to and fro, to set on
us at unawares, as we se evidently by the example of Job, and in the similitude
which we spoke of before, that our Savior Christ made unto the Jews,
touching the wicked spirit that wandered in the deserts, and sought for rest.


Tobie. If one devil be sufficient to trouble, and torment the whole world, in
what state be the poor possessed, that are not only troubled with one, The
power that the Devil has to torment men
but with many.


Theo. To the end that we may the better judge of this matter, and perceive
the malice and rage of our adversary, let us consider in what fury he
brought those possessed, which answered our savior Christ, that they had a
Legion of Deuilles within them, because they were possessed with a great
number: as it well appeared (when Christ gave them leave to depart) by their
enteryng into the Heard of Swine, that were there by: and then we shall well
understand, how we may come to the knowledge by such examples, into what
state the Devil brings men's souls, through the sin that reigns in
them, and into what torment and trouble he brings the whole world, by
the same means.


Tobie. I wene S. Matthew writes that these two possessed, Math 8.
of who^ thou speak, came forth of the graves, and were very fearful, so
that none could pass that way.


Theo. S. Mark touching this matter says, Mark. 5.
that he had his abidyng of him that he spoke thereof, among the graves, and no
man could bind him, no not with chains: because that when he was often bound
with fetters and chains, he plucked the chains in s^nder, and brake the
fetters in pieces, neither could any man tame him: and always both night and
day, he cried in the mountains, Luke. 8.
and in the graves, and stroke himself with stones. Saint Luke says further
of this matter, that he was long time possessed with the devil, and he ware no
Clothes, neither abode in house, but in graves, and breakyng the bands that he
was bound with, was carried of the Devil into the wilderness.


Tobie. There are many things to be considered in these possessed, in which
I would know thy mind.


Theo. Show them in order, and I will answer thee to every of them, as GOD
shall give me grace.


Tobie. The first is, The abidyng ^f the posses^ed in graves and deserts.
touching their abidyng in the graves and deserts: and why the devil rather
carried them thither, then to any other place. For, saint Luke says plainly,
^uke. 8.
as thou did rehearse even now that the devil did carry the^ to those
places.


Theo. Thou must understand, Torment of the body and mind.
that the devil does not only torment the possessed in their bodies, but
also they so trouble their understanding, that all bodily torments were
nothing, in comparison of the torment of the mind, now the devil having thus
troubled their minds, puttes horrible and strange things in their
imagination: so that many times they know not, whether they be beasts, men,
or deuilles: whether they be quick or dedde, but even as their imaginations
and fantasies carry them.


Tobie. I have seen frantike, Fond imaginations of frantic men
Melancolike, and furious men, which were not esteemed to be possessed, and
yet had such imaginatio^s, as could not be removed out of their heddes, though
the strangeness thereof were incredible. I have heard many tales of diverse,
that have been in that taking: but emongst other, of some which being out of
their wits, thought they were ded: and had this toye rooted in their
fantasy, that they could by no means be persuaded to eat meat: For, when
any man offered them either meat or drink, they answered, that they were
dedde, and that ded folks did neither eat nor drink: so ye some of the^ have
died of honger and thirst: and some of them have been brought to eating,
because that other which fained to be ded as well as they, did eat and drink.


Theo. Ihon Nider makes mention of a certain Citezen of Vienna in Austriche
whom he saw whilst he studied there, Nider in formicar. Lib. 5. cap. 12.
that could never be persuaded, either to eat or drink, being in this
rauerie that thou speak of, but died for ho^ger. Now, if diseases and evil
humors that be in man, be able so to trouble his brain and understanding, it
is not to be doubted, but that the Devil can trouble him more, and by many
other means, whereof men know not the causes, whether it be that he use the
means, of the evil disposition of those that he seeks, or that he do it
without the aid or mean thereof. And therefore it is very likely, that those
deuilles which possessed the men, that we eue^ now spoke of, had put some
such like toye in their pha^tasie, and made them imagine that they were dedde.
For which cause, they fled the company of the living, and withdrewe themselves
into the graves (which were places appointed for the dedde) as unto the lodgyng
metest for them, according to their fond imagination. And because desert places
be not inhabited, they withdrewe themselves thither, to flee the company of
men. For, there are some melancolike and furious folk, yt so hate men, and are
grieved with the conversation of others, yt they cannot away, either to see or
hear any body, but desire to be alone like wild beasts. It seems that these
two possessed men, were of these sorts, and therefore desired to be in desert
places.


Tobie. They that live in fear of Death, The fear of death.
live in a marvelous pain.


Theo. They live in a pain which tormenteth them, more then Death it self.


Tobie. I doubt not thereof. But me seems that these, which already have
opinion that they be ded, and both flee from the conversation of men with
great hatered, and also this present life, are in much more miserable estate.
For, he that fears death lives somewhat between fear and hope, but he that
has this opinion, that he is already dedde, is not only out of all hope of
life, but even in the case of a condemned person, in the hands of the
hangman, or as the damned soul in perpetual pain.


Theo. Therefore thou may well think in what torment, the Souls of the poor
possessed are, having such imagination. For they were, as having always
present death before their eyes, and diyng continually, and yet can not wholly
dye.


Tobie. How could they imagine to be already dedde, and yet to dye again, as
if they were not wholly dedde? It seems that these imaginations, be quite
contrary.


Theo. Thou must not marvel at that, for there is no stay in those, that are
troubled in mind and understanding, but chiefly when the devil puttes in
foot: for they have no certain judgment, to judge any thing by reason, The
torment of those, that are given over to Satan.
neither to understand reason when it is told them. Furthermore thou shall
understand, that the torments of these, which are given over into the hands
of the Devil are so horrible, that it casts the^ into utter despair: and
therefore they seek all the means they can, to rid themselves of it, though
it be never so impossible. Wherefore there is no doubt, but that the damned,
which bear the judgment of God, feel themselves so ouerladen, with the
burden of his wrath and curse, they would gladly be dispatched: yea, so ded,
that there might be no memory of the^ after death, no more then of brute
beasts.


Tobie. I doubt not but that they had rather their souls were mortal the^
immortal, and that their bodies might not rise again, rather then to rise to
perpetual torment.


Theo. Thou may well understand, Matthew. 26.
that it was not for naught that our Savior Christ said of Judas: The
judgment of God on the wicked
that it had been better that man had never been borne.


Tobie. Wherefore said Christ so think thou?


Theo. He said not simply that it had bin good that Judas had never bin borne.
Prouer. 16.
For how mischeeuous so ever he was GOD made his wicked treason to serve to his
glory. And therefore it was good that he was borne in respect of gods glory,
which created all things to that end. But sith Judas was so wicked yt he
mischeeuously rebelled against God, and thereby deserved eternal damnation, our
Savior Christ spoke in respect of ye person of Judas, that it had been better
that he had never been borne, the^ so wickedly to cast away himself for ever.
Wherein our savior Christ teaches us two things worthy to be noted.


Tobie. What is the first?


Theo. That is: that God so makes wicked Instruments to serve to his glory,
that by them he executes his eternal ordenaunce, and yet nevertheless he
punishes them for their evil imaginations and wicked works.


Tobie. What is the other poinct?


Theo. The other poinct is: that he thereby declares unto us, how horrible y^
pain of the wicked and reprobate is, in that the greatness of the same is not
to be compared, with the excellent gift of this mortal life, and the benefits
which we may here receive.


Tobie. Yet life is a good and excellent gift of God.


Theo. That is very true. And therefore if it be better for man never to have
lived, or never to have bin made, then to be made to bear the everlasting
curse of God thou may easily judge, how great a burden it is, to bear
such a judgment. And thereby we may perceive that, which Jesus Christ
speak to Judas concerning this matter, was likewise spoken to all the
reprobate and enemies of God. Ovid because we can not understand nor
comprehend them, God has here set forth before our eyes horrible images in
these possessed me^, The Image of the hell of the wicked.
whereof we speak. For I would ask thee a question. Whether had thou
rather (if thou were put to thy choice) never to have been borne, or to be for
ever in the estate that these possessed men were.


Tobie. I had rather if I had none other respect but my self, never have been
borne into the world.


Theo. And yet all that is written of these possessed men is nothing, in
comparison of the torments of the damned and reprobate: which begins not
only so sone as they are departed out of this present life, but even whilst
they live, so soon as they resist God, and fight against their own consciences


Tobie. We may then place those wicked ones that thou speak of, in the
number of these possessed men that make their abidyng in the graves: as if they
were already lodged with death, and had him always before their eyes.


Theo. Though they make a fairer show toward the world, then the possessed
do, and are not so much tormented in body, yet are they no less tormented in
spirit and conscience then they: for though they go about to appease it, as
much as they can, yet the Lords saying shall always remain true which he
spoke by the mouth of Esaias: Esaie. 48.
saying. The wicked shall never have peace nor quietness, but shall be
continually like the Sea, which is always in torment.


Tobie. As concerning those that thou speak of, They that hate and are
weary of all men.
which hate all men and their conversation, and seek to be sollitary, because
all the world does extremely avoid them, I have known some, that in steed of
ioiyng in their wines and children, they have so extremely hated them, that
they could neither see them nor hear them, no, nor abide any other person.


Theo. Thou may well place those in the number of those possessed that fled
into the Deserts. For there are some wicked ones so envious and hateful to
every man, through the extreme covetousness that continually grieueth their
greedy heart, that they would have all the world them selves: therefore as
they can away with no man, no more can any man away with the^: yea, they can
not away with them selves. And this is the cause that they become like to
these possessed men, Math 8.
which not only fell upon all such as passed by and they met, Mark. 5.
so that none durst pass by the way where they were, but also they cruelly
tormented themselves, and beat themselves against the stones.


Tobie. If the Devil have such power over those whom he rules, that he
causes them to torment them selves, yea, if they could to destroy them selves,
we need not marvel if such be cruel and furious against others.


Theo. Notwithstanding, thou see how God has Satan so in bonds, The
Deuille power brideled.
and brideleth him by his providence, that he cannot work his will, neither
in the person of these poor possessed, nor in any other: for though these
possessed break their chains and bonds, so that none could keep them bound
nor stay them: nevertheless, they could neither destroy themselves, nor hurt
any other further then the Lord gave the^ leave.


Tobie. If God had not provided, they might have done much harm, considering
that they were so furious, mighty and strong, that there were no bonds nor
chains but they brake*


Theo. Thou may well think, that that strength came not alone of them
selves, for they were but men as other men are: whereby we may perceive, that
the Deuilles which possessed them, did employe their force to work such
things, as surmounted the order of nature.


Tobie. It is not to be doubted but that their strength came from them as thou
have said: for it is certain that it came not from the spirit of God as
Sampsons did: Jude. 15. 16.
who also brake chains and bonds, carried away Town gates on his shoulders,
and overthrew houses with ye strength of his hands.


Theo. Nevertheless, thou see how God has these possessed in such bonds,
that notwithstanding the strength that the deuilles gave them, yet were they
always so subject to Jesus Christ, as if he had had them in chains and
bonds, and although they fled to the graves and deserts, yet when it
pleased Jesus Christ, he brought them from thence, and constrained them to
appear before him, as if a Judge should call a wicked doer out of prison: to
appear before him, to give sentence against him. Now if our Savior Christ,
have showed such power on these possessed, and over the Deuilles which
tormented them, we may not doubt, but that he has as much power now as ever
he had, to repress the cloaked possessed, Tyrauntes possessed.
that are now adays, and also these Deuilles, by whom they are conducted and
governed. But especially we may be well assured, that he will not loose the
bridle more to tyrauntes, then to these possessed, who^ they resemble in many
things. For, they are strong and mighty possessed, whom man's power can not
easily resist: yea, and they be furious, like the lord and master that they
serve. And therefore, The crowne^ and horns of the redd Dragon.
it is written in the Apocalips, that the red Dragon had seven heddes, and on
every hedde a croune, and he had also ten horns. For, Apoc. 12.
the Devil has at all times governed such tyra^nous Kings and Princes, as
persecuted the people of God. Furthermore, laws be given to men, as bonds and
bridles to restrain them, from all kind of riot or beastly life: And
therefore David admonishes us, Psalm. 32.
saying Be ye not like an Horse, or like a Mule, which understand not, whose
mouths thou do bind with Bit and Bridle, least they come nere thee. But
there is neither bit nor bridle, that can restrain the tyranny, and fury of
tyrauntes, by reason of their power, and the practices that the Red Dragon,
which is the Devil, works in them and by them. Wherefore, they may well
be compared to those furious, violente, and wild possessed men. But our
greatest comfort, is, that Jesus Christ which is their judge, is able enough
to call them to judgment before him, either to bridle their rage, or to
condemn them to the bottomless pit of hell to the Devil, whom they had
rather obey then God. And therefore it is written in the book of Daniell,
Dan. 7.
that the Son of God has Judged and condemned all beasts: By which is
signified the empire and kingdoms, which have persecuted the people and
chuche of God, and have done so much harm on the earth.


Tobie. I understand this poincte very well: Now remains to hear, what
Jerome has to say.


Ierom. Because that the tyrants which openly persecute the people, and
Church of God, and use nothing but rage, force, and violence, do manifestly
declare themselves, to be the enemies of God and his church, it seems that
we may rightly call such possessed and devils, black devils.


Tobie. Why say thou so? Black Devils
Diddst thou ever see, either black or white Deuilles?


Ierom. Seeing they are spirits without bodies, they ca^ neither be black nor
white, for they can receive no color, sith that colors have no place, but in
visible and corporal things. But I speak this, because Painters commonly
paint Devils black, and we imagine them so to be, which is not wholly
without reason: The Prince of darkness his liuerie.
For, seeing the Devil is Prince of darkness, the color is very meet for
his liuerie, because it represents darkness much better, then any other,
as whiteness best represents light: for which cause contrariwise, Painters
commonly make Angels white and shinyng: And when they have appeared to men in
likeness of men, they have often times appeared after that manner, as the
holy Scripture witnesses.


Tobie. Seeing the Devil is a Prince, Math. 28.
yea, Mark. 16.
the Prince of the world, Luke 24.
and is al^o called the Prince of darkness, Ihon. 20.
it is good reason that he should have a liuerie, Acts. 1. 10.
as oother Princes and lords have, Ihon. 12. 15.
and that it should be black. 2. Cor. 3.
And so seeing thou diddst call these black Deuilles, Luke. 22.
that we talked of, Ephe. 2.
thou make me imagine that thou think, that there are also white devils:
or else thou need not to have used that title, as a distinction of black
Devils from other.


Ierom. As we may rightly call those black devils, which openly show them
selves to be Devils, so likewise may we call those white devils, which
tra^sfigure themselves into Angels of Light. White Devils
For, although they be Deuilles in deed, 2. Cor. 11.
nevertheless, they disguise themselves so, that they are taken for Angels
of Light, though they be Angels of darkness.


Tobie. I think those white Devils, are more dangerous then the black, for
that they are more subtle and traitorous then ye other, and are no less cruel
and furious.


Ierom. There is no difference, but that these white Devils, can better cover
their cruelty and rage for a time, but in the end they are rewarded like
hypocrites, even as they are deuillishe hypocrites, their cloked hypocrisy,
cruelty, and fury, must be discovered. And therefore it comes to pass many
times, that these kind of devils become more fell and murtherous, then any
other.


Theo. Seeing we have spoken of black Deuilles, Ancient black Devils and
white Deuilles.
I would we speak a little of white Devils, that we might learn their
nature, and beware of them.


Ierom. As thou haste had examples of black Devils, in all the ancient
tyrants, which heretofore have persecuted the church, whereby thou may
know their nature, thou have likewise many examples of white Devils, in all ye
ancient Heretics, and in all the Hypocrites, and householde enemies of the
church: which has ever done more harm, then all the open enemies that ever
the Church had, how cruel so ever they were.


Tobie. Now that we are delivered from these ancient white Deuilles, I would
we should now talk of these of our time, which touch us nerer.


Ierom. I think Theophrast will be ready when thou will, to satisfy thine
expectation.


Tobie. And I will also be ready to hear when it pleases him.


Theo. Then we shall al quickly agree. But before we end this talk, I will
show you one ancient example of a Devil, A Devil both white and black.
that was both black and white, who has many fellows in these days.


Tobie. What Devil is that?


Theo. It is Julian the Apostata. When this Julian became Emperor, and had
renounced the Christian Religion, which he before professed, he went about with
all his might, wholly to abolishe it, and to establish that Heathen religion,
which he followed. And because he knew by experience, that the tyrants
before him, profited nothing with their persecutions against the Christians,
but rather increased that Religion, which they sought to abolishe, then
diminished it, he took a contrary way to them much more dangerous then
theirs. Wherein we may rightly say, that the black devils of his predecessors
tyrants, Iulians devil converted into a white devil.
converted themselves into a white devil, in the person of this Apostata, for
he went not about to pursue the christians, and with cruel persecution,
torment and death, to make them renounce their faith, and to embrace his
Paganism, but rather to win them by flattery, worldly honor, riches, gifts
and presents. And therefore at the first, he entreated them very courteously,
Tripart. hist. lib. 6.
and commanded that none should torment or trouble them, or constrain them to
do Sacrifice to their Gods, but suffer them quietly to live with their own
Religion.


Tobie. That was a wonderful subtlety for, Alluringes of Julian to deceive
Christians.
many may sooner be overcome by such means, then by persecution and torment.


Theo. Thou may be sure that he wan many by that practice. For the
ambicious, glorious, and covetous, which desired honors, riches, and offices
in the court, and to be heaued up into high dignity, sought to please him,
perceiuyng that they were most made of that most favored his religion, and
were farthest from the Christian religion, which this Apostata hated to the
death. But notwithstanding all these practices, he could not win so many by
this means as he desired: for, by reason that there were many Christian
Emperors before him, since Constantine the great, the number of the
Christians was greatly increased, in so much that Iulians Court was full, and
the greatest part of his officers and servants were Christians. For this
cause he used a more subtle craft and dangerous slight, Christians in Iulians
Court
to deceive the most virtuous, and those which most feared God, and his
religion. For he knew that good life and holy conversation would much move
the people. And because y^ Pastors, and Ministers of the Christians, were the^
of very upright life and holy conversation, and that by their example they
stirred and drew men to their religion, and to fellow their doctrine, and also
confirmed those more which had already received their religion, he went about
to reform the state and lives of the Priests and religious me^ of the
Paynims, Another subtilty of Julian to make men have the better devotion to the
heathen religion.
and their Gods and Idols, after the example of the Pastors and Ministers of
the Christians. And this he did, to the end that the Christians should cast
the Gentiles in teeth, with the wicked life of their Priests and Ministers,
neither that the Gentiles being offended therewith, should be moved to forsake
their heathnish religion, and become Christians. For they that have any spark
of the fear of God, yea the very superstitious and Idolaters, mislike their
Pastors and Ministers of what religion so ever they be, when they perceive
their wicked and vicious life. For even the wicked them selves, The offense of
the evil life of Pastors
look for better life then their own at their hands who^ they esteem to be
their guides, and to have administration of things which they think holy. And
therefore they require of such persons a straighter and vprighter life the^
their own or any other. For they think they have more liberty then they that
ought to be the example and rule of their life. Wherefore, they can not suffer
that to be in them, which they can well suffer in other that are not of that
calling, yea and in themselves, as we see the Papists at this day. For, not
only the most supersticious and demute of them, but also the least religious,
the greatest mockers of all religion, the most vicious and unruly of all, are
sore offended with their Priests and Monks, and cry out against them, that
they lead an offensive life, and a life that seems not to be according to
their profession. And therefore there are many of both sorts, that care
neither for them, their calling, nor religion. But because they can not judge
of true religion, Hypocrisy in stead of holy life.
upright life, and good conversation, according to the rule of Gods word, they
are contented with the life of their Priests and Monks, so that there be no
notable or apparent vice in them. It suffices the^, if they have only an
outward show of discretion and holiness, which they take principally to
consist in superstition, hypocrisy, ceremonies, counterfaiting, and outward
works: and not in true Christian virtues. And therefore, whosoever can best
play the supersticious hypocrite, pleases the^ best, and is best esteemed
amongst them. And this knew Julian the Apostata very well. A reformation of
Julian in the heathens Priests.
Therefore, he commanded the Priests religions and Ministers of the heathens
God, to enforce themselves at the least to counterfaite as nigh as they could
the life and manners of the Pastors and Ministers of the Christians: and that
they should use themselves so, that there might be no apparent or notable
crime in them, Tripart. hist. lib. 6. cap. 28.
which might make the people mislike the^, their Ministry, or the Religion
of the Gods which they served. Wherefore, he forbadd them to go to any common
plays, to Tauernes, or to meddle with any filthy practice, Popish reformation.
or any dishonest art not seemly for their calling. To be short, he made
such a reformation among these fellows, as the Pope and his make commonly
among them selves for their Priests, Monks, and the rest of their Clergy.
For when they see that every man cries out at their pride, pomp, bravery,
pleasures, ditties, and at their great excess in all things, at their
Epicurian life, given over to al filthiness and enormitie more then any other,
they make a show of reformation and creation of such vice and horrible sin as
reigns amongst them, which they can in no wise excuse: but in the mean
while, they never come to the principal matter, but are contented to dazell
the eyes of the poor ignorant with a fained appearance of slight reformation,
as in apparel, in pompes, in meats, and excessive braveness, in hawks, in
horses, in pastimes, and in the observation of their Ceremonies, and such like
things: and as for the most notable and infamous vices which they can not
forbear nor correct, it suffices for reformation thereof to work secretly,
and not so openly and commonly that all the world perceive it, and point at
them, and that the most vicious, unruly, and most offenciue them selves, be
not offended with their offensive life. In this mean while, there is no talk
at all of their false doctrine, nor of the abuse in their Religion, and in
their whole state, but only in these things which are so evident and
intolerable, that there is no man can bear with it, no man so blunt or
blind, that can not perceive it, and that knows it not, and openly
condemns it.


Tobie. The^ all their reformation is none other thing, but only an
hypocrisy, which serves the^ for a cause, the better to cover their
filthiness before men, to the end that their estate be not discried, nor
deffamed.


Theo. This reformation is of less appearaunce, then the reformation of Julian
the Apostata. For, he did not only reform the priests of his religion, as I
have said, but he did also show himself to be a very good Emperor, liberal,
and charitable to ye poor. The Philosophical life of Julian.
For, his life would shame a great many now adays. I say not only Emperors,
kings, and Christen princes, Popes Cardinals and prelates of the Church,
which are more worldly, then the world it self, but even Monks, Hermites, and
the most reformed, and the straightest livers of the^ all, though their
appearance of holiness be never so great. Tripart. hist. lib. 6.
For, first he was very well learned in all humain learning and very studious,
so that he was always at his book, or otherwise occupied in some verteous and
honest exercise, at the least in outward show. And therefore he loved wise
men, Iulians court Tripart. hist. lib. 6.
but principally Philosophers, with who^ his court was ever furnished. Since
Julius Caesar's time, there was no emperor but he, that could recite in the
Senate or counsel, the orations or declarations of his own making. As for his
court, and ye rest of his life, he lived more like a sober and co^tinent
Philosopher, then like an Emperor or worldly prince: and therefore he put away
his Cooks, vsyng such sober and simple diet, that he needed the^ not. Yea, he
had no Barber of his own, for he said one Barber could serve a great many men.
To be short he lived a Mo^kish life. The Monkish bringyng up of Julian.
For, he was taught and brought up in his youth with Monks who in those days,
were not so sore degenerated from the manners of th'auncient Monkerie, as they
are at this present: But their life had great appearaunce of holiness. Julian
therefore, had a smatche of his youthly instruction and bringing up, which
served him the better to color his Idolatry. For this devil profited so well
in that Monkish schole, that he had good skill in disse^bling. To be short, The
dissimulation of Julian.
he lead such a life, as if there were any at this day: I will not speak of
princes, but of prelates of ye popish church (who ought to be the light of
other) that should live such a life, in such co^uersatio^ and such
knowledge, men would esteem them for holy men, yea, they would worship the^ as
young little gods. For, after his wife died, The continence of Julian.
he never married again, but lived in co^tinence all the rest of his life,
neither was there at any time, any whoredo^ perceived in him. Furthermore, he
had no servants about him, to maintain pleasure or pastime but only to serve
his necessity. And as touching his liberality and charity, The foundation of
Hospitalles by Julian.
whereof I spoke before, he erected hospitalles, after the thexample of the
Christians, as well for waifaryng strangers, as for those of the countries: and
commanded such to be erected, throughout all his cities. And gave to the^
great revenues, both of corn, wine, money, and all other things necessary
for the maintenau^ce of the charges thereof: but chiefly he gave great living
to the poor, that kept the temple of the Gods. He commanded also, The
charity of the ancient Christians.
y^ the heathens should make collections for the relief of y^ poor, as
christians did. For he said, yt it should be great shame for them, if those
wicked Galilea^s, which from time to time had suffered so great hinderance and
losses, and so great persecution for their religion, should be so liberal and
charitable, that not only they should sustain the poor, which were of their
own religion, but also should succor and help both Jews and Gentiles, which
were their enemies, and that he which had the Empire of the whole world, and
they that followed his religion, should be more niggardes toward their own,
then the Galilea^s were to strangers, yea, to their mortal enemies. And
therefore he thought it great shame, both for him and his Religion (which he
would exalt above the christian religion) to be ouereome in liberality and
largeness, by the Christians, who^ he called Galilea^s in despite and
mockery, (because Christ and his Apostles came out of the country of Galile,
which was the most despised even amongst the Jews: as it appears by
diverse places of the Gospel, and specially by S. Ihon.) And therefore he named
Jesus Christ with the same name, calling him Galilean in despite and mockery.


Tobie. For, Ihon. 1. 7.
ought that I ca^ perceive, all this liberality of Julian, Christians called
Galileans.
yt thou have talked of, proceaded not of true liberality, nor true charity,
that he gave to the poor and needy, but for envy of the Christians, and spite
that he had, that their charity and liberality, did so much honor their
religion, drew men to it, and dishonor the Painims religion. And therefore he
would not, that their religion should be less honored in this matter, then the
Christian religion. And by that I perceive, that the christians in those days,
had to do with a subtle Devil: who could cunnyngly change himself from a
black Devil into a white. But I would wish, if we can now have Angels instead of devils, that at least we had many such devils in that point, but
principally emo^gest you that brag so much of the reformation of the Gospel.
For, seeing yt you hate the Pope, and prelates of the Church, Priests, Monks,
and all the Religion which you call Popish, and that ye cry so much against
them: I would ye would (in spite of the^, The example of Julian to the shame of
Christians.
and in shame of the^) become more liberal and charitable then ye be: and
that ye had more care for the poor that are emo^gst you, then ye have: and yt
ye would so honor your religion, that ye might keep it from blame, and that
those which you call Papists, should not surmount you in liberality and
charity, as Julian did to honor his religion, in despite of Christ, and the
Christian religion. For, if liberality and charity were as great in these
days among you, as in old time it was among ancient christians: ye should
have as great a vantage over your enemies, as those good Christians had over
the Gentiles. But you care not for any such honor. How say thou Eustace,
is not this true?


Eust. Though they brag never so much of their religion, Charity required in
those that brag of the Gospel.
and show themselves very well affected to it, and desire greatly the
aduauncyng and exaltyng thereof, and the abolishyng of ours, nevertheless,
their devotion is not so great, that they become one penie ye more liberal for
it, neither is their charity so great, that they forget any iotte of their
coueteousnesse, which is greater, more gredy and insaciably in them, then ever
it was, or is among us, whom they call Papists, or amongst our Priests,
Monks, and Prelates, against whom they cry out, as though all charity were
quenched in them, and that there were no coueteousnesse in all the world, but
theirs. For, so far are these new Christians, from giuyng any thing of theirs,
to ye relief of the poor, that they even take away that, which others have
given the^ heretofore. Yea, so far are they from erectyng, or giuyng any thing
to Hospitalls, that they will not maintain those, which were founded by their
predecessors to their hands. There are many hospitals, which heretofore have
bin governed by priests, which were much better governed then, then they be
now by these new Church reformers. For masters of Hospitals are many times
made, as Bailiffes, and other officers be made, not so much to minister
Justice, and to execute the office committed to them, as to fill their purses,
and to make them rich. Is not this a godly reformation, to make masters of
hospitalles, not such as are mete to govern the goods of ye poor, but such
as ca^ shift for themselves, and make the poor fast.


Tobie. What answerest you to that Theophast? me thinks Eustace speaks reason.


Theo. I would he had less reason so to say, but yet he takes every thing at
the worst. For he looks so much at those that do not their duty, that he
forgets to look on those that do it. But put the case that there were
greater disorder in this matter on our behalf then there is. I would ye
Papists (whom Eustace now defends) would so envy us, that in spite of us,
they would become more charitable and honest then either they or we be yet,
and that they would surmounte us in all virtues. But though they be holden for
never so zealous in their Religion, yet I fear not that they will so dishonor
us, as I have wished.


Tobie. I think that neither they nor you are so spitefully bent, to go about
to dishonor one an other after this sort, how spitful so ever ye be one against
an other in other things. But we will leave such occasions in which some
will whiten themselves in blackyng other, and talk we again of Julian the
Apostata, whose story thou haste not yet ended. Thou have already told, how he
transfigured himself into a white devil diverse ways, but thou haste not yet
declared, how the white Devil become black.


Theo. When he saw, that by all the means that he could devise, he could not
abolishe the Christian Religion, and establish and augument the Heathen
Religion, but that contrariwise it increased more and more, he was merueilous
angry, and in such rage, as he could not forbear, but in the end manifestly
to open it. And here upon he forbad the Christians, the reading of the Heathen
Poets, Orators, and Philosophers: to the end that they might not allege
thelm for authority against the Heathens. For, he used to say: the
Christians do prick us and thruste us through, with our own Fathers,
because they did confound the Heathens with their own books: And whipped
the^ with their own Rods, as the faithful at this day do whipp the
Papists. For, if we had none other books but their own, we should have
sufficient to condemn them all of false religion and abuse. Wherefore if they
would do well, they should rather forbid the faithful to read their books,
then the holy scripture. For, the dishonor is the greater unto them, if they
be condemned by their own writings, and by such books as they make of
greater authority, then the scripture it self, for that they will rule y^
doctrine thereof according to ye conte^tes of the same books.


Tobie. But did not Julian the Apostata otherwise persecute the christians,
then to forbid them the readyng of these books.


Theo. He could not wholly forbear persecutyng of the^, and would have used
more cruelty, if he had durst. But his devil was sore troubled in this. For,
when he would have played the black devil, and have spewed out his swellyng
venim, two things hindered him: The one was that, whereof I spoke before, that
is, that he saw that it profited little or nothing to return to that first
fury, wherewith he used of old time to stir and inflame ancient Tyrauntes,
to such cruel persecution against the Christians. For, he had often proved
full sore against his will. O how the flesh and constancy of Christians had
repulsed the sharp points of the cuttyng swords of tyrauntes, quenched their
furies, and vanquished all their rage and fury. On the other side, this Devil
saw, that in Iulians time the number of the Christians was so great, that
Julian could not use grievous and cruel persecution amongst them, without his
hinderaunce, and great danger of his person and Empire. For, his court, yea
and his camp were full of them. Yea how many Lords, Captains, and Officers
had he in his Court that were Christians? amongst whom Valentinian that was
Emperor after him, was in great authority. Who so little feared in Iulians
time to declare the honor and reverence that he bear to the Christian
religion, and how he hated Iulians Paganism, and that entering on a day in
Iulians company into the Temple of Fortune, (whom the Panims held for a
Goddess) he struck a Priest on the ear which sprinkled Holy water at the
entry of the temple, because he threw a few drops on his Cloak: and told
him that he had spoyld him, and not purged him. For the Panims believed as our
Papists now a days do, that sins were purged away by Holy water. Seeing
then yt Valentinian durst be so hardy in the presence of Julian himself his
Emperor and Prince, Julian had not so little understanding but he did well
foresee and consider, what trouble he should bring not only his Court in, but
also his Empire, if his devil should become a black devil and tirannous
persecutor. Wherefore, he was constrained to countefaite the white Devil, and
dissemblingly to let many matters slip, which nevertheless were great
grief and heart breakyng to him: But he was fame to be patient perforce. And
when he saw that the Christian religion prospered more and more, when they had
any release without persecution, this white Devil forgetting the mask
wherewith he was disguised, falling into a great rage, came to his natural and
first occupation, and became a black Devil as before. And then knowing not at
which end to begin, but perceiuyng all things went from evil to worse,
being at his wits end, he knew not what part to play.


Tobie. Verily he had a troublesome part to play, and not without cause, for
he had to do with a very strong adversary, when he had to do with God. For
were he white Devil, black Devil, or tra^sformed into what Devil he would,
God knew him well enough what mask so ever he took on, and knew the way how
to overthrow all his enterprises and practizes, and to confound and overcome
him.


Theo. There are many now adays in the world that play the same part, and
amongst them many that are, Apostates as Julian was: for they have had
sufficient knowledge of the Gospel, to be condemned with him: But these
fellows are as much troubled to play those parts that they play as Julian and
his Devil was. For they see yt it is impossible to find water enough to
quench the fire of the Gospel which is kindled round about them on every side.
They see there is no hope to quench it by their fires, as heretofore they have
thought. For experience has taught them, that one fire quenches not an other,
but rather enflameth it the more. They see also into what danger they are like
to bring themselves, if they continue such Tarmagantes and play the black
Devils as they have done heretofore. And therefore now they beg in to play the
white Devils, more then they have done, and are contented to confess that
their cruel and rigorous manner was not the best nor surest way for them. For
this cause they are contented to go more gently to work, and to hide their
black Devils horns more then they had wont, til they see occasion to show them
again, more safely, and according as their shall see their strength increase or
deminishe, and as their desired means shall be granted or debarred the^. For
look they never so smoothe, it is easy to be judged what they pretend, and
that they counterfaite the white Deuilles, but only because they cannot be
black Devils, or such as may bear the whole swaie.


Tobie. I understand now what thou meanest, let them play their parts as they
can, seeing they can not as they would: and in ye mean while make thou ready to
show us farther of white Deuilles, as thou promisest, before thou toldest us of
Julian the Apostata, and of those Devils parts that he played.


The third Dialogue called White Deuilles.
THE third Dialogue is called White Deuilles, for the reasons mentioned before
in the second Dialogue.

First, there is talk of the confession that the Deuilles made of Jesus
Christ, likewise of their worshippyng of him, and of the co^plaintes that tbei
made of him, and the agreement that they desired to have with him.

Of good Deuilles, and the manifestyng of the possessed by means of the
Gospel, of their accusing and complainyng of him, and of the fair shows that
they have.

Of such as make the Gospel serve for their gain, and can not bear the yoke
of Jesus Christ.

Of good Sheepeheardes and hirelinges, and how either of them discharges their
calling, and of their estimation amongst men.

Of the administration of Church goods, and the abuse thereof, and of the
fault, that the wi^ked burden the true ministers of God withal, by means
thereof.

Of the enemies, of the discipline of the Church.

Of the want that we have of good Ministers, and the contempt that we have
them in.

Of the tyranny used to the Church, and of our chaungyng of old Popery into
new.

Of Clarcke Popes, and Lay Popes.

Of the discord and division that is among those that brag ^f the
reformation of the Gospel.

Of the chaungyng of men's traditions, into like or worse.

Of the continual discord between God and the Devil, and between their
children and servants.

Of the Church mingled with good and evil.

Of the persecution and rebellion of those which say they be of the Church,
against the true ministers of the same.

Of the foundation as well of the Popedom of long gowns, as of short gowns.

Of the evil reformation of the Church.

Of Magistrates abusing their Offices.

Of Priests and Monks transformed.

Of the true reformation of the Church.

Of the great evil that proceeds of the ignorance of many, and of the
diversity thereof.

Of false reporters and tale tellers, that hinder the true discip^ine of the
Church.

Of the e^ill judgment of the wicked against the true Ministers of the Lord.

Of those that always desire respite to come to talk, and of the fault in too
long bearyng with the disorders in the Church.

Of the hypocrisy of those that seek excuses to hinder the discipline of the
Church

Of the obedience that al me^ owe to God.

Of the o^de and new Gadarens, and of the Hogs of each of them.

Of the true mean to keep or drive away Jesus Christ.

Of the diverse fear of God, and the diverse knowledge of the Gospel.

Of the causes that hinder many, from followyng of the Gospel.

Of those that are afraied of Christ's coming, and of the vain fear that
tyrauntes have, least the Gospel should make them loose their Kingdoms and
Lordships.

The third Dialogue called white Deuilles.
Tobie, Jerome, Theophrast, Eustace. Tobie. Seeing we are all agreed to talk of
white Devils, now yt we have talked of black Deuilles.


Eust. And I am ready to hear what thou will say, touching them.


Ierom. Before Theophrastus enter into this matter, I think good to remember
one poinct, which I forgate, when I talked of the difference, which we ought
to make, between black and white Devils.


Tobie. What is that?


Ierom. It is, that as there is difference, between black and white Devils,
there are also diverse kinds of white devils. For as some devils are blacker
one the^ another, so some are likewise whiter one the^ another.


Tobie. I think thou meanest thereby, that some of the^ have fairer show of
goodness then other some have, and can better counterfect the Angels.


Ierom. That is without doubt, and therefore in comparyng some with other some,
they may seem to be black Devils, which otherwise seem to be white.


Tobie. I do not well understand, what thou meanest.


Ierom. I will make thee understand it by example. Seeing the Papists, which
resist the Gospel, be named Christians as well as other, they may be counted
white Devils, in comparison of Jews, Turks and Painims, which declare
themselves to be open enemies, both of Christ and his Gospel: but if thou
compare them with those, that brag of the title and reformation of the
Gospel, the persecuting Papists will seem black devils, when other shall seem
white. For, they be both false Christians, but the one has a fairer show then
the other, for he covers himself with the cloak of the Gospel, and the
reformation of the same.


Tobie. I understand thee very well, but let us now hear what Theophrastus
has to say.


Theo. The Eua^gelistes say not only, Mark. 5.
that those possessed whereof we spoke before came and presented the^ selves
before Christ, Luke. 8.
but S. Mark and S. Luke say farther, Matthew. 8.
that he of who^ they write, fell on his knees before Christ, The Deuilles
worshippyng and confessing Jesus Christ.
and worshipped him. And furthermore, all the three Eua^gelistes which have
written this story, witness, that both these possessed confessed openly, that
Jesus Christ was the Son of God, yea, of the highest God.


Tobie. They made almost as good a confession of Jesus Christ, Ihon. 6.
as saint Peter and his fellows did. Matthew. 8.



Theo. But they did it not with such a heart, nor to such an end, for that
they were Deuilles, which spoke it by the mouths of these possessed.


Tobie. I think no less. But what was the cause think thou, that they did
so? for the Devil hates none so much as Jesus Christ, and fears nothing
more then that Jesus Christ should be esteemed and acknowledged among men,
for the true son of God, as these Deuilles confessed.


Theo. The Devil honored not Jesus Christ, only by the mouths of these
possessed, but also by other, of which Saint Mark and Saint Luke make
express mention. Mark. 1.
They say first, Luke. 8.
that in the Sinagogue of Capernaum, there was a man which had an evil
Spirit, that cried out when he perceived Jesus Christ, and said amongst
other things, I know that thou art the holy one of God.


Tobie. Wherefore did the Devil call Jesus Christ, the holy one of God?


Theo. It is as much to say, as that he knew Jesus Christ, to be the holy
one of holy ones, Ihon. 17.
that is to say, the true son of God, Acts. 16.
who^ the Father has sent to sanctify mankind: we read also in the Acts of
the Apostles, The Soothsayer of Philip.
that Macedonia in the town of Philippi, there was a maid that had a spirit
of sothsaiyng, which gather mastres much gain with sothsaiyng, she followed
Paul and his fellows, and cried saying: these men are the servants of the
most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation, and this did she
many times.


Tobie. This Devil which spoke in this sothsaiyng maid, made no mention of
Jesus Christ, in the words which he used to Paul and his fellows.


Theo Though he named not Jesus Christ by name, yet he did him the greatest
honor that might be. For, praisyng the Apostles and servants of Jesus
Christ, as he praises them, he declares their doctrine to be of God, and to
bring true salvation unto man. Now, seeing the Apostles taught, that this
salvation was communicated to man, by Jesus Christ, and by none other: this
evil Spirit plainly confessed, that Jesus Christ was the savior of the world,
the true son of God, and generally all ye doctrine contained in the
Evangelists, which he approved, in the approuyng of the Ministers of the same,
because they preached it.


Tobie. Thou haste not yet told me, The confession and constrained prayers of
Deuilles.
why these evil spirits made such confession, and why they showed this
honor to Jesus Christ, whom the devil goes about with might and maine,
always to dishonor.


Theo. There are many causes that moved them so to do. First, when the Devil
must appear before God, he is like a transgressor, that comes before his
Prince and Judge. Who, how wicked and rebellious so ever he be, is constrained
spite of his teeth to acknowledge him his Prince and Judge, and to confess ye
truth unto him of al his misbehauior. For, if he will not confess it
willingly, the rack shall make him confess it whether he will or no. So these
Deuilles which were in these possessed, were in the presence of Christ, not
only as transgressors, which are brought before the Judge, to have sentence
of condemnation, but as transgressors, which the Judge himself took with the
dee^e doing, and which are presently condemned, because they can not deny the
fault, that they were taken withal. For Jesus Christ took these d^^^^s
exercising the greatest cruelty that they could, on these persons whom they
had possessed, and seducyng the people as much as was possible. And because
they are perpetual enemies of God, and are taken with the deed doing, and
cannot resist his power, they are constrained by force to honor him, and show
him homage, and to acknowledge and confess him to be such as he is They do it
likewise to flatter him, because they knew well enough that it boots not to
resist him by strength, for he is stronger then they.


Tobie. Me thinks that these words aagree very well with ye other words which
the Devils used to Jesus Christ* For, they cried? The complaint of Deuilles.
What have thou to do with us Jesus the Son of God? Math. 8.
Art thou come hitherto torment us before the time? Mark. 5.
We pray thee and charge thee by God, Luke 8.
that thou torment us not. It is also written, that they besought Jesus very
instantly, that he would not send the^ out of the country, nor into ye
bottomless pit, but if he would ^ast them out of the possessed, that he would
give the^ leave to go amongst the heard of Swine y^ fed thereby, and to remain
amongst them.


Theo. The possessed of which S. Mark and S. Luke make mention, which was in
y^ Sinagogue of Capernaum, cried also: Oh what have thou to do with us Jesus of
Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us?


Tobie. By these words we may easily judge, Mark. 5.
that the worshippyng confession and prayer that these Deuilles made, Luke. 8.
was but by constraint, and therefore proceeded not of any good will either of
the possessed, or of the Deuilles that were in them, but by the power of God,
which enforced and constrained them so to say. They also did it, to obtain
gentler entreating at Jesus hand, then they deserved.


Theo. It well appears, that they know Jesus Christ, but they will not obeie
him, but resist him as much as they can. And though they be not able to
resist him, The Deuilles desire atonement.
yet they will, yet they will fight against him: but perceiuyng that they be
too weak and overcome, they give him fair words, they beseech him as their
master. And here it should seem that their fury and rage were subdued, but it
is but in show and by force. They complain of Jesus Christ as if he did them
wrong, or that he used them more discourteously the^ they deserved, and before
their time be come. To be short^, they desire nothing but peace and agreement.


Tobie. And notwithstanding, seeing that the Devil is author of war and
strife* peace can not greatly please him.


Theo. Also he desires not peace for that it pleases him, but only to escape
y^ hands of Jesus Christ. For he is (...) the enemy which being beaten and
overcome, desires to get out of his enemies hands that has overcome him, yt
afterward he may more strongly and cruelly war against him.


Tobie. It is no marvel though the devil use this subtlety and
dissimulation: for there are diverse men that (...) the same many times, not
only toward m^n, but toward GOD himself. Wherefore, in my judgment, we may
well compare them to these possessed, and make the^ their fellows.


Theo. Tell me thy mind more plainly.


Tobie. I have known diverse, that in time of health and prosperity, have not
only given them selves over to the greatest filthiness and mischeef that is
possible for any man to committ, but also have openly withstood God, as if they
would willingly defi^ him, and pluck him out of his celestial Throne. But
afterward when God has laid his hand on them, either by grievous and
dangerous sicknesses, or by some other misery and mishap, so, that the danger
was extreme, they then became good Devils, Good Devils when they could do no
more harm.
like to those of whom we talk. Thou never saw more gentle, more
tractable, nor more devout people in outward show. They are the best
Catholics that may be found. They yield, they promise to become the
honestest me^ in ye world. They will never do more amiss, but will live a
straiter and holier life, the^ holy Hermites themselves. But when it is once
past, and the danger escaped, they forget all that they have promised, and
like wild beasts that have got their uerkes out of the collar, they
return to their first nature, and become worse then ever they were.


Theo. There is nothing that more manifests those sorts of Deuisses and
possessed, The Gospel manifests Deuilles.
then the pure preaching of the word of God: it is then principally, that they
use those words that the Devils used which Jesus Christ cast out, whereof we
talked even now. For there are many (but chiefly) Priests, Monks, and other
principal vpholders of Antichrist, and of his sinagouge, which is the Romish
Court and Church,) which many times play the prankes of this Devil. For they
resist the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and those that maintain and follow the
same with might and maine, with fire and sword, and by all other means that
they can imagine and invent. It is them that cry out against Jesus Christ, and
say: What haste thou to do with us: why art thou come to torment us before
our time? Suffer us in peace and quietness, we have nothing to say to thee.
I think Jerome, that thou have often heard, the enemies and persecutours of
the Gospel, use such like words.


Ierom. It is ordinary with the wicked enemies of God, The wicked accusing of
the Gospel.
to lay all the fault on the Gospel, and on those that faithfully favor and
follow the fame, according to their duty, as if they were rebels,
fraimakers, sedicious, and troublers of common peace and quietness.


Theo. We have manifest examples of this that thou speak, Luke. 23.
as well in the Prophets and Apostles, Acts. 27.
as in Christ himself, for these have all been burdened, with the self same
accusation.


Ierom. The like may be said of all the Martyrs, and other faithful
Christians, which have lived at all times in y^ world. But to return to our
talk, of those Deuilles and possessed, I my self have heard some ere now, that
have fa^ed to the true Ministers of the Gospel, whom God had sent to declare
his truth: who the Devil sent ye hither: The complaint of the new possessed.
What have ye to do here? Why ^ary ye not in your own country, ye
runnagates: what have you to do with us? We have nothing to do with you, we
care not for you. Why suffer you us not in quietness and peace? But I remember
a pretty saying of a Curate once, to a Preacher that began first to preach
the Gospel in that country.


Theo. Why, what said he?


Ierom. Why came ye so soon, The manner of gettyng of goods by Priests and
Monks.
if ye had tarried a while longer, all had been ours.


Theo. What meant he by that?


Ierom. He meant that if these new preachers, had not come so sone, and have
preached then yt Gospel, which so sore warreth against the Pope and all his
Priests and Monks: they would in small time with their false doctrine and
Religion, with their abuse and su^tle practices, easily have scraped and
gathered all the gooddes in the world to themselves, and have left little or
nothing to oaths.


Theo. He perceived it very well: and therefore we may liken him and his
fellows, to those devils which cry: Why art thou come to torment us before
our time?


Ierom. These kind of fellows that say, Qui nostra toll^t inimicus est: he
that takes away ours, is our enemy. They regard not whether they have
gotten the gooddes that they possess, well or evil, wherefore they esteem
all those to be enemies, To whom the goods of the Church belong.
that in reason demand restitution of them, and declare that it belongs not
to them, but that they have stolen it from the church, and poor members of
Jesus Christ. And because they have gotten these great riches which they,
their parents and friends inioye, The cloak wherewith the Prophets of
Antichrist cover them.
and whereby they be maintained, and do get daily more and more, under title
of their false pristhood, Mo^kerie, and false religion, they cry out against
those that condemn their estate, as if they were murderers. For they know
that they cannot be long maintained, if that coler or mask be taken away,
wherwt they mask and coue^ all their falshoode, abuse, and blasphemy.


Theo. It is very hard for simple and ignorant men, The color that the
Deuilles complaint has against Jesus Christ.
to know the wrong, that these enemies of the truth, do to the true
servants of God, by reason of the Deuilish subteltie yt they use, and their
shamelessness not unlike these Devils, that complained of Jesus Christ: and
asked him, what he ha^ to do with them, as if he had offered them great
wrong, and warred against them without reason. For, as for them, it seems
that they have nothing to say, but that Jesus Christ should suff^^^ the^ in
peace and quietness: and therefore ye fault is not in them, as they say, that
there is no agreement between Jesus Christ and them, if Jesus Christ did not
trouble them, and were cause of all the strife.


Ierom. I am afraied if thou hold on, What is first to be considered in all
controversy.
that thou will become the devils attorney, for it seems by thy talk, that
thou give a very good color of reason to their cause.


Theo. If we should only regard the complaint of the Deuilles, without
considering the principal cause, whereupon this disagreeyng is grounded, it
might seem that Jesus Christ was in great fault. But we must consider, who
began the strife.


Ierom. Seeing that God is the God of peace, 1. Cor. 14.
and not of strife, Phil. 4.
and the Devil is a murderer from the beginning, Ihon. 8.
it is not to be doubted, but that the Devil is the aucthour of all the
discord and strife.


Theo. I putt the case that a whorehunter or haude, The co^plain^ of those that
do wrong against those that receive wrong.
steal away an honest man's wife, and the housbande comes, and demau^deth
his wife of this ruffian, that has stolen her away, and reuileth this
ruffian or haude, for the wrong that he has dooen him, and goes to law with
him, whereby there arises great strife, I would ask of thee who were in the
fault? Either the housbande, who has had this great wrong, or the Rauisher,
who has played him this wicked pranke.


Ierom. This whorehunter or ba^ed, has as much reason to complain and (...)
angry, as has a thief or robber, which is called to account of theftes and
robberies which he has committed, and which is called to judgment for
the same.


Theo. It is certain, that such fellows would have nothing to do, with those
that they have wronged, neither with such judges, as should call them to
accoumpte; and pronounce sentence against them.


Ierom. But nevertheless it follows not, but that they which have been thus
wronged, have just occasion to pursue their right. Neither does it follow,
but that Judges and Magistrates, do very well execute their office, in
condemnyng such according to their deserts. And though they cry out against
those which sue the^: we have nothing to do with you, they may well be
answered: but we have to do with you. For if the wicked and guilty might be
quitte, and escape the gallows with such co^plaintes and cries, they would al
escape. And if there were reason in these co^plaintes, the Judges and not the
guilty ought to be condemned, they that demand justice, and not they which
have committed the fact and deserved correction and punishment. Wherefore the
common proverb is well verified in such, as both offer wrong and complain,
that the lamb has troubled the wolves water, and he can both bite and whine.


Theo. This is the greatest wickedness in the world, and yet it is daiely
used against Jesus Christ and his Servants, whenever they have to do with
the wicked, and reprove them of their faults, and go about to bring them
under the yoke of the Lord. This is the cause that they cry out against the
Gospel: This is the means that they trouble the world with. The cause why the
wicked complain of the Gospel*
This is the cause that every man cries against the servants of God: Let us
accuse them of fellonie. What say thou Tobie?


Tobie. You have talked of Priests and Monks, and such other which you call
Papists, how they complain as sore wronged, because they go about to reform
them, according to the word of God, but have you no such possessed among you?
you yt ^^unt so much of the reformation of the Gospel? But I promise you I will
not accuse you any farther in this matter, but will leave it to Eustace, who
shall go forward with it*


Eust. As for me, They which abuse the Gospel making it serve to their own
gain and affection.
I know many, which liked the Gospel well, when in the beginning their
Preachers cried against the abuse yt they said was in the Romish church, and in
Priests and Monks. They liked well also, that the goods of ye church should
be taken from Priests and Monks, to have the government of them themselves,
under color that the Priests and Monks abused them, and that they should be
put to better use, but God knows how evil they are bestowed upon many, and
in many places.


Tobie. The worst is, They that can not suffer to be reproved by the Ministers
of the Gospel.
that those which have not done herein as they ought, and which daily forget
themselves more and more, cannot nowadaies so much as suffer the Preachers to
admonish and reprove them, and to stir them to bestow it where they ought to
bestow it, according to the order and discipline that heretofore has been
used in the Primitive Church even since the Apostles time.


Eust. Therefore we may well say of the^, as Theophrastus and Jerome said eue^
now of our Priests and Monks. For I doubt not, but if they were called to
account for the bestowyng of such goods, and if it were taken out of their
hands, as it was taken from our Priests and Monks, and given to such as
should better* bestow it, they would take pepper in the nose, and fall to
plaiyng that Devils part whereof you spoke even now in good earnest. I am sure
they would at the least play ye part as well as you said that our Priests,
Monks, and their adherentes played it, when it stood them upon.


Tobie. Yea, some of them play that part very well, against their own
Preachers, but I know not by what means. For first there are many that are so
meal mouthed, that they dare scarce open their mouths to speak one word
that should displease in reprouyng their faults. Some other better knowing
their office, and less esteeming their belly, dare boldly reprove the faults
of those that do amiss, and specially in the bestowyng of the goods of the
poor, but yet they deal not so sharply with them as they ought. For they use
them more favorably then they used the Bishops, Priests and Monks. There
is no talk of taking away the administration from them, but only to correct
such manifest faults, as every man does plainly see.


Eust. If they can not suffer to be admonished and reproved so favorably as
thou say, how would they suffer their Preachers to use them, as they have
used our Priests and Monks in like matter?


Tobie. Thou may will think, that if Priests and Friars went about to
defend their cause with fire and faggot, these fellows would not suffer their
swords to rust in the like cause, which they are well able to do* if they
were put to it, but the best (...), Hirelinges and good sheepeheardes.
they have no great cause to fear their Preachers therein. For first, there are
more flatterers and hyr^linges which will dis^semble men's faults and
encourage them therein, then true preachers which will speak freely according
to their office. Secondly, the Ministers are of very little power, and therefore
there is no danger to be feared that way. Thirdly, I think that those which
be of the best sort among the^, desire the abuse only to be corrected, and
that the goods may be employed and bestowed as they ought to be. And it is al
one to them who do it, so it be done according to the order that the Church
requires.


Eust. Me thinks thou art be^ome attorney for the preachers that thou
speak last of, for they that well allow the doctrine which they preach, A
slander on the good Ministers of the Gospel touching the administration of
the Church goods.
speak not so well for them as thou have done, but contrariwise accuse them,
and say: that they would have the administration of the Church goods in their
own hands, to dispose as they think good, as Priests and Monks have done
heretofore.


Tobie. There is a common Proverb that says: when a man will hang or kill a
dog, he will make him believe that he is mad. So there are some that cannot
abide such preachers as neither can nor will be dombe dogs as they would have
the^, but say madness to their charge, to make all men hate him, and to the
end that they and their Ministry might have the less authority. For, the
lesser authority that the Ministry and Ministers of the truth have, the
greater liberty have Sacrilegers, Thieves, and Extortioners, and all other
wicked ones. And let the authority be once taken from these, they fear not
the hirelynges: Flatteryng Ministers.
for they are dombe Dogs, which will either bark or hold their peace for a
soppe, or morsel, or for a mess of hott broth, or a good bang with a staff.
And to be short, they mark what either pleases or displeases their
masters, to y^ end that they anger them not. Yea, and to please them the
better, they join with them, to bark against those, with whom they ought to
join, to hunt out the Wolf.


Eust. It is possible that these of whom thou speak, have used the
reformation of the Gospel (such as it is) chiefly to be fingeryng of Church
goods. And because they have used ye title of the Gospel to get it into their
hands, therefore they use the Ministers that reprove them of the evil
administration thereof (as they list, fearing least they reprove them to the
same end, that they themselves reproved our Priests and Monks: that is, to
supplye the same place, and enjoy the same goods.


Tobie. It may be that there are such as thou speak of, but I think there
are many (...) say otherwise then they think, and make this only a mean to
put the Preachers to silence, accusing them of vprores, seditions, and to be
busy fellows, and such as will take the authority and power of the
Magistrates in hand: And therefore they lay to their charge yt they be
troublesome, and that if their indiscreet pratyng were not, all would be
quiet enough: therefore they cry out that they should suffer them in peace,
for they have nothing to say to the^, so that no man have any thing to say
unto them, for they have that they would have.


Eust. Then according to my first talk, we may place these (of whom thou now
speak) among the number of those possessed which complain of the rigor
and wrong that Jesus Christ showed unto the^, as well as Theophrast and Jerome
have placed of Priests and Monks.


Tobie. I will not say against it, but there are other as well as the^e, which
do the like: The enemies af the discipline of the Church.
when any thing is spoken of the observing of such discipline, as Jesus Christ
has appointed, and his Apostles and Disciples, and all the true ancient Church
have put in vr^, and practiced according to the holy word of God. To be short,
they can be contented to hear the preachers cry out against the wickedness
of Priests and Monks, but in no wise they may not away to hear of their
own. They would feign have a Gospel preached without repentance, and without
amendment of life. They would have such liberty under title of the Gospel,
as to be let lose to their own pleasures. They would be unburdened of the
Popes yoke (whom they call Antichrist,) but will not be burdened with
Christ's yoke. They would be very well content, neither to have Priests nor
Monks, for their findyng was costly, and the restoryng of Church goods very
hard to hear of: And therefore are contented to have Ministers and Preachers,
but not so many as they had Priests, for saving of charges in maintainyng
them: wherein they show them selves to be good housbandes, but great hinderers
to the poor flock of Christ, Lack of good Ministers of the Gospel.
which remain without such food, and such abounda^ce as is necessary for
them, and all for lack of such preachers and such number as is needful. But
the worst is, The contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel.
that they would have our poor Ministers and Preachers heads under their
girdles, as if they were their servants, and toss them from post to pillar at
their pleasure. And if the Ministers will not do it, but if some of them (well
understand their office,) use such sufficient honor unto them as they ought,
to the end that Jesus Christ and the ministry of his Church be not despised
and dishonored, straight ways they cry out, that such Ministers be both
ambicious and rebels, and that they will take upon them the Magistrates
office. To be short, if any Minister go about to bring in such discipline and
reformation of the Church as the Gospel requires, strait ways they say:
Why come you hither to trouble us? Can not you live quietly your selves, and
suffer other to do so to? You would pluck the sword out of the Magistrates
hand, but ye would be well swadled with it for your labors. We have it by
the haft, and you shall wring it from us by the edge if ye will needs have it.


Eust. For ought I can perceive, such fellows would neither have Priests,
Monks, Preachers nor Ministers, to the end that no body might let the^, but
to know as they list.


Tobie. I believe verily that there are such as thou speak of* They that are
content with outward show of religion only.
but because they see that they can not live without some form of religion,
neither have any form of religion without some Ministers of what quality so
ever they be: therefore they are constrained at the least to make some outward
appeara^ce. For they foresee well enough, that all the world would cry out on
them, calling the^ Athistes and Epicures, and would lay to their charge, that
they received not the reformation of the Gospel, such as it is, but only to
scratch to themselves the Church goods under title of the same, and to use what
liberty they list. Therefore they are contented to have Preachers to preach,
so that they rub them not to hard on the gall. Again, there are other,
which are contented to let them speak what they will, when they see that they
can not stop their mouths, and also when they can not reprove and hinder them,
but with great dishonor to themselves. But when the Ministers are earnest with
them to live according to the doctrine preached, there begins the strife. And
herein they be like to those Monks of whom the Proverb is said: Ryng to
Mattins and spare not, but say Mattins who list.


Eust. Me thinks these of who^ thou speak, commit the same fault that they
burden the Pope, Change of Popedom.
Bishops, Priests, and Monks withal: for they accuse them of vsurpyng the
power of both swords, that is to say, both the spiritual and temporal
sword: and that which they do, seems to me not much different, but only that
where they accuse the Pope and his Churchmen of taking the temporal sword from
the Magistrate, they them selves go about to take away the spiritual sword
from the Church and Ministers of the same, in as much as they go about to rule
them after their own fantasy. For if they take their ministers to be the true
ministers of the Gospel, they ought to suffer them to execute the charge that
God and the Church has given them. If they go about either to take it from
them, or to hinder them therein, they are tyrauntes both to the Church and
Ministers of the same. Wherefore the Ministers have greater occasion to
complain of them, then they have of their Ministers: for they need not greatly
to fear, least the ministers of the church set their feet on their throtes,
for that they have brought the^ so low, that in my simple judgment, it is not
to be doubted.


Tobie. Thou may also say, that if they be true Ministers, they will go
about no such thing, though they might.


Eusta. I will leave to dispute, whether they be true ministers or no, for thou
know mine opinion touching that: But for that they esteem them to be
such, I have good occasion to say thus much against them. For if they hold
them for such, then may the ministers justly complain of them, for taking
away that spiritual sword of the Church, which God has committed to them,
as well as they complain for taking away their sword. Contrariwise, if they
hold not their ministers for the true ministers of God, why do they allow
them? And why are those better welcome to them, which go about to please
them in all things, like idle belles and hirelinges, then they that go about
to execute their charge, according to the commandment of the word of God? By
this we may well perceive, to what end these fellows have received the
Gospel, and how they use it to their gain. They cry out against the Pope,
and yet they go about to set up such an oath among them selves, in that they
do that, whereof they accuse the Pope and his. The difference is, Temporal
Pope.
that where this is a spiritual Pope, they would make a Temporal Pope, who is
more to be feared then yt Pope which they condemn, if he once take root, and
be admitted and maintained: But I will leave this talk, for it belongs not to
me. I leave y^ charge to those, whom it touches nerer then me: only touching
this, because I fear me, least the world fall in decaie as fast this way,
as ever it did, on the Pope, Priests, Monks, and Romish Church side,
according to our former talk.


Eusta. Theophrast and Jerome may not marvel, if I and such as I am, cannot
follow the Religion and living, which they follow, considering that we see
so great disorder and fault in those, which do most vant of that
reformation, which they so much set out: for we perceive, that they cannot
agree themselves. The division among those that brag of the reformation of the
Gospel.
The Ministers are one against an other. And if they disagree together, they
disagree worse with the Magistrates and people, and each of them accuses
other. And for my part, me thinks the Ministers that have forsaken the Romish
church, to set forward that reformation, which they now have, deserve to be
used as they are. For in sekyng to get the Magistrates and peoples favor
against the Pope, Priests and Monks, they have so despised the state of
Priesthood, and ministry of the Church, and so magnified the state of
Magistrates, that they now feel the fruits thereof. They thought to set the
Magistrates and people, against the Pope and his Church men, but they have
now set them against themselves. For they now drink of the same cup, that they
gave other to drink of. They thought they should bring a great enterprise to
pass, if they could drive out the Priests and Monks, to set those in their
steed, Magistrates which usurp authority over the Church.
whom they have now placed. They thought it a goodly reformation in ye church,
to abolishe all the Cannons and Decrres, with the good statutes, which the
ancient Fathers and Doctors had ordained, to maintain good discipline in the
Church. They have put all into the Magistrates hands, and have made them
masters of the church. It is no marvel, though they will not only maintain
that, which they have in possession, but also encroche farther, to be out of
the subjection of all discipline. Yea, they are not contented herewith, but
where they should be subject to the discipline, which have been ordained in
the church, they themselves will appoincte such discipline, as well to the
Ministers, as to the whole church, as shall seem good unto them. Yet when they
have that, they themselves will not be subject to that law and discipline,
which they have appoincted to other, but will dispense with it, as well for
themselves, as for those whom they favor as they think good, eue^ as well as
the Pope. Wherefore, they can neither blame the Pope, nor his church men
herein, but they must likewise blame themselves, for that they do the same.


Tobie. If it be not the same, at the least it is very like.


Eusta. Furthermore, Man's traditions changed into other as ill.
I ca^ not se by what reason, they can reject the Traditions of our good
aunciente Fathers, under the title of man's Traditions, saying, that they were
men, and that we must stay only upon the pure word of the Lord. Why, are
they not then contented with this word? Why, can they not then away with
such discipline, as Jesus Christ himself has ordained: And such as his
Apostles and disciples have practiced? For I would ask them but this question.
Seeing they reicte all Ecclesiastical Traditions, under color that we ought
to follow only the word of GOD, which word condemns all man's
Traditions: are not they men as well as our predecessors were? And if they can
not suffer the traditions of our predecessors, what reason is it, that we
should the rather receive theirs, in steed of the simple and pure ordenaunces
of Jesus Christ? For I dare say, that they have abolished, as many or more as
theirs, which have better ground, and are much more agreeable to the rule and
Discipline of the Primitive Church.


Tobie. I confess for my part, that there is great abuse grown, in the
aunciente discipline of the Church: But me thinks they should be contented to
correct the^, and keep that which is good, and according to the first
ordenaunce of Jesus Christ, and not abolish al.


Eusta. Thou say truth. But they may not be told of their faults, which
be very great. For if they be told of them, then they cry out: why do you
trouble us? Are not all things in good order? And, if we go about to show
them their disorder by the word of God, and wherein their Traditions are
different from the same, they answer, that they will dispute no more, and that
they be already resolved, what they ought to believe and follow. And yet
when we made the like answer to them, and those that hold the same religion,
they mocked us, and said we answered so, because we durst not stand to the
trial and that we have such mistrust in our weapon, that we be afraied to
enter into combat.


Tobie. Surely, now I perceive that thou art at them in good earnest, me
thinks thou handlest them as they ought to be handled. For thou beatest them
with their own rod, and condemns? them with their own sentence. But I pray
thee, how art thou become so great a doctor in divinity? How could thou
perceive all this that thou have spoken?


Eusta. How could I not perceive yt, which is manifest to all men: For, since
our first conversation together, might I not well perceive that, which I saw
and heard daiely? I report me to Jerome and Theophrastus the^ selves, whether
this be true or not? For, although we be of Religion and opinion different, yet
I take the^ to be so honest, that they will not lie against their own
conscience.


Theo. Tobie and you have made a very long discourse, wherein ye have very
nere touched us, and likewise all these that do brag at this day, of the
reformation of the Gospel, wherein ye have neither spared Magistrate, Minister,
nor people.


Eusta. Yet we have spared you more, then you have spared us: or our Prelates,
pastors, or Magistrates. But when we say trothe, what need we to speak.


Theo. I confess that which you have spoken, is not so false as I would it
were: but me seems you do us wrong, in that you make no difference, between
those that abuse the Gospel (as you say) and those that live according to
the same: but condemn all, as well the good as the evil, without iudgyng the
cause: Condemnation without iudgyng the cause.
wherein me thinks ye show your selves, as if ye would condemn Jesus Christ,
as well as the devils* which complained of him, because they are one against
an other, and at difference: if we condemn all those that are at strife, we
must as well condemn God as the devil: for they were always at strife, and
shall never be otherwise, Perpetual strife between God and the Devil, and his
servant.
nor ca^ not. Now, if God and the devil be at strife, we may not say, that
those which take Gods part in aniwise, agree with those that take the devils
part. And to take both parts is impossible: seeing then that it is so, it can
not be but that (those which serve the devil, and will not become obedient
to God) will always burden ye true servants of God, with thesaid
complaints, that the devils laid to Jesus Christ. For, if the devil durst do
it to the master, it is not to be doubted, but yt he will give boldness to his
to do the like to ye servants of Jesus Christ, seeing he durst do it to Christ
himself.


Eusta. I agree to all that. But you that glory so much in the reformation of
your Gospel, brag to be all faithful, all good men, to follow the pure
word of God, to be all led and guided by the holy ghost, and condemn all
others that are not of your sect.


Theo. That notwithstanding it follows not, that all they that brag of
such things, be such as they would be esteemed. For, the church of God will
never be without hypocrites and false brethren, The evil and the good mingled
together in the Church.
mingled amongst the children of God, which bring more dangerous and
offensive war to the church of God, the^ any other enemies whatsoever they
be. And therefore there will always be such Deuilles, and such possessed
enough in the church as thou speak of, that will cry out on Christ and his
servants, and complain on them, but yet they are not of the Church. For
there is great difference between being of the Church, The Church persecuted
by her own.
and being in the Church. But where ca^ the devil assail Christ nerer, and
more subtly then in his church? What sort of men can he better use to serve
his purpose, then those, which only will be holden for the true members of
the church, but such as shall be in greatest credit, and authority in
the same? If thou will talk of Ministers, I would ask of thee: when was the
church ever without false Prophets, dombe dogs flatterers, and Hirelynges,
which have always warred against the true Prophets and Apostles, and against
the true Ministers of the lord? And have not these been most promoted, and
best esteemed amongst men? If ye talk of Kings, Princes, Lords, and
Magistrates, consider how many have there been found, that have yelden such
obedience to the word of God, which has been declared unto them by the
Prophets, and other ministers of the Lord, and have showed the^ such honor
and reverence as they ought? For one that has been found to yield such duty
to their Minister, as behooved, there have been twenty found that have done the
contrary, which have not been contented not only to despise the doctrine of
the true servants of God, but have also driven them out, and persecuted them
themselves. And when I speak this, I speak not of such Princes and
Magistrates which have had dominion over such people and Nations as were
esteemed Infidels, but I speak of those that reigned over the people which
were esteemed of God and of his Church. But how many have been found among
this people which would have disposed the religion after their own fantasies,
to make it serve to their affections and commodities, and which have usurped
the offices in the church, which belonged not to them? ^eroboam. Ahaz. Ozia.
Jeroboam, Ahaz, and Ozias, which were Kings over Judah and Israel, do
sufficiently witness unto us. And when all these were reproved by ye Prophets,
how were they received? Achab.
After that Achab with his Iesabel had perverted all the divine service,
Iesabell.
by the means of his false Prophets, what said he to Hely? Was it not laid to
his charge, that it was he ye troubled all Israel? Hely which only went
about to set up the true service of God according to his law, Hely.
troubled all: 2. King. 18.
and Achab which was cause of all the ruin that was in the Church of God,
Achabs reproach to Hely.
was a good King, and very zealous of the glory of God. Wherefore rightly Hely
answered him: it is thou and thy fathers householde that troublest Israel. And
here does Achab show himself like these Deuilles which complained of Jesus
Christ. And yet all these Kings of whom I have spoken would not be holden for
Infidelles, The rebellion of the Magistrates and people against the Ministers
of the Lord.
no more then those which in these days will be holden for Christian Princes
and magistrates, yea, reformed according to the Gospel: and nevertheless,
they will receive the Gospel but according to their own pleasure. And if that
in all times there has been such contradiction of Princes and magistrates
against the servants of God, and if they refused to submit themselves to the
word of God, the rebellion was not less among ye people, which commonly
follow the manner of their Princes and Lords, and rather of those that rebel
against God and his servants, the^ of those that show their duty as they
ought to God ward. And sith it is so, what reason is it to condemn as well
the true servants of God, the good Magistrates, and other good men which do
well discharge their office, as their adversaries, which from time to time have
troubled the Church.


Eust. I grant that were no reason, but this is nothing to my talk.


Theo. It is al one: For it seems that thou would have so perfect a
Church, yt there should be no dissension or discord: but it is in vain to
look for any such here, as our Savior Christ himself has well declared unto
us by the parables and similitudes which he used. For there will always be
ill fish among the good in the net of the Gospel, and the Lords field will
never be so clean in this world, ^ypocrites a^ong the ^^ithfull in (...)
Church.
but that there will be always darness mingled with the good seed, which will
be so like in growing, y^ it ca^ not be known from the other, Math. 13.
till it show it self farther.


Eust. What is the cause thereof? Mark. 4.



Theo. Among others there are two most worthy to be noted.


Eust. Which be they?


Theo. The first is, Matthew. 13.
that the Devil does always mingle his seed with the Lords seed, until the
Lord do clean separate them.


Eust. And what is the second?


Theo. The second is, that the very children and servant of God are never so
perfectly regenerated in the world, Romans 6. 7. 8.
neither can not so well mortify their old Adam and sinful flesh,
Imperfections in the perfectest.
but that there always remains many carnal affections in them, yea, even in
the perfectest, which is the cause they can not be so perfect as they ought to
be. Wherefore, the most just are greatly grieved, that they can not become so
obedient to the will of God as they desire, and as God in his law requires:
eue^ as S. Paul witnesses of himself. Roma. 7.
But I will leave to talk any more hereof at this time, because I will come to
ye point yt Tobie talked of touching the new temporal Pope.


Tobie. Truly I would gladly hear thy mind therein.


Theo. I doubt not but the Devil would be glad to do as much as you have
spoken touching this matter, in those places where the spiritual Pope is beaten
down. The foundation of the spiritual Pope
He has heaued up his spiritual Pope, under ye title of Minister of the
Church, and has taken occasion to give unto himself many goodly titles, and
such authority as the spirit of God gives to ye true Ministers of his word,
and their Ministry: But if the Devil and his false Prophets and pastors
have abused the name of this holy ministry and the true ministers of the
Lord, to usurp tyranny over the Church of Jesus Christ under this color:
it follows not therefore that the authority of the true Ministry of the
church, and the true ministers of the Lord, (which is given them of God and not
of men) ought to be diminished. Evil reforming of the Church.
For whosoever uses such mean to correct the fault that the Pope and his
have committed in this behalf, does not reform the Church, but deforme it
more the^ it was before. And therefore when the true Ministers of the Gospel
preached in the beginnying against the Pope and other false Sheepeheardes
which have abused the ministry of the Church, and wholly overthrown it: and
when they have admonished Princes and Magistrates to set to hand, that the
abuse which was in the Church might be corrected and reformed according to ye
word of God: they preached not that the Magistrates should take any tyranny
over ye Church, which they condemned, and that they should tread the
ministry thereof under their feet: but that they ought to bestow their whole
power in restoryng of it to such perfectness, as it ought to be according to
Gods word. And to the end that the Magistrates should not stick at it, The
declaration of the Ministers to the Magistrates.
and think that it belonged not to them, they showed them what was their
duty, and how much God had honored them in calling them thereto. They
likewise declared unto them, the honor that the spirit of God shows to that
holy state in ye sacred Scriptures: and what dishonor and injury the Pope and
his prophets have done unto it. Wherein they did not amiss, but faithfully
executed their charge. If there be any that have passed their bounds therein,
I will not excuse their fault. And likewise, if there be any Magistrates,
Magistrates abusing the Gospel and their office.
that stretch that farther the^ they ought, which has been preached unto them
by the true ministers of the Lord, touching the authority and power that ye
Lord has given them: the fault is not in the true ministers, but in those
which abuse their doctrine, which is the doctrine of God. For there is no more
reason to blame them in such case then to blame the Prophets and Apostles
because they writ of the excellency, as well of the ministry of the Gospel,
as of the state of Magistrates. For they wrote not yt which they have written,
to give the Devil, false prophets, and tyrauntes, occasion thereby to vsurp
tyranny over the Church, but because the troth is so, and that it is needful
that the faithful should so understand it: for whom they have both written
and preached, and not for tyrauntes or enemies of the Church. If there be the^
any Magistrates in these days, which under title of authority and power that
God has given them, will take more authority and power over the Church then
God wills them, and will make the Ministry of the same subject unto them,
as the Pope has made the^ subject to him and his, and has also made subject
the power and authority of Princes and Magistrates: the same do verily set up
a new Pope, Popedom changed and not abolished
chaungyng only his coat and mask. And by this means Satan shall establishe
a new Popedom, under another color, but al will come to one end, though they
take an other way. And so the tyranny that he tofore time has used over the
Church and ministry of the same, A Popedom more dangerous then the first.
shall not be taken away, but only changed and disguised.


Tobie. Nay, it will be worse: for it will not only be changed and disguised,
but more enforced.


Theo. How can that be?


Tobie. Thou know, that what power so ever the Pope and his, have over the
church in their estate, yet can they not do what they list, except they do
otherwise then they ought to do. For, first they ca^ put no man to death: but
must deliver up to ye secular power such as they judge worthy of corporal
punishment, either for heresy, or co^mittyng of any other crime against the
faith and religion. But if the whole power of the church, be in the
magistrates hands, they may bind and loose as they list. They need not to
borrowe the sword of an other, which they enjoy theimselues. Furthermore,
notwithstanding the great abuse in the Romish Church, yet were the Councels,
Sinodes, and ancient cannons always of some authority with the^. There is
neither Pope, Cardinal, nor Bishop, that dare undertake to admit any into ye
Ministry of the Church, except he have passed the order which he must pass,
and without some form of election. If any be deposed out of the ministry, he
shall not be deposed without being heard, as appertains to him: that is to
said, without form of Ecclesiastical judgment. But if the whole power be in
the Magistrates hand, they may place or displace the Ministers as they list,
without any Ecclesiastical order, be it right or wrong. They may use the^ as
servants, that when they are weary of them, they may put them away, or put
the^ to death as they list, I mean if the Magistrates be tyrants, and have
none that dare gainsaie the^, without the like danger. And so Wolves shall be
thrust into the Church of God, and the true shepheardes shall be driven out. For
tyrants will never abide to hear the troth, as it ought to be told the^: and
if they be no tyrants, they will be content with the charge which the lord
has given the^, and will beware how they attribute to their particular, that
which is common to all the Church, or which is specially joined to the
Ministers of the same.


Theo. I perceive thou speak reason: for though the Pope and his, abuse, and
have of long time abused, both Councelles and ancient Cannons, and that they
use no part of the ancient discipline of the church, but only the names and
titles: yet dare they not so openly give themselves over to (...) they would,
if that bridle were not.


Tobie. Thereupon I conclude, that if this bridle could not so keep the^,
within their bounds, but that they have ouerpassed them very much, as you
say: it will be worse, when the power of the church is in the hands of
those, which are armed with the temporal sword, which have none other Laws
to restrain them, and keep them in their bounds, but such as they
themselves will take and those at their pleasure. And besides that, how often
chances it, that th^^e of this estate, have neither learning nor knowledge,
and are the least exercised in matters belongyng to the Church: And yet these
shall be they, that shall commau^de Ministers and Preachers what they list, on
pain of their sword: and shall appoinct the^ laws touching their estate and
ministry, and likewise to the whole church.


Theo. I confess ye al these inco^ueniences might come of such tyranny. And
therefore the true ministers of ye Gospel, Good Ministers prevent the new
Popedom.
perceiuyng the subtlety of satan in such case, and forseing his pretense,
prevent such things betime. Wherefore, they cry no less against such
tyranny and abuse (when they perceive it) then they have heretofore cried
against the tyranny and abuse of the Pope, and the Popish church.


Tobie. There are very few that do so, Priests and Monks transformed.
for I know the greatest part to belly gods, flatterers, hirelinges, who have
the good will of the Magistrates and higher powers, speak as pleases them
whom they seek to please, and confirm their tyranny: In steed of reprouyng
them, and fightyng in the quarrel of the liberty of the Church. Wherefore,
if they have good occasion to call our Priests and Monks belly gods, and
false Shepherdes: your preachers are not void of the same fault, they can
play that part well enough.


Theo. I would I could in all points disprove thee herein. But I pray thee
consider whence those belly gods are come to us: come not the most part of
them from those, whom thou mentionedst even now? Think thou that all those
priests and monks, that now hold on our side, are now wholly vnpriested and
vnmonked? Think thou not that the devil has sent the^ emongst us, to
^^asider the Gospel, having enough to (...) his turn beside. Wherefore it is
no marvel, if he go about to sow those ^ermine under other habit and ^^ler,
where such Apostates will (...) received in their (...) habit. For he is
contented that they unclothe ye outward habit, so they vncloche not their
priesthood or monkehood. But tho there be such, yet thanked be God there are
other, which are ready and contented not only to be driven away and banished
in maintainyng the liberty of ye true discipline of the Church, in despite of
tyrants, but also to give their livesin so good a qua^^ell.


Tobie. If there be any such, they (...) thick sowe^, but come thin up: and
besides that, they shall find very few, either of their (...), or of the
Magistrates or comme^s, that will stick to the^ in the maintenance thereof: but
almost all sorts of men cry out against the^, and against rebels and
sedicious persons that trouble the whole church. Now, what better hope of
reformation, is there too be looked for at your han^des, then at ours? but only
that it is like (...) overthrown with you, then ever it was (...) nere) by the
Popes (...) I dare say: that I se already (...), that under title of
reformation by the Gospel some christian Princes have in (...) usurped more,
tyranny* over the Churches in their dominion, their (...) and his adherentes in
six hundred years.


Theo. Thou talkest at pleasure of affection that thou bear against us and
our religion. But in this mean while, True reformation of the Church.
thou co^siderest not the goodness of those that fear God, as well Ministers,
Magistrates, as common people. For, as there are good Shepherdes, which
faithfully execute their office, vsurpyng nothing over the Church or
Magistrates, but honoryng the^ as they ought, according to the word of God: So
likewise, are there many true christian Magistrates, which let helping hand,
both to the church, and ministers of the same, not to oppress the^, but to
help and further the^ in their charge, as much as either of their offices
requires. And when this agreement is between the Magistrates and the ministers,
the people which are committed to their charge, do willingly frams themselves,
to yield to God and their pastors (...) his servants, the honor and obedience,
which they owe^vnto the^. And though the number of these be not so great, as
it is to be wished, yet there is good hope, that the Lord will make perfect
that good work, which he has begun in his church. The ignorance of many.
For, there are many that e^re rather of ignorance, then of malice! and for
fear ^east some new tyranny should be used over the Church; the Magistrates
and the people, under color of Ministry, then for any hatred they bear to
good discipline.


Tobie. You ca^ very well excuse your ^aultes: this is always your manner, when
ye cannot gainsaie that, which is evident to all men, to make some execuse.
And yet will ye not accept the excuses of other, though they be never so
reasonable.


Theo. I excuse nothing, but that that is to be excused. Ignorance worthy of
blame.
I excuse not ye ignorance of those which are ignorant of the things that we
talk of, and chiefly seeing the Gospel has been preached so long, and so
plainly among the^. For if they be ignorant, it is their own fault. It may
be also some preachers faults, which have not declared these things as they
ought: neither have had so great care of the discipline of ye church, as is
requisite. Some (...), Fault in the Ministers.
because they are ignorant themselves, and understand not the governing of the
church. Some for not caring greatly for the flock to the^ committed, and not
bearyng so fervent a zeal to the glory of God, and the edification of his
church. Some other, because they be flatterers, and are afraied to get the^^
will of men, but especially of the higher sort: knowing that they will not
willingly submit themselves to discipline. But how soever it be, there is
difference between those that sin ignorantly, (though it be never so gross)
and those that sin upon pretenced malice. And ^n the other side, False
detractours to hinder the discipline of the Church.
there are so many false reporters, and make bates among men, but chiefly about
princes and magistrates, which with their flatterers and slanderers go about
nothing else but to hinder yt true discipline be not received, and restored
into the church, as of necessity is requisite. And this they do, because they
are afraied of it themselves, for that they will neither be subject to god nor
his church. And these fellows find more, which nor only give ear to them,
but also (...) detractio^s, then the good preachers find that follow the true
doctrine which they preach. These are of the number of those devils, which
cry out against the servants of God, and complain of them, after they have
done the worste they can against them, in sekyng to overthrow the whole
ministry of the church, and all true reformation.


Tobie. Me thinks we have talked long enough, of these manner of deuilles and
possessed, which complain of those whom they have wronged, and accuse such
as have received great injury at their hands, tell me now if thou have any
more to say of other kinds, (...) which we have not yet spoken.


Theo. Thou must further note, that those deuilles which complained of Christ,
complained not only, that he tormented them before their time, but also made
request unto him, that he would not send them to the bottomless pit, nor
out of the Country* but that he would suffer them there.


Tobie. What say thou to that?


Theo. First I say, that all the wicked are (...) offended, when they se and
perceive their judge. ^ow the true Ministers of ^he Lord are ^^dges of the
^icked.
Now the ministers of the Lord are as Judges to the wicked, for that Jesus
Christ conde^neth the^ by the judgment pronounced unto them by the mouth and
ministry of his servants. And therefore it is written of Ezechiel, ^zech 22.
that the lord sent him as judge of ye people, ^^on. 16.
whose Prophet he was. And Jesus Christ said: that he would send the holy
spirit to his Apostles, which should reprove the world of sin, as a judge
which conde^neth him, by the preaching of the gospel annou^ced by the
Ministers of the same. For the manner of speech that Jesus Christ uses in this
place, imports so much. And this causes the wicked to murmr against the
Ministers of the lord (as these wicked spirits) when they are constrained to
se them and hear the^. The wicked will never find time to hear the
condemnation.
Furthermore, the wicked are herein like to those wicked sprites, which would
always prolong the time, as the giltte which are condemned to the gallows.
For, they think it won time, if they may delaie it so, that they be not
constrained to come to account. These devils denied not, The reasons of those
tha^ are convinced by the word of God*
but that they had well deserved to be driven out, and sent to the botto^lesse
pit, because they could not deny it: but they feared least they should be
sent thither before that time. For the wicked would never willyngly appear
before the Judge, and therefore can never find meet time to come to
judgment. There are also many, whose consciences bear the^ witness, that
that which the true Ministers of the Gospel preach is trothe: and that
which they demand touching the reformation of the Gospel is very
reasonable. At the least they can not gainsaie it by the word of God, how
much soever they calominate against it. And because they have nothing else to
say, they complain that the ministers are too earnest and too sharp, and
that the people will not so be won. They say that they must go softly to
work, and by little and little tarry a time. But in the mean time they
consider not, that they and the Ministers may die the whilst* and that it is
requisite y^ every man make himself ready in time, to give account to the high
Judge, who grau^teth no dela^e when y^ hour is come. They consider not
likewise, (...) with (...) profit is ^^ungerous.
y^ some has bin tarried for more then x. or xv. year, some other more then xx.
or xxx. years: and yet they are so far from ame^dement, that they are daiely
worse and worse.


Tobie. Then we may well say by them, that they are the worse for the
keepyng.


Theo. They wax so evil, that after long looking for, they are less ready to
do good, then ever they were. They so well determine to amend, that when they
feel theimselues earnestly pressed, not only in word, but also in deed, and
that they will tarry no longer, but that ye servants of God will at length know
if God ought to be heard in his Church, or men, and if these Dogs, Hoggs,
Foxes, and Wolves, which are in the Church, ought always to be suffered:
then declare they themselves to be very Hogs, Dogs, Wolves and Foxes. And while
we let the time pass, they they counterfect the sheep* But when we go about
by true marks* to know whether they be sheep or no, they can not away with
this trial: Then show they what they ca^ do. They are not contented to tread
under foot the pearls, Dogs and swine turn against the servants of God.
which are cast before them, and the holy things, which are given them, as
they have done of long time, but they turn against the servants of God
(which offer them unto them) to bite and tread the^ in pieces, Matthew. 7.
as Jesus Christ says that Dogs and Hoggs will do, to those (which against
his commandment, to cast the Pearls and precious stones of his Gospel,
before them.


Tobie. It may be, The punishment of God, for too long bearyng with abuse.
that the Ministers do well deserve such reward. For, seeing that Jesus
Christ has forbidden them, so to profane and soil his holy things, why
have they so long done it, against the commandment of Jesus Christ. The
reproach of the Papists for pollutyng the sacraments in reformed Churches.
For in this case (me seems) there is much more disorder among you that brag
of the reformation of the Gospel, then among us whom you call Papists. For you
make no difference between Dogs Hogs and sheep, and principally in the
administration of your Sacraments. We do not so in our churches, which you
call Popish. For whatsoever our curates and shepherdes be, yet they will know
their sheep: and will not receive any (specially to y^ supper, which they
celebrate) without they first know what faith or religion they be of. But your
pastors and Ministers are constrained to receive indifferently, all such as
shall present themselves to your supper. Your reformation is so well
established, that if a common whore, a thief, a robber, or a Jew, a Turk,
come to you, your Minister dare not refuse him, except he will endanger himself
to be deposed from the Ministry, at the least. Think you, that offends us
not greatly? And that it lets not many men of good conscience from yelding
to your sect? For though you blame our form of religion, yet we think, if we
do not better then you, we can not lightly do worse. For at the least we
observe our Ceremonies, and that form of discipline, which we have in our
churches, better then you observe those, which you ought to observe, if ye had
received ye Gospel, as you brag. Seeing then that your Ministers have so long
time given to hogs and dogs, those things which you esteem to be most
precious and holy, is it not good reason, that those hogs and dogs should show
themselves to be such, and should punish the dishonor, which they showed to
God and his word, and his holy Sacrament is. For you brag to have all these
things.


Theo. I agree, that they have lingered therein too long: and that the
punishment whereof thou speak, is very just. And it cannot be otherwise,
seeing that Jesus Christ has foreshewed it. For in admonishyng his Apostles not
to give holy things to dogs, nor to cast pearls among Swine, Math. 7.
least they tread them under foot, and tear them in pieces which offer
them: He gave the^ warnyng hereby, prophesiyng and threatnyng what should
happen unto them, if they failed herein. And although our Ministers be faulty
herein, They that will defer the time with God.
in that they have deferred the time to long, some for fear of displeasure,
and some for losing of that they have, watching for better opportunity, yet
are they burdened by diverse, to be to hasty, to wilful, and to rash. And
this is the cause, that such always defer the time so long.


Tobie. Therefore I fear me they shall sweetly abye for it one day, and
shall then perceive what sheep they have in their flock.


Theo. Seeing that God has spoken it, we need not to dispute whether it shall
come to pass or no. Or whether we ought to defer the time so long or no. We
need to determine no more, or take any other council in it. They that do
otherwise declare one of these two: either that they will control God, as if
that which he has ordained were not well enough, and that rule which he has
given to his Church were not sufficient: or else show themselves rebellious
against him, in not obeyng him. And therefore we ought not to appoint or limit
any time, to do yt which he has commanded. For if we mind to obey him, we
ought not to delaie any time, seeing we know his will. The hypocrisy of those
which seek excuses.
And therefore I judge them less hipocrites which say plainly. Let us cast
of this yoke wherewith they would yoke us, Psalm. 2.
and let us break this band wherewith they would bind us, and let us do as we
were wont: then they which make delay, and excuse them selves with the time.
For they dare not speak so openly as the other do, nor utter their mind,
because they are somewhat more shamefast and hipocrites then the other. But
whilst they thus defer the time, they and their ministers may dye: and then
must they both appear before the judgment seat of God, who will neither
allow appellation or delaie.


Tobie. I am sure if Jesus Christ should have demanded of the Devils which
complained of him, what time they would have him grant them, they would never
have found convenient time, but would as well have complained on him a
thousand years after, as then: Likewise, if God should give us our choice what
time we should obey his commandments, and do as he requires us, we would
be as hard to please as they.


Theo. Therefore he demands not our advise, neither puts it to our
choice, but commands: The obedience which we owe to God.
and when he commands we ought to obey. And if we obey not, nor cease from
wickedness, he has as great power to drive us away, to cause us to do what
so ever pleases him, whether we will or no, as he had to drive out the wicked
Spirits, which he cast out whether they would or no, notwithstanding their
resistance, complaints, and requests. Though we resist and seek never so
many ways to avoid it, yet will he be master. Yet we have one poinct more to
consider in the request of these Deuilles. That is: that they desire to remain
still in the Country, that they might vex other, if they might no more vex
those poor persons out of whom they were cast.


Tobie. They did show by that experience, when they entered into the Swine
which fed there by: for if they might have done worse, they would not have
spared. There are many men which do the like, Desire to do mischief.
when they can not hinder or let the word of GOD in one place, they go to an
other: For they can no more be without doing mischief, then these Deuilles.
Wherefore they bring all out of order wheresoever they come, and carry this
pestilence with them wheresoever they go.


Tobie. I know many such Deuilles.


Theo. And know thou none like to the^ of Genezareth?


Tobie. Why ask thou that question?


Theo. Thou know that after our Savior Christ had cast out these Deuilles
that we talk of, and that they had drouned the Swine into which they
entered, the Genezarians were grieved with the loss of their Swine, The
Genezarian^.
and that such things happened in their Country: and therefore when they
understood what Christ had done to these possessed, they met him and prayed
him to depart their Country.


Tobie. Me thinks they were much ouerseene therein: for seeing they understood
of the great power of Christ, and what good he had done (not only in these two
possessed, but also to all the Country, which they keep in great subjection
and fear) they had iuster occasion to beseech him, yea, and with great suit to
entreat him to tarry amongst them, then to pray him to depart. For what fear
and horror was all the Country in, having these two so dangerous, furious,
and outrageous possessed?


Theo. They showed the^ selves herein not only ouerseen, but wholly madd, and
hereby show, that they needed not to be so grieved with the loss of their
Swine, for that the declared themselves to be very swine, yea, vile and
detestable Swine: For they did set more by earth then by heaven: they esteemed
Swine better then their own souls. For, they might well think what goodness
was to be found at Christ's hands in recompense of them, seeing he had such
power over the devil him self. But seeing they were such filthy swine
themselves, Christ would show by the workyng of these Deuilles in the swine,
how he could use such swine as y^ Genezaria^s were and all such other as were
given over by gods just judgments, according to their deserts.


Tobie. Because they were very swine the^ selves, peradventure they were
afraied, least he would likewise have used them so.


Theo. But to drive away Christ, The true mean to drive away the Devil.
who has power to drive away devils, is not the way to fly from the
devil, but to receive him. Wherefore the best way to drive him away is to
become the Sheep of Jesus Christ, who is come to transform Dogs, Hogs,
and Wolves into sheep and La^bes, Esa. 11. 2^.
and to be their shepeheard, as Esaie prophesied.


Tobie. Thou did ask me now, if I knew any that were like these
Genezaria^s, I pray thee tell me thy self, who be they that be like them.


Theo. Although the Genezarians were grieved for the loss of their swine, yet
saint Luke teaches an other poincte, Luke. 8.
that caused them to do, as they did to Christ.


Tobie. What says he?


Theo. They that were in great terror and fear, seeing Christ do as he did.
For, if they had been onelymoued with the loss, they would skante have entreated
him, Fear of the power of god without taste of the goodness thereof.
to depart their Country, but would rather have used commandments,
threatenings, yea, and peradventure have laid hands on him (if God would have
permitted.) But they were astonished at the power and divine virtue, which Jesus
Christ showed before their eyes in that country, by so merueilous a work:
and therefore they flattered him, rather for fear, then love. And where these
desired him to depart their Country, Matthew. 8.
the poor possessed, whom he had healed, Mark. 5.
offer to follow him as his disciples, Luke. 8.
whether so ever he go.


Tobie. Thereby they show, yt Jesus Christ has so delivered them, from the
power of the Devil, that they are less possessed, then the other of the
country. For, if the Devil had not had great power of the Genezarians, they
would rather have yielded to Jesus Christ, and followed him as Disciples, then
to have driven him out of their Country.


Theo. That is certain. For it had been better for them, to have departed
their country themselves, yea, to have left wives and Children, then ever to
have suffered Jesus Christ to depart from them. And therefore if we well
consider the work of Jesus Christ, as well in the possessed which he healed,
as in the Genezarians, we may by them learn to know the diffrence, that is
between those that effectually taste of the grace of the Gospel, and such as
have not tasted thereof as they ought. These poor possessed tasted thereof:
Diverse knowledge of the Gospel.
and therefore they esteemed nothing in the world so much as Jesus Christ, but
offered themselves to follow him, whatsoever did happen. Contrariwise the
Genezarians tasted not of this grace, but had only a knowledge of the divine
power, which they saw in Jesus Christ, which knowledge made them to fear
him, but taught them not to love him, and follow him, thereby to be made
partakers of greater goods, without comparison then that was, which they
thought he had spoiled them. The most part of men are thus disposed to
Godward: Fear of God without any love toward him.
because they know the power he has to punish, they fear him. This fear
causes them to honor and worship him, but not heartily: they fear him as
wicked subjects fear their Prince, who^ they honor and reverence against
their wills, for fear of his power: And therefore all the honor and service,
that they do to him, is but only fained. So the greatest part of men fear
and honor God, but yet they wish him so far from them, that they might
never hear speak of him, or have to do with him. All they that have not
tasted the sweetness of the goodness of GOD, are lead by such Spirit and
affection toward him. And this is the cause, that so few receives the
Gospel as they might. For, seeing it is hard, The cause that lets many from
followyng the Gospel.
yea, and impossible to follow it, but that it will bring some incommoditie,
both to the body and goods, of those that faithfully follow it, it seems
to bring always evil luck follows it.


Tobie. Yet there is no man but will brag and say, that he follows the
Gospel.


Theo. That is true, but the most part would have such a Christ as the
Genezarians desired to have: that is, that they might not lose their Swine by
him: they would also have such a Gospel.


Tobie. There are some that are not only contented that the Gospel cost them
nothing, Such swin^ as both reject Christ themselves and cause o^ther to do
the like.
but they would gain and be enriched under color of the same.


Theo. I pray thee Tobie show me what is the cause that Popes, Cardinals,
Bishops, Priests, and Monks resist the Gospel so stoutly, and persecute it
so cruelly?


Tobie. They will not tell thee that: for they say, it is they that maintain
the Gospel, and those who^ they persecute are Heretics.


Theo* And what causes the doctrine of the Gospel to be heresy to them?
None other thing, but that they fear if it should be received and practiced
as it ought to be amongst Christians, they should be driven out of their
stoyes and stalles, wherein they are fed as fat as Millers Swine: for they had
rather be swine to Satan and Antichrist to be fatly fed in their Stoyes as
they are, then to be sheep of the flock of Jesus Christ, or labouryng Oxen in
the harvest of the Lord. Those likewise which are of alliance to them, either
by parentage, consanguinitie, or affinity, or by any other mean, and specially
those which serve them, and live of their deceit, set more by these fatt
Swine, then by Jesus Christ the true sheapheards of their souls. For these
Swine fatten the porredge with their fatt, or at the least vnfatte^ them not,
but vnfatten enough of others, to fatten their parents, affines, friends, and
other maintainers of their Mother holy Church, which Mother have fed them so
fat. Wherefore, it is no marvel though they be loathe to leave her, or to be
weaned from such breasts. There is an other sort, which though they receive
no profit of such swine, yea, and know the trothe of the Gospel:
nevertheless, they had rather be ridd of Jesus Christ, and drive him out of
their Country, then they would drive out such swine, because they fear least
such change should trouble them, and least they should have some hinderance
touching their bodies or temporal goods. To be short: we see daiely if there
be any talk of the kingdom of Christ, the like that happened to Herod and
those of Jerusalem, when Jesus Christ was borne.


Tobie. Why? what happened to them.


Theo. Saint Matthew says: ^ath. 2.
that when by mean of the wise men which came to worship Christ, news came
to Jerusalem that the King of the Jews was borne, not only Herod, but all the
Cities of Jerusalem was troubled with him.


Tobie. It is no marvel though the Tyrau^t Herod was troubled, for he feared
the loss of his kingdom, which by right belo^ged not to him. Me^ troub at
the b^ of Jesus Christ.
But what needed they of Jerusalem to be troubled with such news? Had they
not greater occasion to rejoice? For besides that Messiah was promised to them,
at whose hands they looked for full and perfect restoryng of all things: it
is to be doubted, but they had rather have a King of their own Country and
blood, then such a stranger and Tyrant as Herod was.


Theo. Thou say troth, and therefore the faithful which were the true
Israelites among those people, rejoiced very much when they heard of the birth
of Jesus Christ, their King, their savior and redeemer.


Tobie. We have good witness thereof, and namely in the Sheepheards to whom
it was first showed, and after in Simeon, which so longed to see that great
goodness of God which he saw. Luke. ^.



Theo. The other which were carnal and worldly men, and not true
Israelites, but only in name, denied that Herod would not so easily leave his
kingdom, and that the Romans would not suffer any other prince to reign in
Judah, but themselves, and those appoincted by them. Whereby they thought that
there must needs be great change in Jury: and this change could not be
without great wars and troubles: which should greatly trouble the common
state, and so become hinderaunce unto them. And because they would live in
quietness, they had rather remain in the state wherein they were, (tho it
were miserable) then fall into those troubles, which they thought would be
greater. For, they were already used to this yoke, and therefore they thought it
not so heavy, as they did at the first, before they were used to it.


Tobie. Me thinks neither Herod nor the Jews, ^e vain ^re that ty^^nts
have, (...) the Go^^ll should ^^der their ^^gdome.
neded to fear that, seeing Christ came not to reign after the manner of
worldly kings, as he himself witnesses. Therefore neither Herod, nor the
Romans neded to fear, that he should take away their possession, ^^th. 18.
neither the Jews, (...). 6. 18.
that he should trouble their Country, in taking of their Kingdom.


Theo. That is very true: But the state was then as we se it now, when Jesus
Christ shows him self to the world, by the Preaching of the Gospel. For,
why do tyrauntes persecute it? But because they fear (like Herod) least it
should hinder their Kingdom? And how many are there, that would be glad to be
lightened, of the Romish Antichrist yoke, Worldly quietness, preferred before
the quietness o^ the conscie^c^
and have greater liberty, which notwithstanding had rather bear it, then by
suffryng never so little trouble, to be delivered by means of the Gospel:
Thereby we may well perceive, what care such have of their souls or
Salvation. None but the true children of God esteem Jesus Christ, and his
Gospel, better then their Swine: and therefore, are always ready to forsake
all, rather then Jesus Christ, to abide all dangers, rather then suffer him
to depart from them: yea, to keep him with them, as much as they can with
all their might, and to follow him whether soever he go, for they esteem the
liberty of their conscience more, then all the Kingdoms or Lordships of the
world.


Tobie. Are there not some among you, that brag of the reformation of the
Gospel, that are like those that thou talkest of?


Theo. There are more the^ I would wish. For there are many, that although they
se an unspeakable confusion in the Church of God, ^^ei that re^^^ the
disci^^ne of the ^^urche to ^^oyd trou^^^.
and in all estates: yet they will hear of no better reformation, then that
which they have, because their bodies are in quiet and rest. Wherefore, they
fear if any should go about, to establishe better order, (to the end that
God be not dishonored as he is, and the people better instructed and ordered)
lest some troubles might arise, which should trouble that worldly quietness,
wherein they would live. And therefore, they had rather root in the mire, and
suffer other to root with the^, then to have those troubles which they so
sore fear. Wherein they are greatly deceived: for the mean to live in quiet,
is not to cast of the yoke of Jesus Christ, ^he yoke of christ and ^^e yoke
of ^athan.
but to embrace it: and they must necessarily bear the yoke of Satan, which
will not bear Christ's yoke. ^ath. 11.
Now it is easy to Judge, which of the two is lighter and easier to be
borne, and which brings greater quietness (by all means) unto man. For as
Jesus Christ witnesses that his yoke is light, pleasant, and amiable, so he
promises quietness to the souls and consciences of those which bear it,
and submit themselves to him and his Discipline, and follow him as their
Master.


Tobie. I doubt not but these of whom thou speak, do prove to their cost,
that which thou say: and think by that mean, to avoid a light and
easy pain, are deceived, find for one pain an hundredth.


Theo. If such men knew what it were, to serve God from the bottom of their
heart, they would not think or trouble: for there is no pain in seruyng God,
but only in seruyng the Devil. For none serve GOD as they ought, but serve
him with good heart: and to serve with good heart, is so far from being
pain, that contrariwise, it is a singular pleasure to us: and as for those
that serve the Devil, although they take pleasure in evil doing (for that it
is more natural to the^ then to do well) yet they serve him as bond and
slaves, and the pleasures that they have in seruyng him, are like the pleasures
of the sick. Who (contrary to the council of the Physician) eat and drink
that, which deliteth their fantasy, and afterward become sicker thereby.


Tobie. We have already spoken heretofore of those, which are contented to
have the Gospel and Religion, only in outward show. Me thinks we may well
join the^ with these, of which we now talk.


Theo. We may well so do.


Tobie. Seeing we have sufficiently and largely talked, of the old and new
Genezarians; tell us if thou have any more to say, touching the possessed, of
whom thou made mention before.


Theophrast. I have much more to say: but we will leave of that till an other
time.


FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE DEMONIACKE WORLD, or world possessed with Devils,
containing three Dialogues: 1. Of Familiar Devils. 2. Of Lunaticke Devils. 3.
Of the coniuring of Devils.


Translated out of French into English by T. S. Gentleman.

Imprinted at London for John Perin, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Angel. 1583.

(...) he had heard him more at large, he was a great deal the rather
desirous to deliver him, then ever he was before.

To. If he had continued still in that mind, it had been much better for him.


Theo. That is true indeed. But because there was no true fear of GOD in him,
neither yet had taken deep and good rooting in his heart, it forthwith vanished
clean away, when he was pressed to the contrary, and never straue to withstand
the crueltye of the Jews. And yet he showed himself to bear more reverence
unto the name of GOD, then a great many of those, who would at this day, be
taken not only for Christians, but also for the very stays and pillars of the
faith. For, although they know well enough, that the causes which come before
them, concern the glory of GOD, and his Church, yet have they less care to
give judgment and condemn them, without further enquiring, what were the best
way for the^ to take, making lighter account of giving judgment on them, then
of the least cause in y^ world, whether it were of a money matter, or of any
other worldly thing whatsoever.


Tob. If there were in them but that fear which they ought to have, in
condemning the cause of God, under the name and title of heresy, me thinks
they should therein, be more circumspect and discreet. And for mine own
part, as ignorant and unlearned as I am, yet I ever abhorred these fire
tormentors, who so little esteemed of the lives of men, especially in such a
cause.


Theo. Truly, if thy first reason which thou have alleged would not serve
them, me thinks that the second which thou even now did touch, might
right well suffyce, for them to cast, I will not say, a little water into their
Wine, but into their fires. For to take away the lives of men, is no small
matter in the sight of the Lord. But the offense is a great deal more
heinous, when as men for Gods cause, shall take life away from such, as
should rather be preserved, and such also as should be in most
estimation, with Princes and Magistrates.

Thus then thou see what an inconvenience pride brings with it, to those
that proud and arrogant: For, seeing they presume so much of them selves as
that they will not once vouchsafe to entertayne the servants of God, and to
be taught by them, as they had need, it is impossible for them to understand
the truth, because they will at no hand understand it. And contrariwise,
Jesus Christ is schoolemaister to the humble, and not to the proud.
as Jesus Christ showed him self to be the Teacher and Master of the humble
and meek, even so rejects he out of his School, all high minded, proud,
and presumptuous persons. And therefore he gave thanks to God his Father, in
that he had revealed his will and truth unto the poor in spirit, Math. 11.
and hid it from the mighty and great men of the world. Isaiah. 66.
For, there are none but the poor and meek in spirit which are capable
thereof.

And therefore, the Lord says by the Prophet Isaiah, Whom will I regard,
but only the afflicted, and contrite in heart and mind, and him, who
trembles at my words? (...).
Saint Paul also tells the Corinthians, That the Lord has not called many
wise, strong, rich, and honorable men of the world: But the most feeble,
most vile, and most contemptible. It is also written, 1. Pet. 5.
That GOD resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. And therefore
Saint Paul, diligently admonishes all Christians not to esteem, Romans 12.
nor presume over much of them selves. Philip. 2.



Tob. True it is indeed, that humility and honor, seldom or never agree
quietly together.


Theo. That is most true. For, whereas humility is not, there cannot be a
teacheable, and well disposed heart to receive doctrine and discipline: Which
thing Saint Augustine confesses to have found in him self by experience, S.
Aug. in his 3. Book 5. Chap. of Confess.
saying in this manner. I then determined to apply my mind to the study of
the holy Scriptures, that I might see what they were. And behold, The
confession of S. Aug. as concerning the pride, which hindered him from
profiting in the holy scriptures.
I saw a thing that was never known to the proud, nor opened to children,
but was lowly in his going, and very high in his arryning, and which brought
great profit, and hidden secrets. And as for my self, I was even such a
one, as that I was not able to make any entrance into it, or yet stoop so
low, as once to be able to put my head into ye intres thereof. For I was not
then of the opynion whereof I now speak, when I looked upon this piece of
Scripture, but thought it unworthy to be compared to Tullies dignity. For, my
great pride could no^ away with the baseness thereof, and therefore it fled
from me: Neither was my wit so sharp, as that it was once able to pearse
into it, and yet it was such, as grew up amongst the basest and meanest.
Howebeeit, I might have vouchsafed to have been lowly. And because I was
high minded, I thought my self to be a great Clearke. Here we see how
Saint Augustine confesses, that whiles he flattered himself, and esteemed so
much of his own knowledge, and of the pride of his mind, as that he
continually disdayned and contemned the holy Scriptures. And although he had a
mind oftentimes to give him self to the study of them, it was so far of
that he found any taste or savor in them, as that he found* less savor in
them at that time, then he did at the first. For, he thought them to be
nothing in respect of the eloquence, and knowledge which he found in the
Books of Tullie and of the rest of the heathen Philosophers. But, after that
this his pride was come down and abased, and the opinion which he had of him
self and of his knowledge, he was of an opinion, clean contrary to his
first: And then, he right well perceived, all humane eloquence, and
Phylosophie, to be no better then bladders stuffed full of wind, and of no
substance in respect of the holy Scriptures: although to the outward
apparaunce they made a far gallanter muster and show. And therefore, whiles
the eyes of Saint Augustines understanding were blyndfolded with ye false
opinion which he had of him self, he had the more hoodwinked them with this
pomp and false apparaunce.


Tob. There are at this day, a great many in the world, There are many, that
will counterfeit S. Augustines pride, but they will not follow his humility.
who are in the self and same predicament, that Saint Augustine was in, at
that time. But I know not, whether GOD will give them that grace, which he gave
unto him, to let them understand their pride, that thereby they might be
humbled, and for the false opinion which they have of their eloquence,
knowledge and wisdom, to acknowledge them selves to be such fools, and
blockeheaded beasts as indeed they are, to the end they might be made apt
and Teacheable Scholars in the School of the word of God. For, there are
such a number of Poetical brains, and so learned in the tongues and in
humayne Philosophy: that they do not only make small account of the books of
the holy Scriptures, in comparison of their Heathenishe volumes: as that, which
is of all other the most vile, they esteem of them no better, then of the
Dreams of old doatyng fools, and of doting old wives tales. And as for
mine own part, let them have as great knowledge as they will, until they burst
with all, I will esteem of the^ no whit y^ more, if they be not honest men, and
have the fear of God before their eyes.


Theo. Thou touchest now a disease, which at this day raygneth more then ever
it did, yea, and that amongst such as bear the name of Christians, which is
the cause that we have so many Libertine Atheistes, Libertine Atheists.
who scorn and laughe at all Religions. And although they are not in truth,
settled in any Religion, yet forsooth they would not he thought to be utterly
void of Religion. And therefore, because they are of no religion, they are
nevertheless of all Religions, in what Countries soever they come unto. For,
they shoot at none other mark, but temporizing, or serving of times, with
every man, a Papist amongst Papists, an Epicure with Epicures, an Atheist,
with Atheistes, and to be short, a Devil amongst Devils, for they will not be
disquieted either in body or mind neither yet hazard either body or goods.
And therefore, they will not greatly frame them selves neither after Jesus
Christ, nor after the Pope, neither after the Gospel, nor after the Mass,
nor yet after any controversy that is at this day for Religion amongst
Christians, without perhaps some of them sustain some particular loss thereby.
For, if either gain, or loss fall out unto them on either side, they will
counterfayte zeal in that Religion which they think will be most for their
profit, and which they suppose will best agree with that, which they desire
to have here in this life, as we have a manifest example, chiefly, in the
Prelates and Beneficed men of the Popish Church. For, if they did believe
that there were a GOD in heaven, and any true religion, whereby their life and
conversation ought to be governed, and that they should render an accounte
thereof in the day of Judgment, they would surely, be other manner of men,
then in deed they are. Howebeit, they right well show, as well by their
doctrine, as also by their life and conversation, that they have as much mind
of God, as have brute beasts, and do as much esteem of the immortality of
their souls, as of the souls of their horses and moyles. And therefore, all
the zeal which they have to their Religion, proceeds not from any love
which they bear thereunto, but only to the honors, and great wealth
which comes unto them thereby. And therefore, when they see them selves in
danger to loose the^, they either become manifest black devils, and begin
openly to persecute, or if they have any knowledge and eloquence, they
straight way, Libertine Balaamites.
play the iollye Balaamites. For they commend themselves unto Antichrist to
resist the truth of God, and mainteyne his false doctrine, against their own
consciences: For, they themselves laugh him to scorn in their hearts, and do
no more believe him, then those against whom they oppose them selves. But I
fear me, I have done them great wrong to compare them unto Balaam, because
they have not so much faith unto the true Religion, as Balaam had unto the
Religion of the ancient Church of GOD, neither have they so great a regard
to God, as he had. But they are as like him in all other points, as like may
be, as in desire of honors, and worldly possessions. And therefore although
they are in part, black Devils, yet are they in nature, more like unto white
and Familiar Devils, where, the rest show them selves to be altogether black
Diuelles.

Howebeit, whatsoever vizers they put on, they are always in truth, very
Libertine Atheistes, notwithstanding, that they seem outwardely the Followers
of Popish Religion. And there are others also, who are almost like them, even
of those which follow the Gospel, if they knew they might any way gain
thereby. But the most of that sort, serve in Kings and Princes Courts.
Libertine Courtiers.
For, if Kings and Princes favor the Gospel, then they know, that if they
favor it as he does, that they shall come to greater dignity, or at least, be
the better and more firmly establyshed in that degree and honor wherein they
stand, for, as they can court it well, so will they also be the first that
shall make court to the Gospel, and will be come fair white, and familiar
Devils, amongst the very angels. But if a man should judge them by their
works, fruits, and life, what Gospel it is that they profess, it would be
soon judged that they are very Libertine Atheistes. For, a man shall never
find any reformation of life in them, which is the chief cause of the
preaching of the Gospel, and the principal mark to be marked and known by,
in those who have received the true faith, in the true fear of GOD, and in a
good conscience. And so by that mean, all their Gospel will be come a thing
where with to scorn the Pope, his Priests, Friars, and the rest of his shorn
Balaamites, and all the abuses of the Popish Church, and to make sport and
pleasauntly talk of them, especially in the companies of Ladies and
Gentlewomen. And if the Gospel will give them any such liberty, whereby they
may abuse it, into carnal liberty, they will be sure to lay fast hold
thereon: and not stick to say, that they are not like unto those
superstitious hypocritical Papists, whom they laugh to scorn.

Howbeyt, further they will not, but as for the rest of their life, it shall be
as dissolute, as the most dissolute Papists, from whom they differ in nothing
but in this, that they have put on a vizar of the Gospel, that they might
therewith the better cover their Atheism.


Tob. Thou have hitherto spoken of Libertine Atheistes, who dissemble their
Atheism, under the color of having some Religion in them, so far forth as
it tends either to their commodity or disco^modity. But there are some
others, who be cause they cannot find any such occasion, beco^ as it were
newters, Libertine newters.
being of neither side, as thou have oftentimes said. And the chief men
which march under this Ensign, and that are of this Band, are they which
are puffed up with eloquence, and knowledge, and are dronken in their own wit
and understanding: As Saint Augustine confessed him self to be, before such
time as GOD had touched his heart with his holy spirit, which is the spyrite
of humility. But, although Saint Augustine presumed thus of him self, by
reason he was of so fine and quick witted a spirit, and of so very a sharp
understanding, and excellent knowledge in humanity, as any man that ever
lived in his time and age: yet was there always in him, some good seed of
religion. But because he was an heathen man borne, and therefore had not from
his youth been brought up in the word of God: but only in humanity and
Paganism, and in the Religion wherein he was borne, he could not rightly
judge of the true Religion, which he knew not. And the opinion which he had
of himself, did so hinder him, as that he could not search after it, as he
ought to have done. And after that diverse, but especially his mother Monica,
who was a widdowe, and became a Christian before him, a very good woman, and
one that feared GOD, had exhorted and solycited him, to search after the holy
Scriptures: those their exhortations stirred him up to the reading of the
Bible. Howbeit, he read it not so reverently as he should have done, but
rather for fashions sake, by reason he came not appointed with that humilytie
and modesty, which afterward he knew was meet for the disciples of the holy
Ghost to come. But when God had rebated this his pride, with the spirit of
modesty and humility, then found he that in it, which before he knew not how
to find in it: And by that mean, he was so much the more humbled. Howbeit,
these glorious arrogant men, of whom we now speak, who thus glory of their
knowledge, and skill, are even the very scorners and contemners of God: for
they never show, that ever they had the true fear of God before their eyes,
nor yet any good seed of religion in them. For, there is a great many of them,
who have manifested them selves greater Atheists, after they had once gotten
some knowledge of the gospel, then ever they had before, and since y^ time,
have ever less reverenced the word of God. For, the knowledge which they
received by the entertayning of the Gospel, served them to none other use, but
to discover the Idolatries, superstitions, and abuses, which are in the popish
Church, that they might laugh at them.

And ever sithence that time, they are grown even unto this, that they are
almost at the like point with the doctrine of Christian religion. For, as S.
Paul said, They judge thereof, 1. Cor. 1.
as the Grecians and wise men of the world, judged of Jesus Christ, and of his
Gospel: who thought the preaching thereof to be foolishness, because they were
carnal men, and puffed up with an opinyon of their own wisdoms.

And because the Grecians, were always more accounted of then any of the rest
of the Nations, by reason of their sharpness of wit, and of the knowledge
which they had in the arts, in Philosophy, and in all other Letters of
humanity, S. Paul names them specially, although he comprehends under
this name, all the rest of the heathen, as well appears by that, that he
opposes them to the Jews, and seperateth them also from the Christians, unto
whom, as he him self witnesses, Jesus Christ is the true wisdom, virtue,
and power of God.

Now, if these Libertine Epicures and Atheistes, had been heathen borne, as
S. Augustine was, or, if they had as much religion in them, being Christians
borne, as he had in his Paganism, they should never have showed them selves,
to have been so monstrous beasts, as in deed they are. But although in name,
they are Christians born, they are to be accounted of, as if they had been
borne and bredde amongst Infidelles and Paganes, yea even amongst the Epicures,
out of whose books they have sucked and droonke, this prophan spirit of
Athiesme, who thus caryeth the^ away.

For, they have yet less Religion in them, then ever had any of the heathen,
who not only did not approve their doctrine, but which is more, manifestly,
both by word and wrytinge condemned it, yea, and oftentimes executed the^ by
public justice namely, Athens. For, when God gives us over so far, he then
by his just judgment brutisheth us in the cause of religion. What it is to
conte^ne prayer.
And therefore, that we shall not need any more to pray unto him, to beseech
him, enlighten us with his holy spirit, in the knowledge of his holy word.

But, over and besides, that David, and S. Peter, Psalm. 19. 119.
calls the holy Ghost, the word of the Lord, 2. Pet. 1.
a candle and lantern which lightneth a dark place, John. 16.
and does enlighten the simple, Psalm. 16.
yet there is one thing more in it, which the Lord has promised, 1 Psalm. 50.
that he will hear as many as shall call upon him in truth, Mat. 7. 18.
be near them, and grant them his holy spirit.


Toby. This then is the effect of thy conclusion, that proud men, and such as
call not upon the Lord as they ought, for their instruction in the knowledge of
his holy will, The judgment of God against the contempt and hating of his word.
have no great good lyking to serve him accordingly. And because they have no
such love and lyking: but contrariwise will live as pleases them, God, in his
just judgment gives them over into a reprobate sense, and leaves them as a
spoil unto seducers, and false teachers. Wherefore, they always receive and
allow rather falsehood and error, then the truth of the Lord.


Theo. In deed, because they had no love nor liking of the truth, but rather
of leasinges, the Lord by his just vengeance, has given a mighty power of
error unto such masters as they have a lyking of, and such as they are best
worthy of. And therefore when Moses admonished the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 13.
that they should beware of false Prophets, who might deceive them, he
namely said, that the Lord would tempt his people by false Prophets, who
should make great shows of truth: and he would do it to this end, to prove
whether his people feared and loved him with all their heart. or not.

Wherein he manifestly declares, that they which had the true fear of God
before them, and loved him in deed, would never receive the false Prophets, A
preservative against errors.
and cast off the law, and word of God, but always continue in the doctrine,
which the Lord God had revealed unto them from heaven.


Toby. I thank thee, I now very well understand this point, and the cause also,
why the devil every manner of way, has so great power over us, as he has.
Moreover, although we have already spoken of many that are haunted with
Deuilles, Of Lunatique, deaf, dumb, and blind Demoniacques.
yet have we not all this while spoken any whit of the Lunatique, deaf,
dumb, and blind Demoniacques.


Theo. It is no great matter: Mat. 12. 17.
For we will treat of them, Mark. 9.
when thou shall think it best. Luke 11.



The Title and effect of the fifth Dialogue, of the world possessed with Devils.
THis fifte Dialogue is called, the dialogueue of Lunatique Deuilles: because
the chief matter contained therein, treats of a Lunatique Demoniacque, of
whom the Evangelists make mention, and of such as may be compared to the same.
And because there were many accidents, which fell out unto this Demoniacque,
somewhat is also said, of deaf, dumb, and blind Demoniacques, and how
Jesus Christ healed them.

What grace God grants to men, by the preaching of the Gospel.

In what a dangerous estate they are, which are deprived of the Gospel.

Of the Prophecies, of the hardening and blynding of their hearts, which
contemn the word of God.

What power the Devil has over young children, and what be the causes
thereof, and of Original sin.

What occasions the Devil takes at the infirmities of men, thereby to hurt
them.

Of those means, by which we give the Devil liberty to have access unto us.

How the Aungelles were converted into Devils.

Of Lunatique fools.

Of the wicked Spirit which tormented Saul.

Of the vengeance of God, upon the mighty men of the world.

Of such as follow Saules ill conditions, and which sin against their own
consciences.

Of such as the Devil casts into the fire* and into the water.

Of the woman possessed of a Spirit, which stay money, by supping up of it.

Of the reign of God Mammon here in this world.

The fifth Dialogue of the Demoniacke world, entitled Lunatike Devils.
Theophrast. Toby. Jerome. Eustace. Theophraste. THere is no man living, but
that would be greatly afeard, when as he considers of the estate where in
these poor and miserable demoniackes stood, who were possessed with a Legion
of Devils. But if they were very miserable, no doubt of it, the estate of ye
lunatike, deaf, dumb, and blind altogether, seems unto me to be most
ungracious.


Tob. I warrant thee, the least of all these mischiefs is great enough to make
the estate of a poor man miserable. For, although we be never wholly blind,
deaf, nor dumb, yet see how we take on, when as our sight alone, begins to
fail us, and that we must be feign to use spectacles? Or, if we hear not
so well as we were wonted to do? or that we stammer, or have any other
impediment in our tongue, and speak not so plainly as we would. And if we
be thus at this point, we may easily judge, what a misery it is to be
altogether blind, deaf, and dumb. But, if we have al these at once, besides
a number of other strange diseases, joined together with the^, then is there a
notable sort of mischiefs piled up in us all at once.


Theo. That is out of al doubt, and by how much both the sight, the hearing,
and the speech are the excellent gifts of God, by so much are those me^ most
miserable, who are deprived of them.


Tob. For mine own part, I verily suppose that there is no man living but had
rather die ten times, then he would be only blind, deaf, and dumb,
although he were no demoniacke.


Theo. Surely, he that should be in that estate, should be more miserable, as
a man would say, then the very brute beast. Now imagine that this might be,
when as the devil should be amiddest all his mischievous turns, whereof he is
the cause and instrument. And if we must judge these Demoniacks to be
miserable, what shall we say by them, who have all these inconveniences in
their souls?


To. If we could as well discern these mischiefs in our souls, as we ca^ when
we have the^ in our bodies, I do not dout but yt we would be in greater fear
of the^, 2. Cor. 4.
then we are.


Theo. And yet for all this, they whom Satan the god of this world, have
blindfolded their eyes, to the end they should not see the light of the
gospel, and whose ears he has stopped, that they should not hear the word
of God, and whose tongues he has tied, yt they should not call upon, and
praise the Lord, and such as whose hearts he possesses and hardens, to the
end they should not believe the gospel, are without al doubt a great deal more
miserable and accursed, then these dumb, deaf, and blind demoniackes, where
of we speak.


Tob. And yet a man shall find a great number of these demoniackes in the
world.


The. Why man, there is almost nothing else in it. For we our selves, have
sometimes been all in this estate. And that which is more, al men are such by
their own nature, until such time as, Jesus Christ comes unto them, to
drive out the devil, who makes them so deaf, dumb, and blind. And
therefore, Deaf, dumb, and blind Demoniacks, healed by the gospel.
so often as we see any man converted to the Gospel, we must think it to be
such a work, even a most excellent work of god: neither ought we less marvel
at the matter, then if we saw him healing: the deaf, dumb, and blind
demoniacks before our eyes. And by this we may judge, what grace God shows to
those kinds of people, out of when Jesus Christ drives the Devil, by the
preaching of the gospel; that they might see the light of God, which without
al comparison, is a great deal more to be desired; then the light of the
Sun, and make them* hear the voice of their shephearde Jesus Christ, and
open their mouths to preach and declare his praise and glory. The grace,
which God shows to men, by the preaching of the gospel.
For, there is no harmony of the mouth, nor yet of musical instrument, to
pleasant to ye bodily ear, as ye voice o^ god is pleasant to the ears of the
souls, of the children of God. And as this greatly delights them; to hear
this so sweet and pleasant a voice, even so likewise is it as great a delight
to the^, to have their mouths open, to magnify and sanctify the name of God,
What a cursed estate they are in, which are deprived of the gospel.
and to call upon him incessantly. And contrariwise, we may judge in what a
cursed estate they are, who be deprived of this benefit of the Lord. For, it
is even as much as if we saw the Devil visibly reign amongst the deaf,
dumb, and blind, never ceasing tormenting of them, both in soul and body,
more cruelly, then the most tormentious hangman in the world is able to devise
to torment the most wicked man that might possibly be committed into his hands.


Tob. Assuredly, I do tremble when I think of that which thou speak, and
when I hear thee speak.


Theo. What would thou then say, if thou should see with thine own eyes,
the thing as it is in deed? For, if the Infidels, and enemies of God could
perceive and believe, that they were in this estate, no doubt of it, they would
be more afeard of it then they are.


Tob. For mine own part, I verily think, that they would fully and wholly be
contented to die, so that they might but only understand and lay hold of it.


Theo. Why then, if the estate of all such as remain in the darkness of error
and ignorance, be so accursed, horrible, and fearful, yet for all this, there
are none of all those which are in such estate, who are more accursed, then
those whom God rejects, by reason they have co^te^ned his holy word, and to
whom he sends his prophets and servants, to do that duty which the Lord
committed to Isaiah, when as he said unto him, Isaiah. 6.
Go thy way, and tell this people, that in hearing they shall not understand,
A prophecy of the hardening of their hearts, which contemn the gospel.
and in seeing, they shall not perceive. Blockishe the heart of this people,
stop their ears, and close up their eyes, to the end, they may not see with
their eyes, nor hear with their ears, nor yet understand with their hearts,
that they may not be converted, and so be healed.


Toby. Surely, surely, this is a fearful prophecy.


Theo. By this we may evidently see, that even as God by his just judgment
abandoneth the Demoniackes unto the Devil, over whom he gave them power, eue^
so he abandoneth him, and discharges his hands of all such as contemn his
gifts and grates, Exodus 4. 7. 8. 9. 10.
to the end the devil might close up their eyes and ears, and so harden their
hearts as he did Pharaos, that they might perish accursedly, as they deserved
and wished. For, seeing they took pleasure to blind themselves, because they
would not see the light of the word of God, and stopped their ears, that they
might not hear his voice, and hardened their hearts, that they might not
believe the gospel, they well deserved, that God should forsake them.


Toby. Verily, these men might well be placed, amongst the blind, deaf, and
dumb Demoniackes, save that I think they are not dumb to blaspheme the name
of God.


Theo. If ever there were blind, deaf, and dumb Demoniacks in the world,
these are they. And the greatest number of those, are they who so greatly glory
of the knowledge of the gospel, and to be the people of God.

And therefore this prophecy of Isayah, is alleged and rehearsed six times
at the least in the new testament, as well by the four Evangelists, as also
by Saint Paul. For, Mat. 13.
even as the preaching of Isaiah did blind and harden the hearts of those
hypocrites, Mark. 4.
and rebels that were amongst the Jews, Luke. 8.
not through the Prophets fault, John. 12.
but through their own: Acts. 28.
even so was the preaching of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles, Romans 11.
amongst them who in their days were like unto these, against whom Isaiah
prophesied. And we see that this prophecy is daily accomplished* not only in
Christian Papists, but also in such as greatly boast of the reformation of
the Gospel: and more in them, then in any other besides, because they most
villanously abuse the graces which God has bestowed upon them. And therefore,
because their unthankfulness is merueilous great, it is good reason their
punishment should be the greater. Wherefore, it is not without just cause
that this prophecy is so often repeated in the new Testament, more then any
other that is in all the Books of the Prophets.


Tob. I beseech the Lord keep us by his grace, yt we fall not into any such
inconveniences, to the end we become not such desperate Demoniakes. But what
say thou now of Lunatike Devils? Lunatic Demoniackes.
For thou have not as yet, set down thine opinion of the^.


The. Although Saint Matthew calls this Demoniacke, Mat. 17.
only Lunatike, Mark. 9.
yet Saint Mark says, Luke. 9.
that he was deaf also, and Saint Luke, The power which the Devil has over
young children, and what the causes thereof, are.
that he was dumb, and they all agree together, that he was even so from his
infancy.


Tob. This is very strange, that the Devil should have such power over young
children.


The. This is an example admonitatorie to us of many things, if we can well
consider of them.


Tob. I pray thee tell me what things they are.


Theo. First of all, we are hereby to judge of the state and condition of our
nature, and how corrupt and accursed it is, by reason of sin, seeing, that
even from our infancy, the Devil has such power over us. For, if young
children were without ^in, the Devil should have no power over them, Original
(...).
no more then death which the devil has begot Romans 5.
through sin. And therefore, Saint Paul proves, that because children dye,
that they are subject to original sin, Bead against Iul.
and that they have already deserved punishmente for the same in this their
infancy. And so, some of the ancient doctors of the Church, take this
example of the Lunatike infant, to prove the same, against all such as deny
original sin, affirming, that young children are innocent, and without sin.


Tob. Surely, the reason of these ancient doctors is built upon a sound
foundation.


Theo. If children then of this age deserve now such judgment at the hands*
of God if God will judge them in rigor, we may soon have an estimate, what
vengeance we daily deserve at the hands of God, considering, that we have not
this natural corruption only in us, which we call Original sin, and is in
young children, but that which is more, we continually carry about with us
the cursed and damnable fruits, by which, we incessantly provoke the heavy
wrath and displeasure of God against us.


Tob. This example ought to teach us, to humble our selves unto the Lord our
God, Mat. 6.
and incessantly pray unto him That he would not lead us into temptation,
Luke. 11*
but deliver us from evil. And therefore we ought to be very watchful, and
stand upon our guard, to the end he overtake us not upon the sudden. For, if
this be so cruel an enemy unto young children, he sure, he will use no great
courtesy unto us. And if GOD gives him such liberty to hurt young children,
out of doubt, he will never spare us, seeing that we have a great deal more
deserved his fury and indignation, then young children?


Theo. Every man may understand this, if he will. But yet consider somewhat
more in another point, of the malice of Satan. It appears by the words of
Saint Luke, speaking of this miserable Lunatike, Luke. 9.
that the Devil, Of the disease which this lunatike (...) had.
tormented him not continually, but that he gave him some respyte, although
but a little. For, he sets it down in these plain terms, that this
Devil, would hardly depart from this wretched child. Whereupon, it must
follow, that he departed sometimes from him.


Tob. Is this the cause, why the Eua^gelists called him Lunatike.


Theo. I do not think, The falling sick^^^s.
that he was called Lunatike, because he had the falling sickness, which
comes by fittes, as the Moon increases and decreaseth. For, because that
this disease comes of the infirmity of the brain, it therefore follows the
course of the moon. And again, because the brain is very cold and moist, it
agreeeth mightily with the nature of ye Moon, which God has created to be of
such a nature, as that it might preserve cold and moist things, as he has
created the Sun to be of a hoate and dry nature, that it might preserve the
rest of the same condition, to the end, that all the creatures* of God, might
be kept in order, which God in his Almighty providence has disposed.


Tob. Is this the cause, why we also commonly call this disease, The hi^ evil.
the hie evil, and that we term them which are subject there to, to fall into
the hie evil?


Theo. That may be one cause thereof. For it cannot take a man hier, then by
the head, or brain, when it takes him in the head and brain, as that he
falls to the ground, as a Butcher knocks an ox in the head. It is also
said of this Lunaticke infant, that the Devil cast him, and made him sometimes
fall into the fire, and sometimes into the water, in such sort, as that it was
marvel that he had not been killed a thousand times. It is likewise written,
that he fomed at the mouth, and tare himself horribly.


Tob. All these accidents, do greatly follow the falling sickness. But it is
namely set down, that the devil did all these things and not the disease.


Theo. The one of them is no let to the other. The Devil takes occasion (...)
cause men hur^ themselves, eue^ by their own infirmities.
For although the Devil is the Governor and ruler of this doing, yet he
takes it from the infirmity and disease, where unto he knows this infant to
be subject, and occasioneth him to do that evil to him self which he does,
and so serves his turn therewith, for the exercising of his cruelty and
malice toward him. And therefore, he watched and pryed out the times and
seasons, when this disease came again to this child, and he himself also
hastened and furthered it as much as was possible. And therefore the Devil
surpresed this child, when he knew that he should fall into the disease, to
make him fall either into the fire or into the water, and so by that mean
destroy him if he could. And therefore S. Luke says, Luke. 9.
that the Devil, with much a do, departed from this child.


Tob. I have already considered of two things which thou have spoken. The
First, is of that which has heretofore been handeled, as concerning the desire
which the Devil has to hurt the creatures of God, but especially men, as for
example we have seen in the Legion of Devils, who entered into the Gergesites
swine, after they had been driven out of the Demontacks.


The. What is that other point, which thou would speak of?


Tob. It is even this, That I see the horrible judgment of God, and his great
mercy together, in one and the self same person. For, although God had left
this poor and miserable child unto the devil, yet he so brideled up the
devil, as that he could not hurt the child as he would: but in good
sort, in despite of all that the Devil could do. And God preserved this
child, that Jesus might heal him, at such time as he had appointed, to the
end that his son Jesus Christ might be glorified by him, and that the world
might know what power he had, over the most wicked and terrible devils.


Theo. Now in very deed, this was very well considered, and spoken of thee,
but yet there is some thing more to be noted, over and besides all this, and yt
is this, that seeing the devil takes occasion to rush in upon men, The mean
by which we suffer the devil to have access unto us.
through their infirmities, and corporal diseases, and so cruelly deal with
them, we may very well consider, what occasion he might take, by the
infirmities, diseases, and grievous sins which are in our souls, for the
destroyng of us eternally. And therefore we had need, very carefully look to
our selves, how by such means, we inuit and bid him come to us.


Tob. Surely, me thinks y^ we have a very manifest example of that which thou
speak, The example o^ Judas.
in Judas. Because, ye devil, seeing him inclined to covetousness, took
occasion to enter into him, yt ready and open way. For, as I take it, some of
the Evangelists say, that Satan entered into him.


Theo. In deed, Luke. 22.
Saint Luke and S. John have so set it down. John. 13.
And although the Devil entered not into him to torment his body, as his
custom is, to torment Demoniackes, yet he so tormented his soul, as that he
drove him to that issue that he made him hang himself. Judas a very devil.
And because he was so disloyal a Traitor, Mat. 27.
where he should have been an angel of God, Acts. 1.
unto the which estate Jesus Christ had called him, John. 6.
our Savior of very right and justly, Mala. 1.
did not only call him Demoniack, but even plain devil. For, seeing the true
ministers of the Lord be called in ye holy scriptures, Apoc. 2. 3.
the angels of god, the^ may they justly be holde^ for devils, which abuse
their office, and band themselves against God, where they should thereby
honor him. The conversion ^f Angels into ^iuels.
For, herein they do the office of Devils, because they abuse their office,
and the excellent gifts which God has bestowed upon them.


To. Me thinks, that this example should terrify all couetousmen, but
especially, all the wicked ministers of the Church who make their ministry
serve their couetoousnes. Covetousness.
For, the devil has a jolly entrance into them.


Theo. Forsooth, it is very true. But chiefly into those, which sell and betray
Jesus Christ and his Church, through their covetousness.

We might say as much of other vices, notwithstanding that this vice of
couetonsnesse, is one of the chiefest, by which the Devil has Lordship over
us, and makes us his slaves.


To. I pray thee, show me some other examples of Lunatique Deuilles, tending to
this purpose, and of the occasions, yt the Devil takes by our infirmyties and
sins to hurt us withal.


Theo. Contented, Eccle. 27.
It is written in the Book called Ecclesiastes: That the talk of a man which
fears GOD, is always wise: But a fool changes as the Moon.


To. Why, then I perceive, we may very well place fools, Lunatique fools
amongst Lunatique men. And so by that reason, the number of Lunatiques should
be great, seeing that there is a great and infinite number of fools.


Theo. Howbeit, if they be both Lunatique and demoniacques: yea, deaf, dumb,
and blind, they are the more dangerous fools. And yet we see almost nothing
else before our eyes. For we shall see some of them, at one time or an other,
seem to have a good lyking of God, his word, and of virtue, and honesty. They
have their momentes, and fittes, wherein they deal wonderfully, so that a man
would think them to be become the honestest men in the world. And in the
turning of an hand, they are so suddainlye changed from better to worse, as
that thou would say, that the Devil was entered into their bodies, and so
became Demoniacques.

These men are such Demoniacques, Saul is left to the wicked spirit
as king Saul was. For, it is written of him, 1 Samuel 16.
that after Samuel had anointed David, to be king over the people of God, in
Saules steed, the good spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and the evil
spirit of the Lord tormented him. And shortly after, Saules servants, called
this Spirit, the evil spirit of the Lord.


Toby. I take it, that the holy Scripture, so says, understanding thereby, that
the lord sent this wicked spirit, in his just judgment to punish him by him, as
he had of long deserved.


Theo. There is no doubt of it. Whereupon thou art to note first of all, that
the Hebrew word, which the holy scripture uses in this place, may be diversely
interpreted. For, it may also be interpreted, that this wicked spirit,
terrified, or choked, or puffed up, or else astonished Saul, and made him become
blockish.


To. But, How the Devil has daily great advantage over us.
before we talk any further of this wicked spirit, which came upon Saul,
after that the good spirit of the Lord was departed from him. It has
heretofore been declared, that Saul was a great hypocrite, and a most
glorious man, and an envious Rebel to God, and had so provoked God unto anger,
1. Sam. 15. 17
as that he caused Samuel to tell him, 1. Sam. 31.
that he should be bereaved of the kingdom, 2. Sam. 11.
which he had given him, as in deed it was. And the cause why GOD gave him
over unto the wicked sprite, came by reason thereof.

Now, Saul was not so wicked and cursed, before such time as the wicked
spyrite had taken possession in him, neither was he any right Demoniacque,
without he kept it more close before, then afterward he did.

And therefore, how are we to understand this, that the good spirit of the
Lord departed from Saul, and that the wicked spirit came upon him, in the
steed of the good?


Theo. The example of Judas, of whom we have so often spoke, may serve us to
great purpose, for the resolving of us in this question.

For, John. 6.
when Jesus Christ said, that Judas was a Devil, there is no doubt, but that
the Devil reigned in the heart of Judas before. But because that Judas
continually more and more abused the gifts and graces of God, and grew worse
and worse, where he should have waxed better and better, he made the way more
open and plain, for the Devil to enter into him.

Wherefore S. John sets it down, that the Devil put it in Judas heart, to
beetray Jesus Christ: John. 13.
and afterward he says, as S. Luke said, Luke. 22.
that Satan entered into him.

It was not meant by the Evangelists, but that the Devil was in him before,
and namely, when he began to murmr against the woman, who had spent her
precious ointment upon Jesus Christ. Math. 26.
But their meaning is, Mark. 14.
that we should understand, that the Devil at that time, John. 12.
had taken larger possession in the heart of Judas, and had greater power over
him, insomuch that he was master of all, as experience afterward manifestly
declared.


Toby. Thy meauing then is, that it fared even so with Saul.


Theo. True in deed, for the thing is most apparaunt.

For, even as Judas did a great deal worse, after such time as S. Luke and S.
John spoke, that the Devil was entered into his heart, so that Judas was the^
come eue^ unto the fullness of all iniquity and wickedness: Even so fell it
also out with Saul, after that the good spirit of the Lord was gone from
him, and he left unto the wicked spirit. For, before that, the good spirit of
the Lord, caused him to do many good things, although Saul had not a true
and sound heart. Howbeit, although he did him self no good, yet did he good to
others, considering the estate wherein he was. But, after that the good spirit
of the Lord, had wholly given him over to Satan, a man might have seen him
grow worse, daily and hourly, so that he never rested, until such time as
he had ^illed the measure of al wickedness, and for a man of his degree and
quality, made even as shameful an end, as Judas did. For, after that Saul
had committed the very worst deeds that he could possibly devise, against God,
and against his servant David, the Devil at last egged him so far forth, as
that he destroyed him self with his own hands.


Toby. This is a fearful example of Gods heavy vengeance, 1 Samuel 31.
especially upon so noble a personage. God plagueth the most mighty kings for
their transgressions.
For, if God spare not kings and Princes, we are not to look that he will spare
any others whatsoever.


Theo. It is so far off, that he spares great kings, and mighty
potentates, because they are of great magnifice^ce, as yt he punishes them
with more grievous, notable and fearful tortures, then any of all the rest of
his people. For, by how much the more he has made them great and excellent, by
so much the more are they unthankful unto his majesty, when as they abuse
his graces. And again, there are no enemies of God, which more dishonor him,
and do greater hurt unto al me^, by their evil examples, and less punished by
men, then they which are in the greatest authority. And therefore it cannot be
chosen, but that God him self must arise to execute justice upon them, seeing
that none else will, or can do it: And he must needs cause them make a public
amends, for all the horrible and grievous offenses, which they have heretofore
committed, and still daily do.


Toby. To say truly, he handles the^ very roughly, when he once begins
to lay his hand on them.


Theo. But amongst all the rest, The Imitators of Saul.
who^ the example of Saul ought most to terrify, are all glorious, proud,
envious, and hypocritical men, and all tyrants, but especially, those kinds of
men, What a grienous thing it is for a man to sin against his own conscience.
who fight against their own consciences, and persecute such as they know to
be most innocent. For, Saul, was subject to all these vices. But, he most
manifestly showed, what great power the Devil had over him, when as he so
openly fought against his own conscience, which oftentimes enforced him to
accuse and condemn his own self, for the injuries and wrongs which he had
done unto David. For, how often was he enforced to say, that he was a vile and
wicked man, and had done great injury to David, 1. Sam. 24. 26.
and that David was innocent, and a far honester man then him self? And who
enforced him this to do, but the very power of the truth, and his own
conscience, which drove him to it, as if he had been racked to do it? he
right well knew, that he did wickedly, and that he manifestly fought against
God, and yet for all this, he no whit amended him self: but still became more
traiterous, fierce and cruel, without any regard, either to GOD, justice or
equity, then any brute and furious beast.

But when he made such a jolly confession of his sins, a man would have
thought, that he had been very penitent, and altogether converted. A man would
have thought that he had been come again to his right wits, and that he had
been very well disposed to have don much better, then before time he had.
But he was immediately after, quite and clean altered, and did worse, then
before he had done. Insomuch, that at the very same instant, wherein he used
these speeches, declaring the innocencye of David, he took his Iaueling, and
thought if he had could to have run David through with it, 1. Sam. 18. 24* 26.
with his own hands, and afterward caused him to be sought for all over, to
have put him to death.


Tob. Surely, herein he right well showed, that he was a very Demoniacke, and
most Lunaticke.


Theo. We see a great number of such. For, there are an exceeding mighty number
of those, who, after they have long time fought against their own consciences,
have some remorse thereof. But forsomuche as GOD forsakes them, because they
have forsaken him, the Devil their master, who has so great power and
dominion over them, has no more stay of them, then of senseless and mad men.
And therefore they alter their mynds every hour. And if it so fall out, as that
they sometimes light on the right side, they by and by tumble over again unto
ye other side, so yt, the moon changes not so often as they do. But this is
the nature of al such as are subject to the devil. For, after any furious and
mad spirit has once got possession of them, they are never long in one mind.
Tob. Thou have already spoken of many great vices which greatly haunt us,
that make us subject unto him.


The. It is said, that the devil many times cast the Lunaticke one while into
the fire, Who they are, w^om the devil overthrows* and makes them fall into
the fire.
and another while into the water. Now, when ye devil eggeth us forward, so
that he causes us to fall into the sin of covetousness, he casts us into
a far more dangerous fire, then if he did cast us into a material fire. For,
The fire of Covetousness.
covetousness, is such a fire, as is impossible to be quenched, by reason of
that which is cast into it, but burns still more and more. Wherefore the
covetous men burn continualy in this fire, and consume therein much of that
that is cast in, with them.


Tob. If they were cast in into a material fire, they should be discharged
for being burnt any more. Howbeit, these men, of whom thou speak, are in a
far worse estate, then if they were burnt but in a small fire.


Theo. We might likewise say as much of Whoremongers. The fire of whoredom
and Lechery.
For Lechery is a fire also, and as hard to be quenched, as ye fire of
covetousness. And how many do we daily see cast into this infernal fire by
the devil, who are there cruelly roasted both body and soul. But there are a
marvelous great number, especially, of these Lunaticke Demoniackes, whom the
devil very often casts into this fire of whoredom and lechery, amongst the
suppostes of the popish Church, who had rather burn in it, contrary to the
counsel of Saint Paul, The contempt of marriage punished.
and the express commandment of God, then marry, and find water in holy
marriage to remedy it, 1. Cor. 7
whereby they might quench this fire, and so be rid of it. But they had rather
have the devil keep them there, Genesis 1. 2.
then they would serve God in that estate which he has ordained from the
beginning. Math. 19.



Tob. But, what are they, whom ye devil makes thus fall into the water?


Theo. Why man, there are an exceeding number of them. We may place in this
rank, all voluptuous and lycentious persons, Who they are whom the devil
causes to fall into the water.
who suffer themselves to ouerflow as it were water, in their pleasures and
delights. And therefore they make this entree for the Devil to enter into
the^, to the end he might plunge and drown them over head and ears, so that
they should never be able to come out again. To be short, if we would
discourse of this matter more at large, we should find, that the most part of
us, are thus daily dealt withal by the Devil, who handeleth us not only as
he handled the miserable Lunaticke, but a great deal more cruelly. For there
is no comparison between the harms which the Devil is able to do to the
bodies, and those whom he incessantly hurts in their souls.


Tob. Seeing we have talked so long, of so many sorts of Demoniackes, I would
gladly now know of Jerome, what he were able to say to this matter, considering
he has so long heard us, and never spoke word which I marvel of. And me
thinks also yt he is about to leave his silence, and to say somewhat.


Ier. Surely, thou and Theo. have said so much, as that you have left me no
great matter to talk of. A story of a woman Demoniacke that was never
satisfied with money.
But I will tell you a Tale which once I hard done by a woman Demoniacke, who
differs far from those sorts of Demoniackes, of whom thou have before
spoken.


Tob. Thou would feign tell us here some fable and old wives tale, to make us
forget all the doctrine whereout we might gather some good matter, of the talk
which we heretofore have had,


Ier. I will tell thee, they that told me this history, told it not unto me for
a fable, but for a true history. And for mine own part, I verily believe, that
they counterfayted not the matter. And put the case it were a counterfayte
thing, yet shall it turn to good purpose, as concerning those matters, whereof
you have talked.


Tob. Thou should have gone on with thine history, whiles we have
entertained thee with these great promises. And therefore let us now hear it.


Ier. First of al, it was told me that this history happened in Almayne, and
that this Demoniacke was so lycorous of money, as never Jack Dawe had greater
delight in it. For she would no sooner come near any man, but that her hand
was suddenly upon his purse or money bag if he had any, that she could find.
And if she had once fingred it, she would have so lustely bestirred her, and
so suddaynely have put the Gold or silver which she had fingered unto her
mouth, as that a man could not have been so wary of her, but that she would
have more suddainelye have licked it in.


Tob. I promise thee, this was a marvelous strange Devil. Why, those which
we commonly call Sarasins, or Egiptians, or else Bohemians, are nothing skillful
in respect of this Devil, no nor yet the Jack Dawes, who are the notablest
thieves for money that may be, and will sometimes as quickly dispatche it.
But what became of this Demoniacke in the end?


Iero. I understood by them who told me the tale, that Luther was asked his
opinion of her. For he was then alive, when as this matter fell so out. And
the place wherein this thing happened, is not far from ye place where Luther
dwelt: but I do not well remember the name which was told me.


Tob. It is no matter for the name of the place. But tell us if thou can, what
Luthers aunsweare was, as touching this demoniacke, to those which asked his
counsel herein.


Ier. I understood, that he told them, that it was an advertisement of God to
the Almaynes, and to all the world besides, that the devil Mammon was
vnchayned and let loose, God Mamm^ reigning in the world.
and reigned in the world, and was now more insatiable then ever he had been
before, and therefore leaft neither purse nor bag vnryfled. And that although
he had drawn dry all purses and bags, and licked up all the gold and silver
within them, yet could he not be through full: For it is an insatiable gulf
which never cries hoe.


Tob. What meanest thou by this devil Mammon?


Ier. That covetousness, whereof the devil himself is both God and father.


Tob. Indeed, me thinks that Luther hitte it rightlye. And if so be there
had been no such thing, but a feigned matter, for sport, yet it carries a good
sense with it, for we daily see before our eyes, the practice whereof Luther
spoke, both in all countries, and also in all estates, and therefore the
Almaynes are not to be only charged therewith. For, we are able to say
without counterfetting, that there is a devilish covetousness all the world
throughout. And if a man should consider well of the matter, we should see
covetousness, to be a very right she Devil, and makes men become he
Devils, and makes such a number of Demoniacks as the woman was, of who^ thou
erst spakest, and begets such a number of great and little Devils, to play
this pagea^t, as that the whole world is nothing else but a Diuelrie,
altogether diuelished.


Jerome. This was that she devil which chiefly made Judas such a Devil, as thou
have said he was, and so, never sithence that ever she ceased hatching and
bringing forth of such like as her self, who are the greatest hinderers of the
course of the gospel, which any way might come unto it.


Tob. We are then in a jolly country, when as we be in such an hell, and have
to do with so many sorts of Demoniackes and Devils.


Ier. The danger is not so great to have to do with them, as it is to be one
of the number.


Tob. I right well know thy meaning. And therefore the hardest matter for us
rests herein, to find ye means how to avoid al these inconveniences, to wit,
how we may first keep our selves, from falling into these mischiefs. The
second is, as touching the mean, whereby we may eschew the hurt which these
devils and Demoniackes might do us.


Ier. That, which thou have spoken of, is the very best and chiefest: For, to
what purpose were it for a man to understand the disease, without a man did
think to get necessary remedies for the healing thereof, and it were to small
purpose to think of them without a man were sure to find them.


Tob. In very deed it would serve to none other end, but the more to torment
the party grieved, and make him become more desperat^.


Ier. And therefore the very best way will be, that at our first meeting
together, we travel and go about this matter.


The Title and effect of the sixth Dialogue, of the Demoacke world.
THis sixth Dialogue is entitled, The coniuration of Diuelles, because in it,
is set forth, which way to drive out Devils which rule and torment the world.
Wheruppon, those remedies are spoken of, which Saul sought after, that he
might be rid of that wicked spirit which tormented him, and of the
remedies which Infidels, and wicked men hunt after, for such diseases as come
unto them, and how men have recourse unto creatures, whereas in truth they
should run unto God.

Of the cause of Saul his madness, and of the right remedy that was used for the
same.

Of the blockish and witching spirit which God sends unto us in his just
judgment.

For what cause, fasting and prayer are auayleable, for the driving out of
devils.

How very necessary a thing the increase of faith is.

Of the true use of fasting, and of the abuse thereof.

Of gluttony and drunkenness, cloked under the title of the liberty of the
Gospel, and namely in the person of the Magistrates, and ministers of the
church.

Of the Devils force, when he is to be put out of his lodging.

Of the victory which Jesus Christ has against him.

Of the principal and most necessary knowledge that is wanting in man, and of
his unthankfulness, as well toward God, as also unto to those to whom of
duty he is bound.

The sixte Dialogue of the Demoniacke world, entitled, The Coniuration of
Devils.
Jerome, Tobie, Eustace, Theophrast. Jerome. THou desiredst ( Tobie) to
understand what remedies there were to keep us, not only from becoming to be
Demoniacks, but also to be defended from taking any hurt either by the devils,
or by the demoniacks whom the devils possess and rule.


Tob. Very true. And therefore I am here now ready to hear what fit remedies
thou haste brought me for the purpose: For I right well know, that all the
Priests, Friars, and Charmers Coniurations, and all the Coniurers that be in
the world, will little or nothing avail, without there be some other helping
hand then theirs.


Ier. Why man, thou must not look that the devils and Demoniackes conjure one
another.


Tob. Why speak thou that?


Ier. Because, if there be any men in the whole world, over whom the devils
reign and have power, they are the people, of whom thou erst speak. And
therefore if there be any who of right are to be taken for Demoniackes, even
those kinds of men, of whom we heretofore spoke, are to be looked for among
the men of that Court. For they are such demoniackes, as that they make all
men else very demoniackes also, what with their false doctrine, traditions, and
by mean of that wicked spyrite which guides and governs them. For, seeing
they are the guyders and Governors of others, it cannot be chosen, but that
they which are guyded and governed by them, must needs be led by that spirit,
which guides and governs their leaders and Governors.


Tob. I doubt that Eustace, will not yield unto that thy opinion.


Ier. I care not whether he will yield to it or not, yet I am sure it is true
that I have said.


Eust, If thou will needs have it so, I shall but loose time to speak against
thee. And therefore I shall be contented to hear, what Coniurers they are that
thou can bring forth for thy part, and see what greater virtue they have
more, then those whom thou have disciphered, and so greatly blamed.


Ier. Me thinks Tobie, that Theo. has showed unto us a most excellent
remedy against this mischief, which is so greatly to be feared: so that in
my opinion, if we take it, we shall never need any other.


Tob. A understand right well, yt he has sent us back to Jesus Christ, to
seek this mean and remedy at his hand. And surely for mine own part I would
never go any further.


Theo. Saul very diligently sought after it, but because he went not to God, to
who^ he ought to have gone, he never found that comfort and remedy against his
disease, that he looked for.


Tob. What remedy was that? 1. Sam. 16.



Theo. His servants made him believe that it was best for him to have some
cunning Musition, The counsel which Saules servants gave him.
which could play excellently upon an harp. And he thought this, to be very
good counsel. Whereupon, he forthwith sent to have such an one gotten him: and
at last, David was brought to him to play this part, for he had therein,
most excellent skill,


Tob. What reason had they to do thus?


Theo. There was great likelihoode, that the servants which gave Saul this
counsel, as the history witnesses, were his Physicians, who had met together
to consult of his disease. What remedies the wicked hunt after, when they are
diseased.
For, when any sickness, or other inconvenience falls upon the wicked,
they never consider, that it is the hand and rod of the Lord that is laid
upon them, without they be enforced thereto, with the great blows of a
mawle, as was laid upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Exodus 12.
And therefore, where they should look up unto heaven, they still look
groueling down to the earth, and run rather unto creatures, then unto the
Creator.

And again, they that are about them, and like them, never give them other
direction. Wherefore, when Saul was not well at ease, he must needs send for
remedy for his disease. And his most excellent remedy had been, to have sent
for some sound Prophet or Preacher, to have told Saul of the grievous and
great sins which he had committed, whereby the wicked spyrit had so great
power over him, to torment him as he did: For, by these and such like
speeches, he must needs have been brought to repentance, and so have fled to
the mercies of God, whereby he might have obtained his favor, and remission of
his sins: for, if he had grown to an attoneme^t with God, through true and
faithful repentance, he should have found at Gods hands, that remedy that
was most necessary for him. For, that God, who had stricken him in his just
judgment, could, and also would, have healed him in mercy. But because that
Saul, had so long dallied with God, and perseuered so long in his wicked doing,
contrary to his own conscience, as yt god would not once vouchsafe to give him
that grace to have recourse unto him, nor suffer him have any man in his Court,
and about him, to give him that counsel.


Toby. I do not think this counsel, to be the best counsel that might have
been given him: We (...) to creatures for aid, rather the^ unto God.
howbeit, this is the very ordinary course, which we almost all take, to run
rather unto Physicians, and seek remedy at the hands of Creatures, then unto
God, the most excellent Physician of all.


Theo. I do not think it amiss, to use Physicians, and all other means
whatsoever that men are able to help withal, so that they be ordained of God.

But herein rests the fault, that we forsake GOD, and run unto Creatures:
But if we run unto GOD, yet have we more confidence in men, and in the
creatures, and in the means and instruments, which he has ordained, then in
God y^ framer and worker of all, without whom, all the instruments are able
to do nothing.

And therefore it is written of king Aza, that GOD took away his life from
him, because that in his sickness, 1. Chron. 16.
he trusted more unto his Physicians, then he did unto GOD. Now, if God
punyshed those, who used such remedies as he had ordained, when as they put
their confidence in that, which they should have done in him, we ought not to
marvel, although he severely deals with many, who are not contented to
abuse the means which he has ordained, but seek after other means, which he
has forbidden, and put therein their whole trust.


To. They which have recourse to the Devil, and unto Charmers, and Sorcerers,
who are his Ministers, direct them selves to other Physicians and means then
GOD has ordained.


Theo. Neither do these men escape the heavy hand of GOD, although he be
slow in coming, nor yet they which run unto Idolles, and to strange Gods.


Toby. But I pray thee tell me, whether Music has any power against such
kind of madness as Saules was, Music, a remedy against madness.
or not? For, it is to be presumed, that they which gave Saul counsel, to
send for a cunning Musition, where of this opinion.


Theo. There are many Melancholic, and frantic people, whom Music serves
as a medicine, because it reioyseth and tempereth men's affections, and thereby
draws away their imaginations else whether, if it be used as it should be.
But Saules madness proceeded not only of a ladde and melancholicke humor,
either yet upon anger and wrath. But the principal cause was supernatural:
And therefore, although he found him self somewhat comforted and eased, when
David played upon the Harp, yet continued he still in his madness, yea
insomuch that he still enforced him self to thrust through David, his Musition.

And therefore he was to look for remedy some where else. For, Saules
madness proceeded from the curse of god, The cause of Saul's madness.
wherewith he threatens all such as will not obey his law, Deuteronomy. 28.
that he will strike them with blindness, furye, and madness: in such a
sort, as that he will make them senseless, that they shall be no more able
to guide and govern them selves, The spirit of fury and blockishnes.
then those blind men, that grope by ye walls at noone days.


Toby. Surely, this is an horrible and very fearful threat.


Theo. All the rest of the Prophets, which lived after Moses, threatened the
like curse and vengeance, namely to tyrauntes, their Counselors and Officers,
Isaiah. 19.
when as they threatened them, Oseah. 4. 5.
that God would send amongst them, John. 6. 12
a blockish, sleepy, and drunken spirit.


To. I think, that foolish and wicked Counselles, which greatly hurt Princes,
their courts, and principalities, proceed from such a spirit.


Theo. That is questionless. For, seeing they make no account of the counsel
of God, which he delyuereth unto them by his word, and servants, they are
worthy of such counselors as are led with such a spirit: 1. Kings. 22.
As the false Prophets of Achab: who were, by ye just judgment of God, sent
unto him, to deceive him, as he had well deserved.


To. Thou would the^ thus conclude, that there is no suffycient Physician,
to deliver or rid men of such inconveniences, save the most excellent
Physician of al.


Theo. Our savior Jesus Christ, yielding a reason, Mat. 17.
why his Disciples were not able to heal the Lunaticque, Fasting and prays
requisite for the casting out of Devils.
told them, that that sort of Deuilles could not be cast out, but by fasting
and prayer.


Toby. Why said he so?


Theo. He himself declared that sufficiently enough, when as he as well rebuked
his Disciples, as also the father of the Lunaticque, for their incredulity,
giving them thereby to understand, that, yt was the cause, why his Disciples
were not able to cast out yt Devil, albeit they had used all the skill and
cunning they had. Wherefore, seeing it was for want of faith, Increase of faith
necessary.
it was requisite, that their faith should be increased. And this could not be
had, but by the grace of God. For, faith is the gift of GOD: And therefore, as
we cannot have it without him, no more also can it be increased but by him
alone. And therefore, Jesus Christ exhorted his Disciples, Ephe. 2.
to pray that it might be increased in them. Wherefore, John. 6.
since it is so, we must address us unto GOD, by hearty and faithful prayer.
And prayer can in no wise please him, without it come from the soul and heart.

And because that abstinence or fasting, The right use of fasting.
greatly avails the soul or mind, for so much as being less pressed by the
body, it is better disposed toward God: therefore the servants of GOD, have
commonly joined abstynence and fasting with their prayers, when as they would
address them selves unto his Majesty, for any things of great importance,
and be more fervent in prayer, according as the necessity of the cause
required. And therefore, Jesus Christ meaning to let his Disciples
understand, that they had great need to pray unto GOD, for the increase of
their faith, and that fasting, greatly auayled unto prayer, because it was of
great effycacie: he joined fasting with prayer, when as he spoke of faith that
was to be required, for the casting out of this kind of wicked, and most
cruel Devils.


Toby. I do not much marvel, that there are this day so few Coniurers, which
are able to cast out of the world those Deuilles, of whom we have heretofore
so much spoken. For, there are but a few men, very earnest in prayer. And as
for fasting; the number is less, especially amongeste you, who so greatly
glory of the Reformation of the Gospel: For, you are not contented your selves
not to fast: but, which is worse, The abuse of fa^ting condemned.
you scorn them that fast, and condemn them for superstitious people, and
hypocrites.


Theo. I know right well, that thou take great pleasure to be merry with us,
or else thou speak of our doctrine according as thou haste heard our
adversaries talk, who can never speak well of it, and yet never either heard
or yet understood it: or, if ever they heard it and understood it, they speak
ill of it against their own consciences. For, who ever heard us more condemn
fasting and abstynence, then true prayer, and all other good works, which God
allows and lyketh of.


Toby. Wherefore then fast you not in Lent, the four Ember days, the Vigiles,
and other fasting days, commanded by ye Church.


Theo. If we condemn ye superstitious and importable abuses, What true fast
are.
which the Papists use in their fastes, we do not for all that comdemne the
true fastes, that are according to the word of GOD, and according to the right
rule of the ancient Fathers and true servants of God: But contrariwise, we
greatly desire, to have the right use of those fastes, to be brought into the
Church. For, there is great difference between correcting the abuses, and the
abolishing of good things which men have abused. And as for the common fastes,
there are no preachers which more comme^d the^, nor who more grievously reprove
and condemn gluttony, drunkenness, and al dissoluteness, or losenesse of
life, as well for eating and drinking, as also for all other things, then the
true Ministers of the Gospel, reprove and condemn them.


Toby. I do verily think, that that which thou say is true, but I find
few which follow that doctrine. For, I see many of your side, who are no
better reformed, Gluttonny and drunkenness, cloked under the title of the
liberty of the Gospel.
without, where peradventure they might at the least have fasted sometimes, so
long as they held our law: who now, not only never fast, but commonly surfeit
both in eating and drinking, as if they had received the Gospel for none other
purpose, but to surfette at pleasure, and make a scorn at all abstynence and
sobriety.


Theo. I must needs confess, that there are over many such. And I will
confess more unto thee then that. For, if this mischief, whereof thou
speak, were but in some of the meaner sort, it were less to be lamented.
But the greatest mischief of all the rest is this, that there are a great
number of ministers and magistrates, who are more licentiously given to this
kind of vice of trowling and bowling, then those men, whom they ought to
correct for such offenses. For these are the special men, whom a man shall
ordinarily find in the Cauernes and Tippling houses, as if their chiefest
occupation were to trowle and bowl, and provoke others to all loosenes.


Tob. I have heard it oftentimes spoken, Of the Gluttony and drunke^nes of
magistrates and ministers.
yt there are many of the chiefest of your officers amongst you, who take great
pleasure to give the ministers, which will play the good fellows alittle,
their lading (as we say). And these officers think, that they have made a
great conquest, when as they have a minister drunk, as it too too often
falls out. And I doubt not, but that Jerome has heard as great news of
this as I.


Theo. I know more of this, then I gladly would, and I cannot hear it spoken
of, but to their great shame which do, and continue such villainies. But it is
easily to be seen, what manner of men these ministers and officers are, who
thus honestly behave them selves, thou may right well say, That Rowland and
Oliver are well met. For, because these officers, are men of wicked life and
conversation, and fear that the Ministers would reprove them of their sins:
They are the gladdest men in the world, when they can get in their Ministers
to bolle with them, to the end thereby to bridle them, that they should not
be over grievous in accusing and reprehending of them. For, when these
Ministers or rather minstrels, have well wet their whystle, they, over whom
they are Pastors, do assure themselves then, that they will not be too eager
upon them. And again, these cup whisteling minstrels, have no regard, to much
crying out, because they fear that some man would accuse them, if they should
displease those who were witnesses of their trolling and bolling, and the rest
of their vices whereunto they are subject.


Tob. If the case thus stands, I dare assure thee, that you have very
venerable Apepostles, to cast out all the Devils by fasting and prayer, which
at this present so greatly trouble the world. And if there were no Devils at
all in the whole world, these good fellows, in steed of casting of them out,
would bring them in. Wherefore, I do not much marvel, although the Devils have
so great power of these dru^kards and gluttons of all sorts and estates, and
namely, over those ministers and magistrates who rise early in the morning, not
to go to a Sermon, but to the Tavern and there drink a dutant, what say
thou to it Theophraste?


Theo. This I say unto it, that yt land, and common weal is accursed, which
has gluttonous and drunke^ magistrates and pastors, Eccle. 10.
and rise up in the morning to follow drunkenness until they are hot with
wine. Isaiah. 5.
And therefore, seeing that all vices reign in the world, and more amongst
them, which should correct and punish the^, then amongst any of the rest, it is
no marvel, though there be so many devils and Demoniacks every where, as are.
But such as fear ye Lord, have a very good recourse. What devises and means
the Devil has whi^he is to be displaced.
In very deed, it will be a hard matter to make those devils depart from
the^, but yet they shall, will they, nil they, be displaced, because Christ
lays his hand on as he did upon the miserable Lunatike. For, Mat. 17.
when Jesus Christ was in place, it was so far of that the wicked spirit
would depart from this poor child, Mark. 6.
as that he became more mad in him. Luke. 9.
And so likewise, when these Devils, and demoniackes that they possess which
are now in the world, feel the Gospel come near them, and begin to hear
the voice thereof, they are even as mad, as if a man should sound out the
Trumpet, to assault them, and give them the alarm. And, as the Devil went not
out of the Lunatike, until such time as he had first tried all his forces
against Jesus Christ: No more will he be displaced of these Rooms, which he
has gotten possession of, without strong and mighty combats. And all the
while that the Devil so furiously resisted Jesus Christ, the devil a great
deal more tormented the poor Lunatike, then ever he did before, Insomuche,
that he lay before Jesus Christ, as if he had been dead.


Tob. He did that, to vex the poor father, of that so very a miserable
child, and because he had so little faith, his incredulity was the reason,
why this child was no sooner healed. For it seemed, that the presence of Jesus
Christ, did him more hurt then good.


Theo. It might seem that Jesus Christ came thither, Victory against the
devil, after he had been driven, to his last shifts.
to give the Devil greater power, to the end he might finish that work which
he so long before traveled about, which was, to kill this poor miserable
child. For, every man thought the child to be dead, when the Devil leaft
him. Howbeit, it fell out clean contrary. For, when it was thought, that he
was stark dead, he was quite and clean delivered of the Devil, and made
through whole.

Now, we see that the like of this falls out daily, we see how the Devil
troubles and tormenteth the world, especially in those places, out of which
he knows he shall be cast. For, he then falls into such a rage, as that a
man would think that the Gospel, by which mean Jesus Christ will cast him
out, had set open all the gates of hell, to let out all the Legions of Devils
that were in it. For, then he fretteth and fumeth, and makes as many as he
has power over, to fret and fume. To be short, he so terrifieth ye whole
world, yea, the valiancest and most constant, as that a man would think it
should be utterly consumed and come to naught. But even then, when we think it
should be clean wasted and destroyed, our Savior Jesus Christ, shows
himself to be far stronger then he. And therefore, we must not stand in a
maze when we see the troubles and persecutions, which the Devil and his
retinue stir up in the world, when as they feel Jesus Christ come near
them, to cast them out through the power of his gospel. We have none other
thing to do but to remain steadfast and constant, and do that duty that
appertains unto every of us: and so leave the charge of all the rest of ye
things unto our Lord Jesus Christ, who will never forsake us, nor yet suffer
the devil to reign amongst us.


Tob. I tell you, it is most necessary that he should put to his helping
hand. For there is none else to withstand the Devils power, nor yet stay and
came such an enemies, whom, never man was able to vanquish, but he alone.
For, so far forth as I am able to understand by the talk that we have had
together, we are not only in worse estate, and more intractable and ragyng then
brute beasts, but also then the very Demoniackes. Whereupon, I can not
sufficiently enough marvel at our nature. For, we are of that nature and
condition, that we can skill so do any thing, but that which should be for our
benefit, Man can do any thing, save that which he ought chiefliest to do.
and most necessary for us. For, there is neither Art, Science, practice, nor
yet occupation whatsoever, which we have not devised, and can do it, and teach
others also, saving the art to live well, which we brag to teach to every
one, and yet are not able to teach our selves, but much less able to
practice it. For, there is almost, no beast so savage, cruel, furious, or
villainous howesoeuer, but that man by Art, is able to vanquishe, tame, and
master, and make familiar and gentle: But it is a wonder to see that he is not
able to find out any Art, Man a conqueror of all things but of himself
Science, Practice, nor weapons, to vanquishe, came, and master him self, and
to overcome and subdue his own affections.

Horses and Moyles are with much a do brought to it: But yet has man found
the mean to handle them, and make them do him service, in a short time.
Bulls and Oxen are mighty and strong: and yet man teaches them to bear the
yooke, and draw in the Cart. The Elephants likewise are most terrible: and yet
man makes them bear as great a burden as he lusts. Wolves and Bears, are
very cruel: and yet man makes them tractable. Lions are very fierce, proud,
cruel, and terrible: and yet man makes them humble themselves, and obey him.
There is disagreement between the husband and the wife.
Contrariwise, I see too often that the husband is not able to master his
wife, nor the wife, her husband, that they might live quietly together:
although she be flesh of his flesh, Genesis 2, 3.
and bone of his bones, and live long time together, Ephe. 5.
both in one house, Genesis 1. 2.
and eat their meat together, both at one Table, and lie both in one bed, and
which is more, are one body, and one blood. If man then cannot live with
himself, with his own flesh, and his own blood, with whom will he live? If
he cannot love his wife, whom God has made of his own substance, and has
given her unto him, for his aid and comfort, whom will he love? Likewise, if
the wife cannot humble herself and fit her self, Ephe. 5.
to agree with her husband, whom God has given her, to be her head, and
framed her out of his body, with whom will she agree, and who shall be able
to abide her? There is great contrariety betwixt dogs and Cats, yea such a
natural hatred, as is not almost to be reconciled. And so likewise, between
Wolves and Sheep: Lions and Oxen: And yet if they had been brought up together
from their youth, their bringing up and company keeping, which they had had
together, would work some power and efficacy to dispoile them something of
their nature, and so join themselves in unity together: Although they be
beasts of sundry kinds, and meruellously differing, and contrary one to
another. What say thou to this Jerome?


Ierom. Me thinks, it fares with men, A similitude o^ unthankful men.
as it fares with flies and swallows, who are always lodged amongst men, and
lie in their houses, and yet for all that, a man is not able to master them:
for, the swallowe builds her neast in his house, and lays her eggs there,
and hatcheth up her young ones. Man, bestows house room on her, and they
both sleep under one roufe, and yet there is no familiarity between them,
neither yet live they one with another. And in the end the Swallowe leaves
nothing else to the good man of the house for his house rent, but her filthy
dounge, after she has continued there a great while, and broken him of many
a sleep with her chattering and chirping. And therefore Tully rightly compared
swallows to false and unfaithful friends. Tully in his 4. Trooke to Heren.
For, as the Swallows make them ready to come in the Spring, and then depart
when cold weather comes in: Even so will false friends stand by us so long
as the weather is fair and clear, but when they see the winter of mishap come
upon us, they fly away from us every chone. And therefore it was not amiss
said of Pithagoras, Pithagoras Creed.
to forbid men of receiving the swallowe under their roufe.


Tob. What meant Pythagoras by that.


Theo. His meaning was, Plutarch.
that it is not good to be familiarly acquainted with Iang, lers, Quest. li. 8.
slaunderers, and unthankful persons-who are rightly represented by the
Swallowe. For, a man shall never get any good by them, but sorrow, grief,
hurt, and dishonor. And is not the fly likewise I pray you, always in the
kitchen? The first at the Table, the first in the dishe, and tastes all the
meats we eat of. Yea, they will do it, although we were Emperors and
Kings, and more then this to: They take assaye oftentimes before the cook.


Ier. But what favor find we by them for all the benefits which they daily
have at our hands, in our houses. What wage and reward have we of them?


Tob. This we have, they grieve and beray with their dirt, whatsoever fair and
beautiful thing that is within the house.


Ier. And more then that, for they engender vermin and corruption, never
ceasing to importune, sting, and bite us, eue^ til the blood follow withal, and
are never contented with all the benefits y^ we bestow on the^, without they also
suck and drink our blood.


Tob. These Flies are far more dangerous then man, and a great deal more
unthankful. I see fathers and mothers also daily, that cannot agree with
their children, but after, that those fathers and mothers have wasted the
odours, and fumes of the odours, which are continually about their children,
and dandeled them, and have been grieved and vexed, The great vn^hankfulnesse
of ^ome children, ^owardes their parents.
and had many a foul hand with them in the bringing of them up: so soon as
these children have bin grown up to ripe years, they would not once
acknowledge either father or mother: They would neither see them, nor bear
with them: but drive them oftentimes, out of the house: or else their parents
were enforced to drive them out, by reason of their rebellion and wicked
dealing. I never saw any such unthankfulness, nor cruelty between Dogs and
Cats, Wolves and Lymmers, Lions and Lions whelps. I have seen these
Landleapers, Landleapers.
who have lead all the countries over, Lions, Bears, Apes, Asses, Horses, and
many other sorts of beasts, and ruled them as they listed. For, they would
make them do whatsoever they pleased, and commanded them. They have made them
dance, leap, lie still, stand up, touch on the ground, make courtesy, march
march with a pyke, and wind a flate. To be short, I am not able to tell you
in a longtime, how many sundry things they have taught them, and made them
do. For, they taught them to do all things. What is the cause then, why man
is so well able to instruct the most unteachable brute beasts, and do learn
of him, and yet he himself, not able to teach himself, nor yet learn of
himself that, that is necessary for him to learn, and without the which, he
is in deed no man?


Ierom. No, not the wife of her husband, nor the child of the father.


Toby. What is the cause then, why do these Landleapers take so great pain,
to teach beasts, after this sort?


Ierom. It is to none other end, but to make men sport, and thereby, get
money of them, that they might live the easelier.


Tob. Now, what greater pleasure can any man have, then to see his children
well instructed? Is there any Ape more pleasant? with whom may they have any
better pastime? And what greater commodity can any Landleaper draw out of
beasts, which he so teaches, then the father from his son, the husband,
from his wife, or the brother, from his brother, or one neighbor from an
other, if they could as well learn of them, as the beasts learn of the
Landleapers.


Ierom. This is most certain,
a man shall find a great many more children, The Hippopotame.
like the Hippopotame, then the Storke.


Toby. What manner of beast is that Hippopotame?


Ierom. It is a beast that is bred chiefly in Egypt, in the river of Nile, and
ye one half of him is like an horse, and the other half like a fish. And
therefore, he bears this name, that is to say, a river horse.


Tob. What is thy meaning by naming of this beast?


Ierom. I will tell thee, They that have written the histories of the natures
of beasts, Plutar. Book.
have set down the nature of this beast, Whether the beasts bred on the land,
be wiser then they which are bred in the water.
to be so perverse and cruel, as that so soon as he is come to any ripe
years, being thereto brought by ye endeavor of his parents, that he will kill
his father, and afterward have to do with his mother. And how many children,
thynkest thou shall we find at this day, who are not grieved, that Fathers
and mothers live so long, and think of nothing else, but to see the end of them?


Toby. And how many think thou there are of such children, who bring their
parents to the grave, with very sorrow and pensiuenes, to see their
untowardness.


Ierom. Alas, if man shows him self to be such a one, to those who have
begotten him, and brought him up, what good shall other men hope for at his
hands.


Toby. But tell me also, I beseech thee, what thou meanest by speaking of the
Storkes?


Ierom. I put in them, because they are of a clean contrary nature. The
Storke.
For, if we shall give credit unto natural Philosophers, Plin. in his (...)
Book. cha. 2*
both Greeks and Latins, and to their Proverbs, Antipelargosis.
they bring up and comfort their dams in their old age, and by that means,
show the^ selves thankful unto them, for their bringing up of the^, when they
were young. How say thou Theophrast, is it not so?


Theo. In very deed the Hebrews, give this Foul, which here, in our
language, we call a stork, and gives her in ye Hebrew tongue a name, which
signifies, mercy and courtesy. And therefore, there is great lykelyhood, that
this name was given unto her, upon the reason which thou haste yielded. And
therefore, Basil.
Basil the great exhorts all Christians, Suydas.
to follow the examples of the Storke.


Ierom. And Suydas also testifies, that hereupon, an Embleame and devise was
made: An Embleame and device for Princes.
In which, there was a kinglye scepter, laid upon an Hippopotame, and thereupon
iewbed certain Storkes.


To. What was the meaning hereof?


Ierom. The meaning was this, That Kings and Princes should by their power and
authority, suppress all unthankful, wicked, ^. Crinit. de ^^on. disc. lib.
4 ^a. 13.
and tyrannous persons, that would not yield their obedience, to those, to
whom, in duty and conscience they are bound, but yield ill for good, both to
their parents, country, and Church, who had begotten them, and brought them
up. And contrariwise, they that should sustain, and maintain, al such as were
Debonaire, and acknowledged the good turns, which they had received, and had
discharged them selves of all such duties, as of right they ought.


Theo. And for that cause also, S. Ambrose says, that amongst the Romans,
the Storke was taken to be an example of all piety and debonairtie.


Toby. This devise, where of thou speak, Jerome thinks it, not too much
amiss. What say thou to it Theophraste?


Theo. I will tell thee mine opinion. Man's unthankfulness toward God.
I do consider thus with my self, how it should be possible, that one man
should be faithful to an other, when as man, is so traiterous, so
unfaithful, and altogether so unthankful, toward God his Creator who is both
his Father, and souereine lieg Lord and Prince. For, how can he obey a
mortal man, who is a Rebel, to the immortal GOD, Isaiah. 40. 4.
who has both our life and death in his hand, Acts. 17.
and is the same God, by whom we are, live, and dye. And therefore, is not this
a most horrible thing, that man, who is but a worm of the earth, and no man in
deed, in respect, and scarce able to crawle upon the ground, should be so
unthankful and rebellious? For, were it not for the hope of eternal life, we
might right well say, that he were the most miserable of all the creatures in
the world. And yet he dares him self alone, boldly resist al order of
nature, and refuse to do his duty, whereunto all the rest of the creaturs are
most obedient. He boldly dares lift up him self, against the Author, and
Governor of all things, who made him of the slyme of the earth, and in a
moment is able again to dissolve him. I cannot enough marvel, when as I
consider of this great pride and arrogance of man, how he alone dares resist
his God, whom, all the rest of his creatures, the heavens, the earth, the sea,
the stars and planets, all the elements, beasts, Angels, and Devils obey.


Toby. Surely, for mine own part, I wonder at it, even as much as thou do.


Theo. But thou would a great deal more wonder, if thou did more
narrowly consider, of the infirmity and myserie of man, wherewith he is
continuallye enuyroned, and as it were almost quite and clean swallowed up,
sithence the time of his conception, and what his nature and frame is. And
therefore, seeing we are entered into this talk, me thinks, that this
consideration, and contemplation will not be amiss, for us to debate on. For
the which cause, I am of the opinion, that we might handle this point somewhat
more at large, if you will agree unto me herein. Howbeit, I fear nothing but
that we should be over long, because there are in this behalf many good
things, and worthy dilygent consideration.


Ierom. I believe there is none here, but would be right glad of it. For, it
is a matter worth the handling. But to the end we might all profit the more. I
take it, that our best way were, for the present, to talk of some other matter
between, and recreate our selves a little in this fair Garden. For, when our
minds are always occupied about one thing, it grows yrkesome unto us at
last, although it were never so pleasant or profitable. Again, we cannot so
well carry away all, when our minds are surcharged with over great a multitude
of matters, and besides, when we have no delight in that that we hear.


Eust. Without doubt, there is nothing more certain.


To. I know not my masters, whether you be weary or no: But for mine own part,
I am weary of hearing of good talk, when I shall tarry all day and all night
about it.


Theo. And, I do think, that there is none of us weary in this good company:
But because we may be the fresher, and follow the matter more cheerely, I am
contented to agree to Jerome. And therefore, I think it most expedient, that
we walk a little here in this garden, and look upon the goodly flowers,
which God has created for our use: to the end, that in beholding of them, we
may the better always learn, to acknowledge his great power, wisdom, bounty,
and that thereby, we may have the better occasion to praise him, and yield him
our humble and hearty thanks: And then we may after enter again into our
matter. And where we have heretofore spoken in general, of the disorder and
confusednesse of the world, and of the danger wherein it stands, we will
also speak somewhat more, in particular of man, who is the cause of all the
disorder, and great mischiefs, that at this present reign in the world.


Tob. Seeing you are all of this opinion, I promise you, I for my part, will
not be against it. Let us rise therefore, and get us hence.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
John Perin in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Angel. 1583.


