Wholesome and Catholyke doctrine concerning the seven Sacraments of Christ's
Church, expedient to be known of all men, set forth in manner of short Sermons
to be made to the people, by the reverend father in God Thomas bishop of
Lincoln.

Anno. 1558. Mense Februarij,

Excusum Londini in aedibus Roberti Caly, Typographi. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.



The contents of the Book.
OF the number of the Sacraments of Christ's Church and the effects of the
same. Ser. i. Fol. i. Of the Sacrament of Baptism. Ser. ii. Fol. viii. Of the
necessity of Baptism, and the ministers of the same. Ser iii. Fol. xiii. Of
the ancient and godly ceremonies perteyninge to Baptism and what is meant and
taught by them. Ser. iiii. Fol. xviii. Of the Sacrament of Confirmation. Ser.
v. Fol. xxiiii. Of the seven gifts of the holy ghost given in the sacrament of
Confirmation. Ser. vi. Fol. xxix. Of the real presence of Christ's body in the
sacrament of the Altar. Ser. vii. Fol. xxxvi. Of the change of bread and
wine, that is to say, of Transubstantiacion. Ser. viii. Fol. xlii. Of the
effects of Christ's body and blood in the worthy receiver. Ser. ix. Fol.
xlviii. An exhortation for the worthy receyuinge of the holy Sacrament. Ser.
x. Fol. liiii. How a man may come worthily to receive the blessed Sacrament.
Ser. xi. Fol. lx. Of the sacrifice of the new Testament, which is called the
Mass. Ser. xii. Fol. lxviii. Of the godly prayers and ceremonies used in the
sacrifice of the Mass. Ser. xiii. Fol. lxxv. Of the necessity and commodity
of Penance in general. Ser. xiiii. Fol. lxxx. A Sermon against desperation.
Ser. xv. Fol. lxxxvi. Against presumption of mercy* Ser xvi. Fol. xciiii. Of
Contrition. Ser. xvii. fol. ci. Of inward Confession to almighty God. Ser.
xviii. Fol. cviii. Of Confession to a Priest. Ser. xix. Fol. cxiiii. what a
sinner ought to do in making his confession. Ser. xx. Fol. cxviii. Certain
Instructions whereby a man may consider his life and make his confession the
better. Ser. xxi. Fol. cxxv. Of confession to a man's neighbor whom he has
offended. Ser. xxii. Fol. cxxxii. Of Satisfaction. Ser. xxiii. Fol. cxxxix. How
a man should after penance avoid sin and live well. Ser. xxiiii. Fol*
clxvi. Of the Sacrament of Order. Ser. xxv. Fol. cliii. In what estimation the
Prelates and other Ministers in Christ's Church ought to be had of the
people. Ser. xxvi. Fol. clix. Of the Sacrament of Matrymonye and what grace is
given in it. Ser. xxvii. Fol. clxvi. Of the manner how to minister and contracte
matrimonye. Ser. xxviii. Fol. clxxii. For what intent and with what affection
men and women ought to marrye. Ser xxix. Fol. clxxix. Of the Sacrament of
extreme Unction. Ser. xxx. Fol. clxxxv.
FINIS.
Of the number of the Sacraments of Christ's Church, and theffect of the same
Sermo primus.
THe Catholic Church of god (good people) does extend her doctrine
concerning the matter of our belief, not only to the Articles of our Creed,
and such points, as by revelation from God it teaches us to believe of God,
and the works of our Savior Christ, which he did or suffered for the
redemption and salvation of man: but also to the holy Sacraments of God, by
the worthy using whereof, he powers abundantlye his many fold graces into
our souls, and by them makes us people mete to receive the fruits and
benefits of his passion. And as ye have been instructed, partly concerning the
Articles of our faith, so it is expedient ye be likewise instructed concerning
the holy Sacraments of his church: to the intent ye might not only know the
manner of Gods working in curinge of your souls, but also prepare and dispose
your selves to the fruitful receiuinge of his medicynes which be ministered to
every man by his holy Sacraments. And therefore at this time by Gods help I
intend to declare unto you the number of the sacraments of Christ's church,
and also theffect of them all in general, and at other times every one of the^
in special.

It is to be believed upon pain of damnation, that there be seven Sacraments
of Christ's holy church, Co^cilium generale Flore^tinu^.
institute and ordained of our savior Christ, in his new testament or law,
which be, Baptism, Confirmation, the Sacrament of the Altar, Penance,
extreme Unction, Order, and Matrimony. The first five be ordained for the
making good and the perfection of every man and woman, as by Baptism we are
justified and made members of Christ's mystical body: by Confirmation we are
increased and strengthened in grace: by the sacrament of Christ's body and blood
we are nourished to everlasting life, and made fat with God: by Penance we are
restored to our former rightwisnesse and goodness, if in case we fall after
Baptism: by extreme Unction we are made hole spiritually, and also
corporallye, if it be thought to God expedient to our souls. Al these five
Sacraments be ordained to begin or restore our ryghtwysnes, and to bring it
to perfytnesse for our salvation. The other two last be ordained for the
common state of the hole Church, as Matrymonye to increase and multiplye the
Church corporally by generation: and Order to multiplye the hole Church
spiritually by regeneration, and also by the ministry of Gods word,
Sacraments, and discipline, to rule and govern it, after the will of
almightye God. And where as the holy Scriptures in many places compare a man's
life to a war, Job. vii. i. Tim. i. ii, Cor* x*
we may very well by that same similitude, understand the number and
division of Gods Sacraments, and the true effect of the same. For Christ our
Lord and king, who has for us ouercommed the devil, the flesh, the world,
hell, death, and all his enemies and ours, laboreth to make all us for whom he
has prepared triumph, and the inheritance in the kingdom of heaven, to be
his soldiers, and by his power and help to fight against the said enemies,
and to overcome them in our own persons, and so to atteine the promised
reward.

The first thing that a worldly Prince does, intendinge to make war against
his enemy, is to muster and choose out his soldiers, and to take their
names, and to apparel the^ with his liuerye and badge, that they may be known
from the soldiers of his adversary. Even so Christ our chief captain by
Baptism has called and chosen out of all the people of this world which he
has holly redeemed, certain to be his soldiers to fight against his enemy
the devil, which soldiers thus called, have given their names to Christ their
king, and have renounced the service of their old master the devil, who was a
tyrant deliting only in their death, and have promised to serve only Christ
like true soldiers against the devil, and by this sacrament of Baptism are
pardoned and washed from their old spots of original sin, and have received
the white lyuerye of innocencye, and the badge of Christ by the impression of
the holy cross in diverse parts of their bodies, and so are known throughout
the holle world, to be the soldiers of Christ their Lord and Captain.

The second thing that a worldly prince does in his war, is to provide that
every soldier be able to fight, and have harnes and weapons mete for his
body, both to bear of the assaults of his enemies, and also to invade the^ as
cause shall require: Even so Christ our heavenly Prince has ordained the
sacrament of Confirmation, to make us strong and able to fight with our ghostly
enemies, and has armed us with a seven fold harnes, that is to say, with the
seven gifts of the holy ghost, whereby we be sufficiently preserved, defended,
and encouraged our selves, and also able to help and comfort our fellow
soldiers which by chance shall come into any distress or danger of their
enemies.

The third thing yt a worldly prince does in his war, is to forese and provide
that his hole army be well victualled and furnished with plenty of holsom meat
and drink, lest for hunger their strength decay, and they in process famish
and die: Even so Christ our spiritual captain has provided victual for us
his soldiers, both good and plenty of it, not meat that will perish and be
consumed with once eating, but meat that will remain and nourishe to
everlasting life, that is to say, his own natural flesh and blood, which he
gives to his soldiers in a Sacrament under the forms of corporal bread and
wine, condescendinge therein to our infirmity, and by that spiritual and most
wholesome and precious food, he repayreth all our decays in grace and
spiritual strength, he opens our eyes to see the traynes of our enemies, he
swageth the rage of our inward enemy the flesh, and preserves our bodies and
souls from famine and eternal death.

The fourth thing that a worldly Prince does in his war, is to ordeyne over
his holle army one chief lieuetenaunt (if he be absent him self from the
field) and under him officers and captains, some of moo, some of fewer, such
men as be expert in war, who can instruct the rest in all feats of war,
how to fight and overcome their enemies, and can set the holle army in good
array, and also can by the law martial correct and punish all traitors and
offenders. Even so Christ our Lord and king, after he has himself ouercommed
all his enemies in his own person, and is now triumphinge with God the father
in heaven, and yet has his Church in battle and conflicte with their
enemies in earth, being absent by his visible presence, and inuisibly and
spiritually present among us, has ordained the Sacrament of Order, and by that
Sacrament has elected and chosen out certain expert and connyng men, to whom
by imposition of hands of Priesthood, he has given authorite and
commandment to instruct his soldiers in all feats of spiritual war,
against the devil, and to admit other into the roumes of them that dye or
depart, and to comfort and encourage them that be in conflict, and by unity of
faith, charity, and obedience, to cause the holle army to keep good array,
and to punish by excommunication, such as by apostasy, heresye, or scisme,
break the peace and good order, and by the discipline of this war of the
church, to correct all other offenders, and to receive them again that will
amend. And of these men there be certain degrees and orders, one chief
Lieuetenaunt of the holle army which was S. Peter, and now is his lawful
successor in the chair of Christ, governing the holle army of Christ's Church
here in earth, and under him there be in every Province one Archebishoppe, and
in every City one Bishop, and in every Parish one Priest or Curate to
feed, order, encourage, and to govern the holle army and every soldiour of
Christ's church in every place.

The fifth thing that a worldly Prince does in his war, is when his army is
assembled, well armed, well victualled, and well ordered and ruled by good
captains, then to merche forward, and to join in battle with his enemies, in
which conflicte, if any of his soldiers chance to be hurt and wounded, then
to cause a Surgean to search his wounds, and to lay playsters and medicines
unto them, that he being made hole, might enter into his place again and fight
a fresh against his enenemyes. Chrisost. hom. v. in Mat. op. imperf.
Even so does our Savior Christ with us, when al we be assembled into one
Church and spiritual army by Baptism, and be well harnessed with Gods
graces, and the gifts of the holy Ghost by Confirmation, and be well
vyctualled with the precious foodes of his own body and blood in the
Sacrament of the Aultare, and be set in good array, and well instructed and
encouraged by the rulers and ministers of his church, having authority so to
do by the sacrament of Order: then we be led by Gods spirit into the
wyldernes of some good purpose or work, there to be tempted and assaulted of
the devil. For they that have the spirit of God, be not idle but occupied in
some good work, which the devil withstandeth and fights against, as much
as he is able to do. In which conflicte, if any of us be ouercommed with
evil, which can not be, except we will be ouercommed, and voluntarylye suffer
the devil to prevail against us (for no man synneth actually against his
will) yet our merciful Lord will not see us utterly trodden under foot and
slain, but if we love to be healed and be sorye for our voluntarye hurt and
wound, he has prepared a present medycine and plaster for us, which the
spiritual Surgean, when he has searched the wound by our own confession,
lays and byndeth to our sore by the Sacrament of Penance, and so restoringe
us to our perfect health, makes us able to enter the feelde again, and to
fight a fresh against our enemies.

The sixth thing that a worldly Prince does in his war, is when any of his
soldiers waxes aged and feeble, and ca^ fight no more, then specially to
comfort him, and to set a watch, that his enemies steal not privily upon him
and kill him, when he is not able to defend him self. And if the same soldiour
has lightly offended in any small matter, and has not at all times been so
vigilant as the laws of war required, yet than gentlye to forgive him, and
to show him that honor at his death, that he shall be of all the army accounted
to have been a faithful soldyoure, and to have dyed in his princes favor:
Even so Christ our Lord does with us his soldiers, when any of us waxes aged
or feable by sickness, and is in danger of bodily death, which death is the
escapinge of al dangers, the end of all labors, the entry to the possession
of eternal enheritaunce in heaven, which God promised to all his faithful
soldiers, and knowinge that our enemy the devil is most busye and fearce
than craftelye to assault his soldiour in his last conflicte, when he is lest
able to resist, because the body that corrupts and dies, does make heavy
the soul: than I say our savior Christ by the sacrament of extreme Unction,
does inwardlye anoynte the sick soldiour, whereby he does replenishe him with
grace, comfort, and strength of the holy Ghost, against the manyfolde and
violent tentations of the devil, and does releue his heart with spiritual joy
against the horror of death, and if he has lightly offended in any venyall
sin, he pardons him, and if he think it so expedient to his soul health,
he does also sometime releue his corporal dissease, and if not, yet he shows
him that honor, that he does and would the holle church should account him
as a faithful soldiour, and if he has not refused the benefit of his other
Sacraments, to have departed this transitorye life in his most gracious
favor, and to have changed the short and light afflictions of this time with
the weighty and everlasting glory in the kingdom of heaven.

The seventh and last thing that a worldly prince does, is if the time of
his war be prolo^ged and further continued, and many of his soldiers be
slain or departed, tha^ to provide that his army be fullye restored again
with some new and fresh soldiers, and to use them as he did the other before:
Even so does our Savior Christ, because all the time of this world is the
time of our battle and conflicte of our ghostly enemies, in which time a
great number of the soldiers of Christ depart out of this transitory life,
some in the favor of their prince, and so be rewarded, and some in his
displeasure, such as have fled traitorously to the devil their enemy, and have
turned their face against Christ their prince: therefore he has ordained the
sacrament of Matrimony, specially for this cause, to restore his army again,
that new men and women may be borne by generation in lawful conjunction and
chaste Matrimonye, of whom by Baptism and spiritual regeneration he might
choose and appoint out new soldiers to furnishe his army again, and to
fight in the place of them that be departed, during the time of his war which
is all the time of this present world. By this example and similitude of war,
I have declared unto you (good people) both the number of the Sacraments of
Christ's Catholyke church which be seven, and also generally the effects and
virtues of them all, and what fruit and benefit we take thereby.

Furthermore ye shall understand, that like as in a man there be two things,
Hugo vic. de sacra. li. i. part. ix. cap. ii.
a body and a soul, so in every Sacrament there be two things, one that is
outwardly seen, an other that is inwardly perceived and believed. The outward
visible thing is the element or matter of the sacrament, the inward inuisyble
and spyrituall thing is the grace and virtue of the Sacrament. The inward
grace is signified, contained and given, by the outward part of the Sacrament.
The graces of the Sacraments be spiritual, and ordained of God to heal the
sins of the soul of man, and because man principally did sin by the
consent of his reason, and yet took occasion to sin of the sensuality and
desire of his flesh: therefore has God tempered the medicine of his
Sacraments according to man's disease, that the chief part which is the
inward grace being spiritual, might be ministered to man in a sensible and
visible sign of a Sacrament, as it were a secret medicyne delivered to a sick
man in a visible glass or vessel, and such a vessel as does teach the
receyuer what is contained within it, and is also given by it. As for example,
the spiritual grace of regeneration is given to a man by the use of baptism,
whereby he understands by the property of the water, which is to wash
away the fylthe of the body, the nature of the inward grace which is the
washing and purgynge of the soul from all spots of sin and iniquity, so
that now the body by the receyuynge of the sensible sacrament, is made an
occasion for the soul, to rise from sin by receiving of the spiritual
grace, as in the beginning it was an occasion for the soul to fall to sin.
For which cause now the flesh is washed, Tertull. de resur. carnis.
that the soul might be purged, the flesh is anointed, that the soul might
be consecrate and hallowed, the flesh is marked and crossed, that the soul
might be armed and defended, the flesh is covered by imposition of hands,
that the soul might be lyghtned with the spyrite of God, the flesh is fed
with the body and blood of Christ, that the soul might be nourished and
made fat with God, and as these two be now joined in their works, so
shall they be afterward joined in rewards.

And although these marvelous graces and spiritual medicines be given unto
us by the Hugo. vi^. li. i. part. i^ cap. iii.
Sacraments, yet God is only the Author and geuer of them, who heals the
soul of man now joined with the body, with his spiritual grace ministered in
corporal signs and Sacraments: and it is not the outward visible things
that give that which is given by them, but God does give grace by them, that
commands us to seek grace in them. And this is the very difference between
the Sacraments of the old testament, August. in Psalm, lxxiii.
and of the new, that the old Sacraments did signifye and promise Christ the
Savior, and the new Sacraments do give the salvation, and the Sacraments
of the old testament did profit the fathers then, not by any virtue that was
in the sacraments, but only by the virtue and efficacye of their faith in
Christ to come, which was signified and promised by those sacraments. But the
Sacraments of the new testament do profit the receivers, not by the faith
and devotion either of the receivers, or of the minysters, (although faith and
repentance, and conuersyon to God and the preparation of the heart, and the
aptnes of the person be necessarily required in the receivers being of age and
discretion) but they profit by ye virtue which they have of the merits of
Christ's passion already suffered upon the cross, who uses them as
instruments of his grace and mercy, and has decreed to work infalliblye by
them such effects of grace as they signifye. And it is not the goodness or
noughtynesse of the minister that can further or hinder the virtue of the
Sacraments in working of their effects, for neither he that planteth, nor he
that waters is any thing, i. Cor. iii,
but God that gives the increase. Even as it makes no matter whether the
Phisicyan be sick or holle, August. in Ioa^. trac. v.
or whether the box be of silver or of woodde, so the medicine be apt and
good. For if theffect of the Sacrament did depend upon the goodness of the
Minister, which to men is unknown, then could not a man be sure of who^ to
receive, and should always be in doubt of the virtue of that he receives,
which no man may be. And although the true Sacraments of Christ may be
ministered and received out of the Catholic Church among heretics and
scismatikes: yet they can not be profitable to the receyuers, until they come
again to the unity of Christ's Catholic Church.

Wherefore (good people) let every man and woman that desires to be made
holle from his sin, or to be preserved or sanctified by Christ, and to be
pertaker of his blessed passion, prepare himself with all reverence and
humbleness of heart to receive these most holy Sacraments in such form,
and for such purpose and intent, as our Savior Christ and his blessed
Spowse the holy Catholyke Church have appointed and ordained, seeing that
otherwise to mysorder and abuse them, or wyllfullye to deny or refuse them,
is to deny or refuse Christ that made them, out of whose bloodye side they
came forth, and also to deny or refuse the benefyttes of his death and
passion which by them be applied and be brought into our souls. As the
reverent and worthy using of them is the mean to grace and salvation: Aug.
contra faustu^ lib. xix. cap. xi.
so the misusing or contempt of them is heinous and detestable sacrilege,
because with out them no religion can be perfyt, which perfitnes every man is
bounden to procure with all his diligence duringe the time of this present life,
that at thend thereof he might enjoy life everlasting, to the which he bring
us all, who has so derelye boughte it for us, to whom be all honor, praise,
and glory, world without end. Amen.

()

Of Baptism. Sermo secundus.
BEcause the holy Sacrament of Baptism is the first gate or entrye into the
Church of Christ, and the ground of all the other sacraments, which can not
be given to any, but to such as be baptized before: therefore (good people) I
shall now begin with Baptism, and declare unto you what ye ought to think of
it, and what fruit ye receive by it.

First it is to be known that our Savior Christ did institute and ordeine
this sacrament, when after his resurrection appearing to his disciples he
said to them: All power in heaven and in earth is given unto me, Mat. xxviii
go ye therefore and teach all nations and people, baptising them in the name
of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, and teaching them to
keep and observe all things which I have commanded you, and I am with you
always to the worlds end. By which words of our Savior Christ we learn,
that power is given only to him to institute and ordeine sacraments, which
the church receiving of him and of his spirit, does faithfully deliver unto
us, to be observed and used. And also we learn that the form and manner of
baptisynge, is to do as he commanded, and in so doing, to say these words: I
baptize the in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost.
And we learn also that Christ does by his promise assist the doing of his
minister, and woorketh the same effects by Baptism, when it is duly
ministered of a man, as if he did minister it himself. And last of al we learn
that Baptism is not an idle ceremony, but that every person which is
baptized, and being of age and discretion ought to be taught before the
faith of Christ, and to believe the same, and than after Baptism, ought
diligently to observe and keep all things which Christ has commanded. And
if they that be baptized be infants, or other wise can not believe themselves
lacking the use of their reason, Math. xix.
seeing our Savior Christ said that children perteyne to the kingdom of
heaven, and the door into the kingdom of heaven is baptism, at which door
no person can enter in ordinarily, but such as be borne again of the water and
the holy ghost: therefore such be offered to be baptized in the faith of the
church, and in receiving Baptism, they are made faithful by the sacrament of
faith, but of this thing I shall God wyllinge speak more an other time.

Secondarilye it is to be understood that Baptism ought to be ministered in
water, as Christ has ordained, and in no other licour, and that is, because
Baptism is a sacrament of necessity, and water is a common element throughout
the whole world, and therefore it is ordained to be ministered in water, that no
man might excuse himself for lack of matter, and so come in danger of
dampnation for lack of Baptism. And also it is ordained to be in water, for
sygnification of theffect that men might learn in this Sacrament, as they do
in all other, by the property of the element, what is the virtue and effect of
the same, Ambros. ad To. vi.
that like as water washes away the spots of the body, so baptism wassheth
away the sins of the soul, and also because the general floode in the time
of Noe, and the red sea, through which Moses and all the people of Israel
went, and thereby escaped the danger of king Pharao that persecuted them, i.
Pet. iii. i. Cor. x.
were figures of baptism: therefore it is ordained to be in water, that the
truth might agree with the figure, and gods people might be now saved from
the devil, and drowning in deadlye sin, Ephe. v.
by the water of regeneration joined with the word of life, as Noe and his
children were saved by the water of the floode and his ship, and as Moses with
Gods people were saved from the sword of Pharao by the water of the red sea and
the cloud. Aug. trac. lxxx. Ambros. de spu^s. lib i. cap. vi. De Sacrament.
lib. i cap. v.
Yet the grace that is ministered in the water, proceeds not from the nature of
the water, which without the word of God, is but only water still, but it
proceeds from the presence of the holy ghost, that descends upon the water,
and does consecrate the water, and by it does wash and purifye the soul.

Thyrdlye, it is to be known, that a man by the virtue and efficacy of
Baptism truly ministered and received, is washed from all kind of sin,
endued with Gods holy spirit, appareled with Christ and his ryghtwysnesse,
and is made with Christ an inheritour of the kingdom of heaven.

First, baptism washes away all sins, in thoughts, Aug. lib. iii co^tra
pela. ii. epist. cap. iii.
in words, and in deeds both oryginall sin, and actual, or personal sin,
which be done either of ignorance or knowledge, both the sin it self, and
the giltynes thereof and also the eternal pain in hell due for the same, as the
prophet says: In that day (of Christ) there shall be a fountain set open to
the house of Jacob, Zacha. xiii
and to all the inhabitauntes of Jerusalem for the washinge away of sins.
And Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, i. Cor. vi.
that they were great and heinous sinners, but now they be washed, they be
sanctified, they be justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in
the spirit of our God, and that there is no dampnation now remayninge to them
that be in Christ, Romans viii.
and walk not after the flesh. And although original sin, both in infantes
and all other, be taken away by Baptism and fully remitted, so that in them
that be baptized duly as they ought to be, no sin remains, nor no other
thing that does offend and displease God, but that the infection which every
person takes by carnal generation from the first earthlye man Adam, is now
washed and clean purged by spiritual regeneration, in the blood of the
second heavenly man Christ our Savior: yet it is to be understand, that
there remains in every person after Baptysme a certain infirmitye or
inclinatyon to sin, which is commonly called concupiscence of the flesh,
whereby a man is made weak and less able to wythstande sin, and his
appetite is much inclyned to sin, which though it be sometimes called by
the name of sin as a man's writing is called his hand, Romans vii.
and his speech is called his tongue, yet it is not sin and hateful to God,
nor imputed to us as sin, so long as our will does not consent unto it, but
by grace withstandeth it, and God has suffered it to remain in our flesh, not
that we should obey it, and be ruled by it, but that we should resyst and
fight against it, which is left in us for our exercise as an inward familiar
enemy, making continually civil war against us, which if we by the aid of
Gods grace and his holy sprite do finally overcome and subdue, shall be a
matter and occasion of our great glory, and everlasting reward. And that we
may so do, God as he has by this sacrament of baptism forgiven us all
sin, so by the same sacrament he does give us special grace to overcome
sin* and to suppress this bitter root of sin, that it spring not and
bring forth in us the wicked fruit of sin, making us more able to
wythstand the carnal lusts and desires of our flesh, than is any other man
that was never baptized.

The next effect of Baptism after remission of sin, is our spiritual
regeneration in that we are borne again of the water and the holy Ghost,
and made new men in ryghtwisnesse and holiness, and by adoption are made
Sons and Children of allmyghtye GOD, as Saint Paul says: Titus. iii.
God according to his mercy has saved us by the water of regeneration or new
birthe and the renewing of the holy spirit, which he has poured upon us
abundantly, by Jesus Christ our savior, that we being justified by his
grace, might be heirs by hope of eternal life. For like as a foul vessel if
it be never so well washed and scoured, Chrysostom. ho. ad bapti^^ndos.
yet it will keep still some mark or taste of the evil humor which was in it
before, but if the vessel be put again into the furnace, and be there with the
flame renewed, it will have no sent remaining of the old corrupt licour: even
so God does put us into the fountain of water as it were into a furnace, and
with the grace of his holy spirit as it were with the flame of a fire does
renew us and make us bryghter then the sun beams. And as we were borne when
we came forth of our mothers womb: even so we are borne again when we
come forth of the water of baptism, whereby God has delivered us from the
power of darkness, Coloss. i.
and has translated us into the kingdom of his well-beloved son, and has of
his own will begotten us by the word of truth, Jacob. ^.
and of him we have received the spirit, not of bondage to fear him as a
tyrant, but the spirit of adoption of the children of God, by which as being
now chosen to be his children, Romans viii.
we louinglye and with humble reverence call him father, which spirit also
bears witness with our own spirit that we be the children of god, if we
suffer with him, that we might likewise be gloryfyed with him.

The third effect of Baptism after remission and regeneration, is to be
appareled and cladde with Christ and his rightwisnes. For like as when a
child is first borne, than has he a coat put upon him to cover his nakedness,
and to anour^e him: so when we be borne again of the water and the holy
ghost, we have a spiritual coat put upon us, Gala, iii.
which is our Savior Christ as S. Paul says: All you that be baptized in
Christ, have put on Christ as a garment, which garment covers the deformity
of our corrupt nature, defends us from the storms of all te^tations, and
makes nothing appear in us but the image of Christ, in godly and virtuous
conversation. For like as a table being made plain and smoth, Basilius de
baptismo.
and having the picture of the kings image prynted in it, is esteemed of all men
not according to the value of the matter be it gold or silver, but according
to the conninge workmanship, in that it lively represents the very face of
the king, and therefore causes the lookers on to honor it and to be in love
with it: even so a man that has by baptism put of his old man with his acts
and corrupt living, Coloss. iii.
and has put on the new man which is made new in the knowledge of God and
in rightwisnes and holiness of truth in that part of his soul where the image of
God is printed, Ephe* iiii.
by turning his love hollye from temporal and carnal things to eternal and
spyrytuall things above, is now much esteemed of almighty God, and accepted of
him as a louinge child, because in all his conversation he is made like to the
image of Christ and follows Christ's footesteppes that did no sin, i. Peter.
ii.
nor no deceypte was found in his mouth, and so has put on Christ, in that
his faith is imputed to him as rightwisnes.

The fourth effect of baptism after remission of sin and the making of us
the children of God by our new birthe and the apparelling of us with the
rightwisnes of Christ, is to be made heirs of God and of his heavenly
kingdom, and fellow heirs with our savior Christ, as saint Paul says: If we
be the children of God (by Baptism) we be also the heirs of God, Romans viii.
and fellow heirs with Christ, which inheritance we have not yet in full
possession, but only by hope of eternal life. And as Christ Gods son by
nature came to his inheritance by suffering his passion: Ti^us. iii.
so our hope shall be sure, that if we suffer with Christ, and patiently bear
the afflictions of this world, Romans viii.
and forbear, and contemn the vanities of the same, we shall without fail
enjoy gods inheritance with Christ as Gods children, for whom the same
inheritance was prepared before the beginning of the world.

Many mo effects of baptism I might rehearse unto you, seeing all other graces
take their beginning here, and be builded upon it, but in these four which I
have rehearsed, they may be considered as how in baptism we are made fre from
sin, August. lib. i* cont. Iulia^um.
we are sanctified by grace, we are made just men by ryghtwisnes, we are
made Gods children by adoption, we are made heirs of the kingdom of heaven,
we are made fellow heirs with Christ gods son, we are made members of
Christ's mistical body, we are made the house and temple of God, we are made
the instruments of the holy ghost, we are grafted in Christ to grow and to
bring forth the fruit of sanctification, and to receive the reward of our
fruit everlasting life. All these graces almightye God works by baptism, as
by a peculiar instrument for that purpose in the hearts of al infants, that by
the Church and in the faith of the church be offered to God and baptized,
where nothing of the infantes party does stop the grace of the sacrament. But
if he that is baptized be of age and discretion having the use of his reason,
it is required necessarilye of him before baptism to have faith and
repentance of his former noughtie living* as Christ says: Mark. ^vi
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not,
shall be condemned, and as S. Peter says: Acts. ii.
Do penance and be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ in
remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost.
Whereby we learn that the lack of true faith and repentance do stop the
grace of the Sacrament, that it can take no place in the heart of him that has
the use of his reason when he is baptized, and yet the baptism is good and
may not be ^^erate and given again, although it be unfruitful to the
receyuer at that time, till afterward he receive by true faith and penance
and imposition of hands, the gift of the holy ghost.

Thus (good people) when we have considered what we ought to think of
baptism, and what fruit we receive by it, now our duty is to put the same
in practice all our life time, and to live so, that this good work be not in
vain bego^ne in us, and to show our selves thankful for so great a treasure
and so preciouse a Jewel given unto us, and to labor and pray diligently that
Gods spirit given unto us in baptism be not driven away by our noughty
living, but that his grace in our hearts be daily continued and more increased,
that by the virtue thereof, the rightwysnes of the law might be fulfilled in
us that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, till this mortal
nature of ours put on immortality, in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with the father and the holy ghost be all honor and glory Amen.

Of the necessity of Baptism, and the ministers of the same. Ser. iii.
THe necessity of baptism (good people) is known by the plain words of
our savior Christ, who said to Nicodemus that came to him in the night:
Except a man be borne again of the water and the holy ghost, John. iii.
he can not enter into the ^^ngdome of God. Whereby we learn that no man is
incorporate to Christ, and made one body with him, but he that is baptized if
he may be baptized. And S. Philippe also declaring that baptism is a Sacrament
of necessity for salvation, Acts. viii.
when he had fully taught the Eunuch the faith of Christ, whose heart was
replenished and fulfilled with the holy ghost, did not cease there, but to
show the necessity of baptism when they came to water, Philipp^ went down
from the charyote with the Eunuch, and did baptize him and let him go. And S.
Peter likewise preaching the faith of Christ to Cornelius and his family and
friends, Acts. x. Chryso. in loa^. hom* x^iiii.
when he perceived that the holy ghost did inspire their hearts with his grace
before baptism, was not content only with that, but to declare the
necessity of water, said: Can any man forbydde water, that these men should
not be baptized that have received the holy ghost as we have.

Therefore be a man never so well instructed in the knowledge of Christ's
relygyon, yet he bears the burden of his iniquity, Aug. tract xiii. super.
Ioa^nem.
which shall not be forgeuen him, but when he shall come to baptism if it may
be had. And children which be borne in origynall sin, and therefore be the
children of Gods anger and dyspleasure, can not be saved and delivered from
their sin, but by the water of regeneratyon, and this is true, whether they
be borne of faithful parents, or unfaithful, for what so ever is borne of
the flesh, Io^n. iii. Romans v.
is flesh, and like as by one man Adam, sin came into the world, and by
sin death, and so death came upon all men that sinned in Adam: even so by
the ryghtwysnesse of one man Jesus Christ, grace came into the world, and by
grace life, in whom many be made ryghtwyse, which ryghtwy^nesse only they
have that have put on Christ by Baptism.

And yet (good people) it is to be understand that this general rule has
but two exceptions, Aug lib. iiii. de baptismo. cap. xxii*
which be Martyrdom, and conuersyon of the heart by faith, when Baptism can
not be had. For Martyrdom which is to suffer death for Christ's cause, or
in the quarrel of Christ, does supplye the steed of Baptism, both in those
that be children, and also in those that be of age, Aug. lib. xii. de ciui.
cap. vii.
when only necessity and not contempt excludes the Sacrament, as our
Savior Christ says: He that confesses me before men, I shall also
confess him before my father which is in heaven, and he that loses his life
for me, shall find it: so that whosoever can not receive the Sacrament of
regeneratyon, but dies before for the confession of Christ, it is as much
auaylable to the remission of his sins, as if they were washed away by the
holy fountain of baptism. For who doubts but that the holy Innocents
whom the wicked king Herod slew for Christ, Bernard. Sermon. de Innocentibus.
are numbered among the Martyrs of God, who made a good confession of Christ,
not by their mouths, but by sheddinge of their blood for him.

Likewise, he that has his heart fullye converted to GOD by true and lyuelye
faith, and can not be baptized in water, Hug. vict. De Sacra. Lib ii. par.
vi. cap. vii.
but is prevented by death before, is in that case excused, for not having
Baptism. For Christ says: He that believes in me, shall not see death for
evermore. And where faith is, where hope is, where charity is, where the full
and perfytte virtue of Baptism is, there salvation can not lack, if the
Sacrament be had in purpose and will, and can not be had in deed.

So that we see that Children have but one remedy to supply the lack of
baptism, which is Martyrdom, and they that have the use of reason, have two
remedies, both Martyrdom, and also the full conversion of the heart by lyuelye
faith, and that only in time of need, when the Sacrament, not of contempt,
but of necessity can not be had.

And because this Sacrament is of such necessity: therefore the ministration
of it is not extended to such a small number as it is in other, for of the
other sacraments the minister ought at lest to be a priest, saving in
Matrimony, which the two parties may contract between themselves, but in
baptism the ministration is not only reserved to priests and to deacons in
the absence of the pryestes, but is also permitted to lay men and lay women,
that be faithful themselves, if extreme necessity so require. And if there be
no necessity nor danger of the death of the child, Thom. Aquin part. iii. q.
lvii.
and yet lay persons do take upon them to minyster this Sacrament (which
perte^neth not to them to do, but in time of need,) al^h^ugh they themselves
do sin in that doing, for their presumption, where need compelled not, yet
the child is truly baptized, and may not in any wise be baptized again.

And because it often chances that children newborn be in danger of death,
and so be baptized of the Mydwyues or of other women at home: therefore I will
show unto you how they must do when they will minister the said Sacrament of
baptism.

First when the child is borne (for the child that is not borne, but yet in
his moothers womb, can not be borne again by Baptism, till he be once borne)
if there come a chance or danger that v^rely they think it will not live til
it be brought to the sole^nization of baptism, than a lay man, or lay woman
in that need going about to baptize the child, must unfeignedly intend to do
therein that the Catholyke Church of Christ does, and taking some honest name
as John or Thomas, or some other, if it be a man child, and if it be a woman
child, then taking Ione, or Katheryne, or such like, let the person that
shall christen the child, take water, as well water, sea water, Ide^ part.
iii. que. lx* and, lxvi.
or rain water, or other common water, (for no other lycour, as oil, blood,
wine, Rose water, or other artificial water can be the matter of this
Sacrament.) And than let the Christener begin to cast or pour the water upon
the childs head, calling it by the name they give it, saying thus: John I
baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen. And if it be a woman child, than let the Christener say thus,
calling it by the womans name: Ione I baptize thee in the name of the father,
and of the son, and of the holy ghost* Amen.

Now that man or woman that thus does say, and cast or pour water upon the
chyldes naked head in the time that he is saying the foresaid prescripte
words, does mynyster well this Sacrament of baptism in the time of need.
And let the Christener take heed that he leave out none of those prescripte
words, nor change none of them, nor add no more to them, and also let
him remember to cast or to pour water upon the chyldes naked head in the
time before he make an end of those foresaid words: John I baptize. etc. For
if the water be cast upon the chyldes head before the Christener begins
to say those words or else after that he has said the words, than the
child is not christened. For the words without the water is no Sacrament,
nor can do no good, nor yet the water without the words, and therefore
they must be joined and go both together after the manner before said.

Moreover ye must note that there may not two persons do these two
foresaid things, that is to say, one may not speak these words, John I
baptize thee. etc. and an other pour the water upon the child in the mean
time, and whiles the words be in saying, for if they do, then is the child
not Christened, and therefore it must be but one person that must both say
the words without any long interruption or pawse, and pour on the water.

Dionisius Ateop. Hier. eccl. cap. ii. Cypri. li. i. epist. xii.
And where as the water of Baptism has been used ever since the time of the
Apostles in Christ's church to be hallowed and sanctified by the Priests
prayer and invocation of Gods holy spirit by the sign and mysterye of
Christ's cross, and in the name of the holy Trinity, and by the infusion of
the holy oil into it, that by the use of it, the sins of him that is
baptized might be washed away, and he made clean: yet in the time of need
and of sodeyne danger when such hallowed water can not be had, other clean
and common water will suffice.

Furthermore, like as the holy Ghost came down from heaven in the baptism
of Christ, Mark. i.
when he was baptized by John, and visiblye rested upon Christ, declarynge
the fullness of all grace to be in him, and all grace to proceed from him:
even so we be taught, that always when this Sacrament is duelye received and
ministered in the name of the holy Trinity, the holy Ghost descends from
above, and does inuisiblye rest upon him that is Baptized, and woorketh
special grace in his heart to obey GOD and his commandments. And as the
father of heaven by his voice which he sent from heaven, testyfyed that
Christ was his wellbeloued Son, in whom he was well pleased: so our
heavenly father in this Sacrament testifies to his conscience that is
baptized, that he is his louinge child, and that nothing is in him that is
dyspleasinge to God.

Wherefore (good people) considering that this Sacrament of Baptysme is of
such necessitye, that no child (except the case of Martyrdom) can be saved
and enter into the kingdom of GOD, but by it, because every one being borne
in orygynall sin, and so the child of Gods anger by his natyuitye, can not
be partaker of the promise of saluatyon, and have the merytes of Christ's
passion applied to him, but either by his proper faith, or else by the
Sacrament of faith, and seeing that young Infantes have not the use of their
reason and will, whereby they may understand the doctrine of our faith, and
so believe them selves in their own persons: therefore if ye will have your
children come to Christ, as he commanded they should be brought to him,
Mark. x.
and rebuked them that forbadde them to be brought, and promised the
kyngedome of God to the only followers of thinnocencye of children, whom he
embraced and laid his hands upon them: ye must procure with all your
diligence to have your children brought to baptysme, and to receive the
Sacrament of faith, whereby they be set in the state of salvation, and be
made partakers of Christ's merytes. Let not your children for your negligence
accuse you in the last day for the loss of their salvation, which they
might have had by baptism, if ye had showed your full endeavor.

And least any man should excuse him self for lack of matter or of a
Minister, or of doctrine: God and his holy Church has ordained Baptism to
be ministered in water, which is an element not far to seek any where, and
has permytted that in time of need any man may be minister of it, and for
lack of them any wooman, yea the very moother of the child if case so
required, and for doctrine, a little suffyseth, for the form of the Sacrament
consists but in three or four words which be soon learned. And like as
children were made giltye of original sin and dampnation for an other man's
fault: so they may be reconciled again to God and have remission of sin in
Baptism by other men's faith. For which cause every child that is Baptized
professes Christ's faith by the mouth of the church which is represented by
the godfathers and godmothers, and likewise makes his covenant with God to
renounce the devil and all his works and vain pompes. And therefore all you
that have been or shall be Godfathers and Godmothers by offringe of children
to Christ by Baptism in the name and faith of the Church which you
represente, Aug. de temp. s^r. cxvi.
and by aunswering for the children, have made your selves sureties for the
same: take heed to your charge, that when the said children shall be hable to
take knowledge, ye teach, or procure them to be taught, that faith and
professyon which they have made by you, and to be exhorted dyligentlye to
live a Godly and virtuous life according to that professyon which they have
made in their Baptism by you, and to observe the commandments of God and
all things which they have promised and vowed by you, so that both you and
they might pass over the time of this present life in the well vsinge of
Gods graces given in Baptysme, labouringe daily to continue and to increase
the same in the fear and love of GOD and good works, that at the end and
term thereof ye may attain the crown of rightousnesse which God will give
as he has promised to all them that love him, to whom be al praise, honor and
glory for evermore. Amen.

Of the ancient and Godly Ceremonies pertaining to Baptism, and what is meant
and taught by them. Ser. iiii.
IN Baptism (good people) beside the very ministracion of it, which
consists in speakinge of a few formal words over the child baptized by the
minister of God and in dippinge the same child the same time in the Element of
water, or in time of need by powrynge water upon him, which two things be
required of necessitye to the true mynystracion of this Sacrament: there be
also other Ceremonies used which be called Sacramentalles, and have been used
universally throughoute the holle Church of Christ from the Apostles time
till this day, and were ordained to be used, partly against the power of the
devil, partly for the devotion and instructyon of us and them that be
baptized, for that cause I think it good to declare unto you at this time,
which be those Godly and ancient Ceremonies of baptism, and what is mente and
taught by them.

The first Ceremonye which is called Exorcisme, is done without the Church
door, because the child that is brought to be baptized, is as yet no part of
Christ's catholic Church, but the child of Gods wrath by his natiuitye
conceived in sin, and is under the power of the devil till he be admytted
into the Church of Christ by baptysme, and be made a membre of the same
Church by regeneration and the renewing of the holy spirit, Aug. epist. cv. De
simbolo. l^* i. ca. i. Contra ^^lianu^ lib. i. cap. ii.
for which cause, the holy Church universally and after one manner uses
first of all this exorcisme, which is an adiuration of the devil in the name
and power of the holy Trinity to depart from that creature of God which he
possessed before, whereby the child is delivered from the power of the devil
that stops him all that he can from the Sacrament and the grace of the same,
Aug. de eccles. dog. ca. xxxi. Joan. xii. Luc. xi.
and is prepared to be translated and brought into the kingdom of Christ.
Here plainly appears how the prince of this world is cast forth, and how
the strong prince is bound, and his vessels bereafte from him, and brought
into the possession of the stronger conqueror that has taken captive the
captivity it self, Ephesians. iiii.
and has given gifts to men. Like as king Pharao in Egypt oppressinge the
people of Israel with importable works and kepinge them in thraldom and
slauerye, and not suffringe them to depart from Egipte at the message of God by
Moses and Aaron, Exodus xx.
was sondrye and diverse ways plaged by almightye God, and yet still did
obstinately withstand God, till he and all his army was drowned in the read
Sea: even so the devil kepinge in bondage and thraldom the reasonable
creatures of god, is continually plaged and scourged by these exorcismes and
adiuracions, in the power and name of God, and yet he being obstynate in his
malycyous tyranny, does not wholly dismysse and suffer the said creatures of
GOD to depart out of his dominion till they come to the water of Baptism
(whereof the read Sea was a figure) and there is he overthrown, i. Cor. x.
and the child baptized set at lybertye by the mighty hand of God, to
serve him all the days of his life. In this exorcisme there be used diverse
things. First the party that is baptized gives his name to Christ, either
by him self, if he be of age, or by his Godfathers and Godmothers, as
representing the Church, whereby we be taught, that he renounceth utterly the
devil his former possessour, and now gives his name to be taken as a
soldier of Christ, and to be from henceforth under his dominion and
obedience. So long as he remained in the possession of the devil, he bare no
name, but as soon as the name of GOD is called upon over him, than he takes
a name, and begins too be written in the book of life. Next the geuinge
of the name, the child baptized, is marked with the sign of the cross in
diverse parts of his body, whereby we understand that now he is received into
the army of Christ, and takes his souldyours coat and his badge upon him,
which is the cross of Christ, under which he professes to make war
against the devil duringe his life. Which cross the devil fears
marueylouslye because he was once beaten and ouercommed with that rod, and as
God when he plagued the Egiptians, would not suffer the Angel to kill any
person, Exodus xii.
nor yet to enter into the house, but to pass by the house, where the blood
of the Paschall lamb was sprynkeled upon both the posts of the door: even
so the devil that is the destroyinge Angel dare not come nere to kill, but
flies from him that professes to fight under the cross, Mark. viii.
and so in very deed takes his cross upon him and follows Christ. The like
is showed in the Prophet Ezechiell, Ezech. ix.
how that all they in the city of Jerusalem that were marked with the letter
taff. T. in their forehead, (which is the very sign and prynte of the
cross) were saved and delivered from the plague and sword of Gods Angel. And
this sign of the cross, is marked upon the chyldes foreheade, Aug. in Psalm.
xxx.
as in the place and seat of shamefastness, to thyntente he should never be
ashamed to be a Christian, and to follow the doctrine and word of the cross,
which was an offense to the Jews, and thought foolishness to the Gentiles:
but to us and all them that be saved it is the virtue, i. Cor. i.
the power, and the wisdom of GOD. The same sign also is marked upon the
chyldes eyes, whereby we be taught that he is elected and prepared to see GOD
in this world by true faith, and in the next world to see him face to face
in the fruition of his glory.

His ears be also sygned with the cross, declaringe that he is now dedycate
to GOD, to hear his word and to learn the truth of his Catholyke doctrine,
and to obey the same in his lyuinge, and to stop his ears from the hearing
and beleuinge of error and the false doctrine of Heresy. ii. Corin. ii.
Likewise his nose is sygned with the cross, to thyntente he should always
remember to live so, that his doings and works be a sweet savor to
almyghtye God. Moreover his breast and mouth be sygned with the cross, that
by the virtue thereof he should conceive and believe in his heart the true
faith of Christ to his righteousness, Romans ^.
and should with his mouth speak and confess the same faith to his
salvation, without fear of any danger or trouble that might worldly come
to him thereby. And last of all his shoulders be signed with the cross, to
the intent he should take upon him to bear the sweet yocke and light
burden of Gods service, according to the commandment of our Savior
Christ, saying: take my yoke upon you, and learn to be meke and humble in
heart, Mat. xi.
and ye shall find quietness and rest in your souls. After the sign of the
cross, follows the Ceremonye of puttinge salt in the childs mouth, whereby
is signified that the child is prepared and made the salt of our lord, Origin.
hom. vi.i^a Ezechiele^*
and a sweet vessel to receive into it the salt of gods heavenly wisdom, of
his spiritual grace, by the presence of gods holy spirit and that all his
words and deeds ought to be sauourye and well seasoned with the said
heavenly wisdom and grace, not putrifyed by the worms of sin, nor yet
smellinge evil by the corruption and poison of abominable iniquity. After
this, like as our savior Christ when he healed the deaf and dombe manne,
Marc. vii.
he put his fingers into his ears, and with his spittle touched his mouth
and said, Be thou opened: even so after that manner, the Priest in the person
of Christ does open the ears and touch the nose of the child that is borne
spiritually deaf and dombe, Ambros. lib. i. de Sacra. cap. i.
that he should now begin to hear the voice and word of GOD, and to obey
his most holy commandments, having the ears of his heart opened to
understand and approve that which is the good, well pleasinge, and perfyte
will of GOD, and also that he should have discretion by the openinge of his
inward smellinge to discern the good smell of life from the evil smell of
death, Romans xii.
and to receive the sweet savor of Gods knowledge by the virtue of the
incarnacion of Gods son (which is signified by his spittle, ii. Cor. ii.
) and to think continuallye upon such things as be true, chaste, Col. iiii.
just, holy, and of good name and fame, and that the power and illusions of
the wicked spirit the devil might be restrained, and that the grace of GOD
might be given to the child, whereby the spiritual effects and all that is
taught and signified by these Godly Ceremonies might be wrought in the
childs soul: The Priest with them that represent the whole Church say the
Pater noster, and make their most humble prayer to almightye GOD, and in
spirit and truth do call upon his name, and after all these things done
without the door of the Visible Church, whereby is sygnifyed the true Church
and mystical body of Christ, out of which the child remains till he be
baptized: at last they enter into the Church, and bring the child to the
fountain of baptism, and there is made the solemn league and covenant
between GOD and man. First the league and vow of the man's part with God,
Tertul. corona milit. Chrysostom. ho. vi. ad coll. Aug. simbolo. li. iii. cap. i.
when he voluntarily by three solemn professions, renounceth the devil and
all his works, and all his pomp and pride. The pompes of the devil be the
unlawful desires that defyle the soul, as the desires of the flesh, the
desires of the eyes, and the ambition of the world.

He that will overcome the world, must overcome these three things which
be in the world, and thereby shall he overcome the devil that by persuasion
of these three deceived the world. On the other side the league of Gods part
with man, is to remytte his sins, to receive him as his son, to endue him
with his holy spirit, and to bring him to eternal salvation. This league and
covenant is never broken of Gods part, but whosoever believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, which promise of our savior Christ is ever
fulfilled, Marc. ^vi.
except the man break his vow and promise before by seruinge the devil and
doing his works, and so finally loose by sin the grace which is given unto
him in baptism. After this league made, the child is anointed with oil upon
the breast, to the intent he should understand when he comes of age, that the
holy ghost (which is signified by the oil) should always possess his heart
by faith, and always dwell in that heart by charity as in a holy temple, ever
in all aduersytyes comfortinge it with the oil of spiritual joy and gladness:
and he is also anointed in the back, that he should understand, that the same
faith which he has received into his heart, ought to be exercised with good
works to the glory of god and the edifyinge of his neighbor. And so is he
anointed as a champion of Christ, as one that even than enters into the
battle of this world, Ambros. lib. i. de Sacra. cap. i.
to fight with the devil and al his wicked Angels. And because Christ said,
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, therefore the party that is
brought to be baptized, is inquired and asked what he believes concerning the
holy Trinitye and all the other artycles of our common Creed, and if he be of
age and dyscretion, he professes his own faith in his own person, without
the which professyon he may not be admytted to the holy Sacrament of
baptism. And this form was always observed in the beginning of the church,
when men of perfyte age were baptized, but after that the multitude of the
Gentiles were converted to the faith of Christ, the holy Church prouydinge
for the salvation of their children, which can not be saved but by
regeneracion of the water and the holy ghost has ever used to baptyse them
in the Sacrament of faith, Aug. ad Bonifaciu^ de baptismo.
that like as they were alyenated from GOD by an other man's sin: so they
might be reconcyled again to GOD by other men's faith. So that the holy
Church our mother answers and professes the true faith for the children,
and make the promise for them, till they may understand that faith, and keep
that vow which is made in their names by the Church their mother. Than after
the professyon of this faith, the party is asked whether he will be
baptized or no, because no man having the use of his will is saved without
the consent of his will, and when he answers or it is answered for him,
that he will: than is he put into the water thryse, and baptized in the name
of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, in which thing
consysteth the great mysterye or Sacrament of baptysme, Tertul. de resur.
carnis.
where the flesh is washed and the soul made clean, where the inward man is
made new, and Christ is fourmed in the mind of man, Eusebius. Emis, orat. de
corp. and sang. Romans vi.
where the devil the old tyrante and usurper is driven away, and god the
right owner and possessor is brought in: Than are we (as saint Paul says)
buried with Christ by baptism into death, that as he rose from death by the
glory of the father, so we should likewise walk in a new life. Whereby we
understand, that like as Christ dyed, and rose again the third day, and
lives evermore: so every man when he renounceth the devil he dies to sin,
and kylleth the works of the flesh in him self, and when he is dipped and
put under the water, than is he buried to sin as Christ was put within the
earth in the sepulcher, and when he is thrice put under the water, he
represents the three days of Christ's buryall, Gregorius li. i. epis. xli
and when he is taken forth of the water again, than does he rise a new
manne, as Christ rose out of the Sepulcher, and ought to dye no more by
seruinge of sin, but to live continuallye in righteousness and holiness all
the days of his life.

And although the old and ancient tradition of the Church has been from the
beginning, to dippe the child three times in the water, Gregorius vbi supra.
as Christ lay three days in his grave: yet that is not of such necessity
but that if he be butte once dipped in the water, it is sufficyente, yea, and
in time of great peril and necessytie, if the water be but powered upon his
head, it will suffyse. Now when the baptism is done, the child is anointed
in the crown of the head with the holy Chrisme, whereby we be taught that he
is by the Unction of the holy spirit, incorporated and grafted into Christ
who is the head of his mistical body the Church, and there is he anointed and
made a spiritual King to rule and overcome his own carnal affections, and
also is anointed and made a spiritual priest to offer up spiritual sacrifyces
to God in a pure heart, and so he takes of this holy Chrisme and of Christ,
the name of a Christen man, Aug. in Joan. tract* xxxiii. Ambros. de Sacra. Lib.
i. cap. vii.
being anointed into everlasting life, which he is bounden to seek and procure
all the means he can, although it were with the loss and spending of this
temporal life here. And by and by after he be anointed with the holy
Chrisme, he has a white vesture or Chrisome put upon him, which declares
that the child has now put of the foul and filthy cloutes of sin, and
has put on the chaste garmente of Innocencye and clennesse of a new life,
which he ought with all dylygence to keep undefiled and to present it
before the judgment seat of Christ, Ambros. de iis qu^ mist. initi^ antur.
cap. vii.
for thatteyninge of eternal life. And also a wax candle burninge is put in
his hand, whereby is sygnifyed the light and truth of Christ's doctrine, and
that his duetye is to fulfill that in his life, which Christ taught in his
Gospel, saying: Let your light shine so before men, Math. ^^
that they may see your good works and glorifye your father which is in
heaven, and he that preserves and keeps this candle unquenched till the day
of our lord, shall among the five wise virgins, enter in with the spouse to
the heavenly marriage. Man. xxv.
Thus I have declared unto you (good people) all the ceremonies used from the
beginning of Christ's Church universally in the ministracion of baptism, and
what is meant and signified by them, whereby we know perfitely both the effects
of baptism, and also the duty of him that is baptized, which I pray you
and exhort you in gods name both to remember your selves, and also to teach
your children them as soon as they can understand, and among all other,
specially that solemn couenaunte, promise, and vow, which they have made
for the renouncinge of the devil, Aug. de simbolo. lib. iiii. ca. i.
his works, and all his pomp and pride, teach them that this promise is
made, not to an earthlye man, but to God almightye and all his holy angels,
who has power to destroy and cast into hell both body and soul of him
that keeps not his promise, and teach them to renounce and forsake the
devil, not in words only, but in their deeds, not in the sound of their
tongue, but in all their conversation, and teach them that they have to do
in their conflicte with an old craftye and mighty enemy, against whom if
they prevail as they can not without their own great diligence, and the
special aid of Gods holy spirit (whereof they be always sure): than will
GOD keep his part of the league and promise, that is to say, he will save them
by grace in this world, and by the fruicion of his glory in the next world,
through the merits of Christ his son, to whom with the holy ghost be al
glory and praise. Amen.

Of the Sacrament of Confirmation. Ser. v.
AFter that a man by receiving the Sacrament of baptism is born again, and
made a member of Christ's mystical body: it is ordained by our savior Christ
and his holy spirit, that he should also receive the Sacrament of
Confirmation, and thereby be confirmed and made strong in that grace which he
received before, for which cause I think it good at this time (good people) to
declare unto you what ye ought to think of that Sacrament of Confirmation, and
what spiritual grace and effect it woorketh in his soul that is confirmed,
and what is every man's duty to do that has received it. We ought to
think that our savior Christ did institute this Sacrament concerning the
grace and effect of it, first when he did promise to send to his disciples
the holy ghost, and also when he did perform the same promise by giving to
them the holy ghost. John. xv. Act. ii.
Many times did he promise to send the holy ghost, but specially a little
before his ascencion, when he said: I shall send unto you my fathers promise,
but remain you in the city till ye be endued with strength and power from
above. And again he said, ye shall receive the virtue of the holy ghost
coming upon you, Luc. xxiiii*
and ye shall be witnesse^ of me in Hierusal^m, and in all Jury and Samaria,
even to the worlds end. This promise he performed upon Whitsonday when the
holy ghost came down and rested upon the Apostles in a visible sign as in
fyerye tongues, whereby we may understand, that as the Apostles were confirmed
immediately by the holy ghost him self without the ministracion of any minister:
eue^ so the same grace and strength is given by the sacrament of Co^firmacion
to us all that be baptized before, according to ye measure of gods gift. Which
thing is proved manifestly by the doings of the Apostles. For when they herd
tell that the Samaritanes had received the word of god, and were baptized by S.
Philip, they sent thither S. Peter and S. John, Act. viii.
who when they came they prayed for the^, and laid their hands upon them and
they received the holy ghost in a visible sign. And an other time S. Paul
baptized certain men at Ephesus, Act. xix.
and when he had laid his hands upon them, they received the holy ghost, and
they spoke with tongues and did prophecy. By this imposition or laying of the
Apostles hands upon them, is meant this Sacrament of Confirmacion, by which the
holy ghost is given, of who^ they receive increase of their former grace given
in baptism, and spiritual strength against all tentacions. And this grace in
the beginning was given in visible signs of fyery tongues, and they spoke also
miraculouslye in diverse tongues, and they prophesied. But when this visible
sign did cease and appeared no more, Basilius de spiritu S. cap. xxvii*
and yet the same grace was given that was given before: than the fathers of
the primative Church and successors of the Apostles by the inspiracion of the
holy ghost, and by the tradicion of the very Apostles, did minister this
sacrament with the holy Chrisme, so that the imposition of the bishops hands,
Dionisius Ar^opag. c^p. iiii. (...). iii. Aug. de (...) xv. cap. ^x^i.
outwardly anointing the party baptized with the holy Chrisme upon his forehead
with the words thereunto belonging, is the sacrament of Confirmation signifying
and working in the soul of man, the inward unction of the holy ghost with
the greater and further gifts of his manyfold grace. The necessity of this
sacrament of Confirmation is not of such importance as it is of baptism. For
without baptism (if it may be had by any means) it is impossible to be
saved. But if a man or child after baptism chance to dye in his innocence
without deadly sin, his baptism and regeneracion only is sufficient to his
salvation, and his death is to him a Confirmation, because after death a man
can sin no more. But if the child or man do live after baptism, because he
is than led into the wilderness of this world, and there is tempted of the
devil his ghostly enemy, M^th. iiii. i. (...). ii.
who goes about like a ramping Lion seking whom he might devour, and also is
tempted by the wicked world, some times by the terror of adversity, other
times by the flattering and deceitful face of prosperity, and has also within
him self lurkinge a secret and busy enemy of his flesh always rebellinge
against his spirit: Gala^. v.
therefore has he need of further aid of grace, to be more able to withstand
his enemies, which aid of grace god gives him by this sacrament of
Confirmation, where he receives the same holy spirit, that he received before
in baptism, but to a diverse end, and in diverse gifts. For in baptism he was
borne again spiritually to live: Melchi^des pap^. epist. decretali.
in co^firmatio^ he is made bold to sight. There he received remission of sin,
here he receives increase of grace, there the spirit of god did make him a new
man, here ye same spirit does defend him in his dangerous conflict: there was
he washed and made clean, here is he comforted and made strong. In baptism he
was chosen to be gods son, and to be an inheritour of his heavenly kingdom,
in Confirmation god has given his holy spirit to be his tutour, to instruct
him and preserve him that he lose not by his folly that inheritance which he
is called unto: In baptism he was called and chosen to be one of gods
souldyours, and had his white coat of innocence delivered unto him, and also
his badge which was the red cross, the instrument of Christ's passion set upon
his forehead, and other parts of his body: In Confirmation, he is encouraged
to fight, and has the armor of God put upon him which be able to bear of the
fyery darts of the devil, and to defend him from al harm, if he will use them
in his battle, and not put himself in danger of his enemies by entering the
field without the^. By this we may understand the goodness and effects of
this Sacrament, and how necessary and expedient it is for a man that would
live well in this world, and to be able to avoid sin. For what does it
profit a man to arise when he is fallen except he be stayed from fallinge
again? As in baptism a man lying in sin was set up upon his feet, and made
able to walk in the ways of god, which be mercy and truth: so in
Confirmation he is stayed from falling, and made able to endure the pains of
the journey, and to pass through the straites and dangers that may chance.
And also there is given in this sacrament by the holy ghost, great consolation
in all troubles and adversities, both to take comfort him self and with
gladness to bear his cross with Christ, and also to give comfort to al other,
that by any occasion shall come in distres. Experience of this we may see in
the very Apostles them selves, and specially in S. Peter that was the first and
chief of all the other. For when our savior Christ had declared that he was
clean, John. xiii.
and had showed unto him so much of his glory in the mountain as he could
bear, where he heard the voice of the father testifying Christ to be his
son, (...)* xvii.
and saw with his eyes his merueylous works, and did miracles in the name of
Christ him self, Luke. ix. Mat* ^iiii.
and walked upon the Sea at Christ's commandment, and was so familiarly used
of Christ, that he said he was ready to goo to prison with him, Luke. xxii Mat.
xxvi.
and though he should suffer death with him, he would never deny him: yet for all this lacking as yet the strength of gods spirit, he was affraied of one
little maid, and by and by denied Christ, and swear twyse that he knew him
not. And beside all this after Christ's resurrection, (...). xxvi.
when he had received a message from Christ and had seen him self, and was
much comforted by him: yet he kept him self priuilye in an house with the
rest of the Apostles for fear of the Jews. Bernard Ser. de diligendo de^
But after that he had received the holy ghost, which Christ promised to
send, and was confirmed and endued with spiritual strength from above: than
began he with the other Apostles to speak boldly the word of god, and to bear
witness of Christ's resurrection, and was nothing affrayde of the mighty
princes of the world, but contemned al there threatninges, and gloryed in their
tribulations, and rejoiced that they were thought worthy to suffer either shame
or death for the name of Jesus, taking this for a rule of their living,
rather to obey God than man. For this same intent and spiritual effect (good
people) receive we the holy ghost in our Confirmation, that we should be
established in the gifts and graces before received in baptism, yt we lightly
fall not from them again: that we should be made hardyer and more bold to
confess our faith, not regardinge any danger or peril that might come to us
thereby: and that we should constantly withstand all the assaults and
tentations of the devil, the world, and the flesh, and neither shrink for
fear, or give over for pain, nor cease for shame, bu with patience and
continuance keeping our promise, bearinge our cross, and not yelding to our
enemy, should with sure hope look for the crown of righteousness, which god
will give to all them that love his coming. ii. Tim iii^*
These Godly effects be taught and sygnyfyed unto us, by the matter of this
sacrament, and by the other ceremonies which be used in the ministracion of it.
The matter of it is ye holy Chrisme which is mingled and made of two things,
oil Olive, and balm. By the oil olive is signified the infusion of grace,
and the fervent zeal and charity toward the maintenance of Christ's faith,
wherewith he is endued that is confirmed. By the balm is signified the swetenes
of gods holy spirit wherewith Christ does allure us, and draws us to his
service, and also whereby we are made a good and sweet savor to God,
replenyshed with the fruit of righteousness to the glory and praise of god,
Philip. i.
and to the good example and edifying of our neighbor. With this holy Chrisme
the man or child is anointed in his foreheade by the impositio^ of the bishops
hands with the sign of the cross. By the imposition of hands, is signified
the strength of the holy ghost, wherewyth we be endued in our Confirmation, to
the intent we might be able to stand in our faith, to abou^d in hope, and to grow
in charity in good works. And the cross is signed in our forehead that we
should never be ashamed of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor of our religion, but
should stedfastlye resist the tentations of the devil, and overcome with
patience the troubles of this world, always glorying in the cross of Christ,
and laboringe to come to the fellowship of his passions, that so we might be
partakers of his glorious resurrection. After confirmation the party confirmed
has a blow of the cheke given him by the bishop, to the intent he should know
and remember, that his religion and profession, is mekely and gladlye to suffer
the shame, rebuke and tribulation of the world for the name of Christ, Act. v.
and for righteousness sake, without grudging against God, or revenging of his
own quarrel, and so in peace and patience to possess his soul. Therefore I
beseech you brethren do not neglect this wholesome and profitable sacrament, but
diligently consider what aid and what grace is given unto you in it, and if by
your necgligence and fall ye have lost that grace, for a great part: yet it may
be recovered again, not by a new Confirmation, which may not be iterate, but
by your inward conversion and faithful penance, and after ye be risen and
have recovered your strength again, than take better head, and do not make
heavy, nor drive not away the holy ghost from you, who flies always from
fained ypocrisy and will not dwell in that body that is subject and servant to
sin. And like wise be you careful and diligente to have your children
confirmed in this grace, and to be endued with these excellent gifts of the
holy ghost, by receiving this holy sacrament in the catholic church, and
specially they whose children were baptized of heretykes in the time of any
scisme and out of the catholic Church. For although they did than receive the
sacrament of baptism which may not be ministered to them again, lest we should
show our selves to crucifye Christ a^gaine: Aug. de eccle. dogmat* ca. lii.
yet they did not than and there receive the grace of baptysme being out of
the Church, but may now receive the grace which they lacked before, and be
reconciled to god, and be made members of his holy catholic Church, and so in
time be admitted to receive the blessed body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Which things if you procure for them, and both they and you stand
steadfastly in that same grace to your lives end: ye may perfytly trust to
atteyne that glory which shall be reveled and given to all Gods elect people in
the last day by the merits of our savior Christ, to whom with the father and
the holy ghost be al honor and praise, for evermore Amen.

Of the seven gifts of the holy ghost given in the Sacrament of Confirmation.
Ser. vi.
Whereas it is declared unto you (good people) that in the Sacrament of
Confirmation, the holy ghost is given to him that is confirmed, not for the
making of him a new man or the child of God, and the inherytour of the kingdom
of heaven, for which purpose he was given before in baptism, but to confirm
him in that grace he has received, and to aid him in his spiritual battle
with his ghostlye enemies, and to defend him in his conflictes, and to
comfort him in his travail, and to be his tutour in kepinge him from
fallinge, and to make him strong and able to resyst and overcome his enemies,
all which things the holy ghost works in the heart of the party
confirmed, by induing him with his vii. principal gifts: therefore I intend
God wyllinge at this time to declare unto you, which be those seven gifts, and
how they be used to avoid the suggestions and assaults of the devil. These
seven gifts be set forth by the prophet Esai, Esaias. xi.
where he says of our savior Christ, that there shall a rod or branche
spring forth of the root of Iesse, and a flower shall ascend from that root,
and the spirit of god shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge
and pity, and the spirit of the fear of god shall replenish him. Which seven
gifts do not only rest upon Christ as man being the head of his mistical body
the church, Greg. super. Ezechiel. hom. ^^x.
but also upon every one of us that be made members of the same body, and the
holy ghost dwells in his soul that has these gifts and always defends
him from his enemies, and when he loses or quenches them by yeldinge to his
enemy, than the holy ghost withdraws his gracious presence from him, till
he by penance and prayer recover them again. And these gifts (after the
manner of holy scripture) be termed and called by the name of spirytes, not
that they be the substance of the holy spirit of god, but that they be wrought
in our souls by his motion, inspiration, and spiritual unction, and do make
that man a spiritual and godly man that has them and uses the^. Now for what
intent the holy ghost does give the^ to a man that is confirmed, you shall
plainly perceive if ye will consider the manner and order of the devils
tentation in us. There be vii. capital vices called deadly sins, from which
as from seven wells or fountaynes all other vices and corruptions of the soul
do spring and proceed. These be the nets and snares that the devil lays to
intrappe and catch a man in. And considring that he is so mighty being the
prince of darkness, and so malicious, never ceasinge to devour us, and so
crafty, knowing in what point we are most weak to withstand, and being
practiced fro the beginning of the world in such feats, he will not fail to
entangle us with these vices his snares, except we have the assistance and aid
of gods holy spirit to help us, and be vigila^t our selves to take heed to our
fete, and with faith and prayer put away his darts. And because we be weak of
our selfs, and not able to match and overcome this our mighty and crafty
enemy: therefore the holy spirit of god our tutour and defe^dour, being of more
strength tha^ the devil is, has armed us with seven other gifts contrary to the
devils seven snares or darts, and has also bound him that he shall not te^pt
us further, than we being thus armed and aided, be able to withstand. And
because these his vii. gifts be as it were the seeds of godly living sowe^ in
the ground of our hearts, i. Cor. x*
he causes out of the^ other seven virtues to grow, where by a man is made able
not only to avoid the seven snares of the devil, but also is inwardelye
beautified and enriched and made an happy man, for which cause these virtues be
called beatitudes. And in case a man lose these gifts, and virtues, our savior
Christ has taught us a mean to recover the^ again, which is prayer, and for
that every man is not of that wisedo^ and learning, as he can perticulerly and
in proper terms ask that he needs, therefore has he taught us one form of
prayer co^teining seven petitio^s, whereof every one of the^ is directed in
order to the asking and atteining of one of the foresaid seven gifts and
virtues. Thus are we every way on gods part provided for sufficiently, and may
easily overcome the devil our enemy, if we list to take pain and fight as our
duty to almighty god, and regard to our souls health do require. And that ye
may the better understand this that I have spoken in general, I shall by gods
help for your edyfying, declare shortly and perticularly how every vice is
ouerco^med with the contrary gift of the holy ghost. And first to begin at
pride which is the root and beginning of all sin, Eccles. x.
the mother of death and misery, and the very cause why the devil was
expelled out of heaven, Esaias. xiiii. Gene. iiii.
and man out of Paradyse, ye may consider that the devil by pride labors
to take god from us, whom we are most bound to love and serve, and daily
tempts us, either to think and esteem that good quality, which we have to
come of our self, and not of god, or else that it is not freely given but
fullye deserved of our party, or else to boast our selves to have that we have
not, or else to despise other and to labor to appear synguler, or else by one
means or other he provoke us to contemn god, and not to regard our state
and condition. By this dart he labors to wound our souls, Aug. ser. domini
in mo^^^. li. i.
against the which the holy ghost has armed us with his gift of the fear
of god, not only with the servile fear of the pains of hell, which is the
beginning of wisdom, Pro^. ix. i. John. iiii.
and goes away at his coming by charity, but also with the reuerente and
chaste fear of gods majesty and goodness that remains for ever, whereby a man forbeareth to offend God, and is careful to please and serve God, as the
wise manne counsels, saying. Son, Eccles. ii.
when thou come to gods service stand in fear, and prepare thy soul to
tentatyon. This fear of God is the root and keeper of all religion, Bernardus
Ser. de sep. tem donis. Eccl. xxvii
in which except a man keep him self steadfast, the house of virtues builded in
his soul, will soon decay and come to ruin. And it is given us by the holy
ghost as a present remedy against pride, as S. Paul says, Noli altu^ sapere,
sed time: be not proud and hye minded, but fear. Romans ^i.
For by fear, a man is awaked out of the sleep of negligence, his conscience
is examined if any fault be done, and he is made careful for his life present,
and desirous of the life to come. Out of this root of fear springs the
godly flower of humilitye which is called poverty in spirit, whereby a man
gives god the glory of that virtue he is endued withal, M^t. v.
and is himself content with the fruit of the same, and is esteemed but little
in his own sight, be he never so hye in knowledge an^ dignity, and puts
his trust and glory neither in him self, his strength, his virtues, his works,
or his riches, nor yet in no other creature, but in his lord God alone, and is
therefore made most happy, and put in sure hope to attain Christ's promise of
the kingedome of heaven. And if he shall perceive by his negligence, these two
gifts of fear and humility to be diminished or decayed in him: than let him
straight run to prayer, and ask them of God in the first peticion of his
Pater noster, which is, hallowed be thy name. Aug. Ser. dom^ni in mo^te. li. ii*
Wherein he asks that he may in all things gloryfye gods name by humility,
and not his own name by pride, acknowledging al goodness to proceed from God,
and labouringe to honor him by his good life. The second dart of the devil is
envy, for of pride grows envy, and as he by pride robbed man of the love of
god: so by envy he robs man of the love of his neighbor, and always
tempts man to bear gall in his heart and poison in his tongue, to rejoice at
the adversity of his neighbor, and to be sorry at his prosperity, to wish
his neighbor evil and to speak evil of him behind his back. Against this
dart of the devil, the holy ghost has armed us with the gift of pity, whereby
we be armed and instructed to have compassion of our neighbors adversity, to
bear the infirmities of other, to wish well to al men for gods cause, to
procure as much as we can their commodity and preferment, and with devout
affection to honor and to do our duties next god, to our parents, to our
country, to our princes, to our masters, to our children and familye, to our
neighbors all, be they friends or enemies, that is to say, to show reverence
to our superiors, to show conformity to our equalies, and to show relief in
word and deed to our inferiors. Out of this root of pity, springs the
Godly virtue of mekenes, for he that is well affected toward the service and
honor of God, and studious to do his duty toward all degrees of men, shall
show him self to be not heady, styffenecked and envious, but meke, gentle, and
tractable, not resisting evil, but with good ouercomming evil, and therefore
this meke man may well be called happy, which by gods promise shall inherit and
possess the land of ye living. And if this gift of pity, or the virtue of
mekenes chance to decay or be lost by the envy of the devil: Aug. de Ser.
domini in mo^te lib. ii,
than let him pray the effect of the second petition, which is O father let thy
kingdom come, either to us that we may be as thou art, and teaches us to be
humble and meke in our own hearts, and so have the (who is eternal rest)
dwelling in our souls, or else let thy kingdom come from heaven to earth in
the clerenes of the glorious coming of our lord Jesus Christ, Mat. xxv. Psalm.
xxxiii.
when the meke men shall hear him call the blessed people of his father to his
kingdom, and therefore shall rejoice and be glad for evermore. The third bolt
that the devil shoots against a man, is ire, for of envy grows ire, when he
enuyeth his equal or superior upon a small occasion either given or taken, he
is stirred to indignation, malice, swelling of mind, and evil looks, or else to
chyding and brauling, and so in process to injury, vengeance or murder.
Wherein appears his great folly. Eccle. vii.
For noughtye anger rests no where but in the bosom of a fool, because it
is great folly to thrust a sword through his own heart, to the intent he might
hurt the coat of his enemy, which thing every angry man does, that usurping
the office of God, seeks to revenge his own quarrel, and thus the devil as he
by pride robbed him of his love to god, and by envy of his love to his
neighbor, so now by ire he robs him of the love of him self. Against this
fyery darte of the devil, the holy Ghost has armed us with the gift of
knowledge, whereby we know how to walk vprightlye and without offense in the
mids of this wicked generation, and also that we should behave our selves to
them that have by wrong done us injury, as we would do to sick folks,
children, or mad men, of whom both their parents and other friends and
phisicions often times will suffer diverse injuries, till their youth or
infirmity be gone away. Out of this gift of knowledge springs the virtue of
mourning. For when we know in what miseries we be wrapped in, what a great
heap of euyls be round about us, which we of ignorance desired as good
things and profitable for us: than we fall to mourninge, and lament the lack
or prolonginge of the very true and eternal goods and riches that be stored
up for us in heaven, and begin to set little by those vain and transitorye
things which we esteemed as good in earth. For which cause our Savior
Christ estemeth us happy that so do mourn, and has promised us the
comfort of the holy ghost, that for contemninge these temporal things
here, we should enjoy eternal gladness in heaven. And for restitucion of
this gift and virtue when it decays or is lost by us, we may pray the
third peticion, that Gods will might be done in earth as it is in heaven, that
when our flesh as earth and the desires of it, do in all things without
rebellion obey our spirit, the lack of which obedience is the cause of
our mourninge, as the having of it, is the perfourmaunce ^f Gods will in
earth, than we might have this promised comfort presently in our hearts, as a
pledge of that gladness which is to come.

The fourth darte of the devil, is ydlenes and slouthfulnes, when he tempts a
man to esteem the fulfyllinge of Gods commandments either impossible, or
very hard and paineful, and so to forbear the doing of his duty, or to be
werye in the beginning, and sad ever after. Against this darte the holy
ghost has armed us with the gift of fortitude and strength, and thereby
persuades us to think Gods commandments not to be heavy or grievous, but to
be a light burden and sweet yoke, and encourages us to set upon that work
which is excellent and worthy praise, and for avoiding of fayntnes or
werynes, he kyndleth our hearts with his love to continue steadfast and
immo^uable from the hope of the Gospel, Coloss. i.
increasing in good works, and knowinge that our labor is not in vain in
Christ. i. Cor. xv.
Out of this gift comes the virtue which is called the hungre and thrist
of rightwysnes, which consists in true faith and perfyte obedience to Gods
law, the earnest and vehement desire whereof, causes a man to be moved
neither with the flattery nor adversity of this world, nor to be sad when
he does well, but to hope as a Lion, Pro. xxviii.
and not to give place to his aduersarye. Therefore saying that fortitude is the
gift of the holy Ghost, whereby they be happy that be hungry and thristy, that
is to say, greedy and desirous of ryghtwysnes, because they shall be made full
with the meat of Christ, which is to do the will of his father, and also with
that drink which causes a fountain of water to be in them, springinge up to
everlasting life: if at any time we lack these virtues, or be slack in
using of them, than let us pray that our daily bread may be given unto
us this day, by virtue whereof we being sustained and made strong, might
come to that perfyt fullness and satietie which shall admit no hunger or
thyrst any more ever after.

The fyft darte of the devil is covetousness, for when he perceyueth a man
encouraged to do good, and serve God, by the gift of fortitude and strength, he
labors al he can to turn that his constancy and strength to a wrong
end, that is to say, from the fulfillinge of Gods law and mainteyninge of his
truth, to the greedye and insatiable appetyte of fulfilling the desires of the
world, and to the mayntenaunce of vice and error, and tempts him further to
be obdurate and stony hearted in vnmercyfulnes, and so in process for hope of
gain not to regard craft, deceipte, violence or treason.

Against this darte of Covetousness, the holy Ghost armeth us with the gift
of counsel, that our courage and strength may be stayed and dyrected to the
right end, that is to say, to the contempt and despisinge of the vanitye of
this world, i. Tim. vi.
and not to trust in the vncertayntye of riches, but to trust in the living
God, and to do good to all we can, and to be rich in good works, being
ready to give part of that God has sent, and to store up a good treasure in
the next world, to the attayninge of everlasting life. And by this gift of
counsel we be armed not to lean to our own strength, nor to the power of
any multitude, nor to the obstinacy of mind, but to the help of God, and
for the glory of his name. So that this gift of fortytude, woorketh the
virtue of mercifulness, whereby a man uses the world, not as the devil
tempts him, to fulfill his greedy appetite, which like dropsye will never be
satiate, but to the relief of the poor, the defense of the innocent, the
forgeuinge of the offendour, and the mayntenaunce of the truth. For such a
man is happy, and shall receive greater mercy at Gods hand. And therefore
when we lack this gift, or do not use it, let us first forgive them that
have offended us, and than pray that our debtes may likewise be forgeuen unto
us, and that is the very practyse of this gift of counsel, and the direction
of our spirytuall strength and fortitude.

The syxte darte of the deuell is gluttonye, for when he has moved a man to
take pleasure and joy in these outward and worldly things, he tempts him
specially to follow that pleasure that is most natural to his flesh, and
not to be content with that the necessitye of nature requires, but to let
pleasure have his will, either in exceeding measure, or in to much delicatenes,
and preparation for the same, whereupon follows the decay of health, and
subversion of reason. For commonly where there is a full belly, there is also a
dull wit, for that cause the holy Ghost has armed us with the gift of
understanding, out of which proceeds the virtue of clennes of heart, that our
spiritual eyes may be simple, and refuse to be made dull with the stuffing of
our bellies, and our hearts may be clean and pure from the corruption of the
flesh, not laden with surfeting and dronkennes, to the intent we might escape the
said vice of glotonie, and be promoted to so great happynes as to see God,
which no man can do except the mist of ignorance, error, and unclean
living be taken from his eyes by faith and the gift of understanding. And
therefore least these tentations of the flesh specially concerning the
nourishing and pamperinge of the same, do hinder us from true understanding,
and the syghte of God which he has promised to all them that be simple and
clean of heart: let us diligently pray that he suffer us not to be led into
temptation.

Finally the last of the devils darts is lechery which is the vylest kind of
sin of al other, and the sonest is a man tempted unto it, if the devil have
any enteraunce before, either by idleness, covetousness or drunkenness. For
(as the prophet says) the cause of the iniquitye of Sodom was pride, E^ech.
xvi
to much eatinge, wealth and idleness. And this vice blyndeth a man's soul,
takes away his reason for a time, and the consideration he should have of
death, and brings him into hatred of God, and in mistruste or desperation of
the life to come. And for remedy against this most beastlye vice, the holy
Ghost has armed us with his greatest gift, which is wisdom, whereby a man
pulls away his mind and pleasure from the corruption of his flesh, and
refuses to be subject to his unnatural sensuality, and to defile his body
the temple of God, and sets his hole joy, felicitye and rest in his Lord
God, having his mind occupied in heavenly thoughts, where nothing is that
can displease. And this is the wisdom of God that comes from above, which is
chaste, Jacob. iii.
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, agreeable to goodness, full of mercy
and good fruit. Happy are they that have this wisdom, out of which
springs the virtue of making peace, because the fruit of rightwisnes is sown
in peace to them that be peacemakers, to whom God has promised that they
shall be called his sons and children, for which cause when we lack this gift
of wisdom, or wax slack to use it, let us pray to almighty god to deliver us
from al evil, which deliverance sets us at liberty, and makes us
freemen, that is to say, the children of god, endued with his spirit of
adoption, whereby we may boldly call God our father.

And thus I have declared unto you the seven gifts of the holy ghost, given
unto us in our confirmation, which for lack of our good and virtuous bringinge
up when we were children, do not so much appear and show theimselues in
our deeds, as it were expedient they should, but if we raise them up again
by our prayer and diligent exercise, as I have partly told you, we shall be
sure to overcome our spiritual enemy, and in the day of our Lord receive
the crown of glory, through the merits of our savior Christ, to whom with
the father and the holy ghost be all glory and praise. Amen.

()

Of the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament of the Altar. Ser.
vii.
AS a man by his carnal generation is not only borne to temporal life, but
also in process of time waxes strong, which life and strength ca^ not be
preserved without nouryshement and wholesome meat: even so a man by his
spiritual regeneration, is not only borne again to a spiritual life in
Christ by baptism, but also waxes strong in Christ by receiving the gifts of
the holy ghost in Confirmation, which spiritual life and strength can not be
preserved and continued without spiritual nourishment and wholesome meat. For
which purpose our savior Christ, who loved us so vehemently, that to bring us
to life, was content to dye, Grego. in canti. cap. i
and for the price and ransom of the same life vouchsafed to give his own body
to death: does still vouchsafe to nouryshe us so redeemed and brought to life
with the sweet and holsom milk of his own blood, Cypria. de duplic^ martirio.
and gives us his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, that we might be
fed and nouryshed for the continuance of our spiritual life, with the same
precious things that we were redeemed withal before. And because our souls be
as yet joined with our bodies, Chryso. in Mat. hom. lxx^iii*
therefore for the time of this life our Savior Christ gives unto us his
unvisible graces in sensible Sacraments. And as in Baptism, by water (which
is a sensible thing) is given to us the invisible grace of regeneration: even
so in the Sacrament of the Aultare under the vysible forms of bread and wine,
is given to us the substance of all grace, which is Christ him self, that is
to say, his body and his blood, which though they be corporal things in
their own nature, yet now being glorified they be spiritual, and therefore not
sensible, but where it pleases our Savior by miracle to have them appear.

This is than most certeynlye and constantly to be believed of us all upon pain
of dampnation that in this blessed sacrament of the Altar (whereof I entreat
at this time) is verelye and reallye present the true body and blood of our
Savior Christ which suffered upon the cross for us, and is received there
corporallye by the services of our mouths, not in the same form of his body,
as it was upon the cross, but in the forms of our daily and special
nutrimentes of bread and wine, Eusebius Emesenus orat. de corpo. and sa^g.
the substance of which bread and wine, is converted and changed into the
substance of Christ's body and blood, by the omnipotent and secret power of
his word, assistinge the due administratyon of his mynister. This merueylous
and heavenly doctrine is not invented by man's wit, but reveled by Gods spirit
in his holy scripture, Mat. xxvi.
and taught us by the mouth of our Savior Christ, who instituted this holy
Sacrament in his last supper, saying to his disciples, take, eat, this is my
body which is given for you, this is my blood of the new testament, which is
shed for many and for you in remission of sins. Of these words and the like
which be written in the gospels of S. Mark and S. Luke and in the epistle of
S. Paul to the Corinthia^s, Mark. ^iiii Luke. xxii i. Cor. xi.
the holy catholic church has ever from the beginning understood and
believed that after the speaking of those words by Christ or by his minister in
his person sufficientlye authorized so to do by his commandment, is made
present the natural body and blood of our savior Christ, there to be
received of his faithful people, to the increase of all grace, and
immortality both of body and soul. For the Church estemeth these to be the
working words of God, making the thing to be as it was not before, and not
as the words of only man which can only declare the thing to be as it is
before. For if Christ's word be of such strength that it can make things to
be, that were nothing before, Amb^ de Sacra^^^* iiii. cap. (...).
how much more has it strength to make a thing that was before, to be
changed into an other thing that it was not? Like as the heaven was not, the
earth was not, and yet he said the word, and they were made: even so the
sacrament before the consecration was not the body of Christ, but after the
consecration, it is now the body of Christ, for he has said the word, and the
thing is made. Emes. ora. de corpo. and sangu.
And he that is the author of the gift, is also the wytnes of the truth of the
same gift, so that our faith in this thing is grounded not in man's reason or
sense, but in the almighty power of gods word. For if Christ the speaker of
this word were not Gods son, Ireneus. lib iiii. cap. xxxiiii.
and the word of God, by whom all trees and herbs do bring forth fruit:
it could not be certain to us, that this blessed and sanctified bread of the
Sacrament were Christ's body, and the cup of his blood. Therefore seeing
that he has said, Chrysostom. in M^t ho. lxxxiii.
this is my body, this is my blood, who can neither deceive nor be deceived:
let us without all doubt stedfastlye believe it to be so, and look upon it
with the eyes of our understanding. For our faith in this matter is induced by
his only authorytie, Bernardus sermon. in cena domini
and not by our wit, whose words require necessarily our faith, and in no
wise do admit our reason, they require a simple beleuer, and reprove a wicked
reasoner, so that we must believe simply, that we can not search profitablye,
wherefore like as we may not curiouslye search how it is done: so we may
not Iewishlye doubt whether it be done, but reverently prepare us to receive
that by faith we are sure is done.

And furthermore, the holy Church estemeth those words of Christ, this is my
body, this is my blood, to be the formal words of a sacrament of the new
Testament, workinge inwardly the same grace that is signified outwardly, which
is the propert^e of every sacrament of the new Testamente, whereby they differ
from the other shadows of the old Testament. And because the grace that is
signified by these formal words, is the very body and blood of Christ him
self, the author and fountain of all grace, therefore we must certainly know
by faith, that God assistyng the due ministration of this Sacrament, according
to his promise, does inwardly work in the holy Sacrament the real presence
of his said body and blood. Chrysostom. de prodit. Iudae.
It is not the power of the priest being a man, that in the creatures which be
set upon the aultare to be consecrate, causes the body and blood of our Lord
to be made present, but it is Christ himself that was crucified for us. In.ii.
tim. i. hom. ii.
The words be pronounced by the mouth of the priest as his mynyster, but the
oblations be consecrate by Gods power and grace, who is now there present, In
Math. ho. lxxxiii. Aug. de trinit. lib. iii. cap. iiii. Hesichius in leuit. lib
vi. ca* xxii.
and sanctifies the creatures, and changes them, by the invisible working of
the holy ghost, which miraculous change must be imputed to Christ, who by his
word works this his presence above the reach of man's carnal
understanding.

And we ought to think of this consecration far above the consecration of
other things. For other things in the Church used about the holy Sacraments,
be by prayer sanctified and called holy, for that they be dedicate to some holy
use, and the soul of man is by grace consecrate and sanctified, because it is
a substance wherein holiness and virtue remains, and a good man's body is also
sanctified being made a membre of Christ, and the temple of the holy ghost, and
the other Sacraments be sanctified and holy, for that they be the
instruments whereby GOD works holiness in the soul of man, but above all
other things, this blessed Sacrament of the Altar is most holy, Chrysostom.
hom. xvii. in Math.
being (as S. Chrysostom says) not only a thing sanctified, but also very
sanctification and holiness it self. For in that it is the body of Christ
by sanctification, whereunto is annexed the godheade by unity of person, it
must needs by holiness it self, not in quality, but in substance, out of
which proceeds all holiness, virtue, and goodness. And the holy Church also
estemeth those formal words of our Savior Christ to be the performaunce
of his promise which he made at Capernaum to his disciples, when he said: the
bread that I shall (...) unto you is my flesh, which I shall g^ue for the
life of the world, Ioa^. vi.
which promise he that is the very truth and can not lie, did never at any
time before perform but in his last supper, when he gave his body and his
blood to his dysciples to eat, and said, that which he gave them was his
body and his blood.

And as he promised to give unto them his flesh, that should be given for
the life of the world, Theophi. in Mark. cap. xiiii.
and not a figure of that flesh, or a sign: so he gave in very deed the same
flesh, and not a figure or sign of it, and said precyselye that it was the
same body that should be given to death for their redemption, to which
word every true Christen manne gives credyt, Epipha. in Ancora^u.
and he that believes not that it is his very true body, as he said it was,
he is fallen from all grace and salvation. And no man ought to be in doubt
of the truth of this real presence of Christ's body in the sacrament, because
he has either read himself in certain holy writers books, or has heard
say of other, that they say how in this Sacrament is a sign or a figure, or a
similitude of Christ's body. For those same authors either in the places where
they use those words, or else in some other places declare most manifestly
their faith concerning the real presence to be al one agreeable with the common
faith of the universal Church of Christ. Aug. in. li. senten. prospe.
And for your better instruction in this matter, ye shall understand that
there be two things which be parts of this Sacrament, the visible forms
of bread and wine, and the unvisible body and blood of our lord Jesus Christ.

The outward form of that is seen, Hylarius pontif.
is a figure and sign of that hydden truth, which is there contained, believed
and not seen. Ye shall also understand that in the Sacrament there be two
graces to be considered, the one is the substantial grace of Christ's body
there present and contained, the other is the accidental grace only signified
and not contained, which is wrought in the soul of the worthy receiuour,
Cyrillus in Ioa^. lib. x. cap. xiii.
whereby he is more inwardly joined to Christ's mistical body, not only
spirituallye by faith and charytye, but also by natural and corporal
participation with Christ and his church. This unity of Christ's mystical body
the church is as well signified by Christ's natural body there present, as it is
by the visible element of bread, Cypri. li. i. epist. vi.
which as it is made one loaf of many granes, so the church is made but one
body of Christ, consistinge of many men and women. And this is Christ's
natural body in the Sacrament, a figure of his mystical body the Church,
and of the unity of the same.

And further, where as our Lord commanded his disciples and all us to do the
same that he did, that is to say, to consecrate and to raceiue his body and
blood in the remembrance of his death and passion till his last coming, i.
Cor. xi.
ye may thereby understand, that the invisible, spiritual and intelligible
flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, Aug. in lib. senten. prospe.
Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. lxxxiii.
signifies and represents the same visible, mortal, and palpable body of
Christ upon the cross, for which respect the sacrament of diverse Doctors is
called a figure or sign. Finally, because all things that be in this present
world, Origenes in psalm. xxxviii. Theophi. in capi x. ad Hebre. Ambros.
offic. lib. i. cap. xlviii. Heb. ix. Nazianzenus orat. de pascha.
be they never so true, yet they be called figures and images in respect of
the same things in heaven, which be seen as they be without all shadows or
coueringes: therefore like as the very oblation of Christ upon the cross, which
is a thing of most truth, is called an image, in respect of that oblation,
which he the same time, and at al times makes in heaven before his father,
where he appears as an advocate for us: even so the natural body of Christ
in the sacrament, which can not here be seen, but by faith, may well be called a
figure or an image of the same body in heaven, which is there seen without
cover, and received by perfect fruition of all the blessed angels and saints
that be there in the kyngedome of God. Bernardus sermon. de cena domini.
For here the Church has Christ her spouse in a sacrament, and there she
shall have him without all sacrament, both here and there is the truth, but
here it is covered, and there manifest without cover: in earth we eat the
bread of angels in a Sacrament, Cypri. ser. de cena*
in heaven we shall eat the same bread euidentlye without a sacrament, where
the presence of the most hye priest shall show it self openly to all men as
it is. For these respects which I have rehearsed, no man ought to be in dout
of the truth of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, because of these
words ( figure or sign) found in certain authors, which words (as I have
declared) do in no wise deny the truth of the presence, but either they
declare the secret and covered manner of it in the sacrament, or they signifye
the unity of Christ's mystical body, or else they bring into our
remembrance, the passion of Christ's body which is paste, or the clear
fruition of the same in heaven, which to us is yet to come. And here ye ought
to mark diligently that I have said concerning the two manners of being of
Christ's body, Chryso. de sacerdotio lib. iii.
the one in heaven at the right hand of his father manyfestlye without all
cover or Sacrament, the other the same momente of time here in earth among
us in a Sacrament, to be received of us for our spiritual sustenaunce, in
which thing we may not consider the nature of a man's body, but the
infinite power of GOD, that can do with his body what he will, and does
with it what he says. And because he says evidently that he gives to us his
body that suffered, Chrysostom. in. Mat. ho lxxxiii. Luke xviii Mark. x.
and his blood that was shed, therefore we ought to believe his word which
can not deceive us, saying that all things be possible to God, which be
impossible to man.

Christ's body is but one, and although it be consecrate and offered in many
places, Ambro. ad Heb. ca. x.
yet there is but one Christ in every place, being both full Christ here, and
full Christ there one body. And where as Christ, Gods only begotten son
goes into every man diuisiblye that receives him, Cyrillus in Ioa^. lib. xii
cap. xxxii.
and by his flesh sanctifies their souls and bodies, yet he in his flesh
remains hole without division in every one, being but one where so ever he
be, by no means divided. And in this miracle our Savior Christ excelled
Helias and all other prophets, Chryso. ad pop. Anti. hom. ii.
for Helias left his mantle unto his disciple, but the son of God ascending
left to us his flesh. Helias ascended without his mantle him self, but Christ
both left his flesh unto us, and ascended having it also with him. And this is
not of our deserts, but of his exceeding mercy and good will, Bernardus sermon.
de cena domini.
that being hole in his majesty and glory, at the right hand of God his
father, yet does vouchesafe the same time to be with us in earth vnuisibly,
being but one in diverse places not only comfortinge us that be here
trauelinge with the presence of his divinity and holy spirit, Cyrillus in
Ioa^. lib. iii, cap. xxxvi.
but also feeding and nourishynge us with the heavenly food of his body and
blood to everlasting life.

This feading of us with Christ's body and blood we must understand that it is
not only spiritually by faith, when we remember and think upon his passion
and death, but also corporallye with the service of our bodies and senses, when
we receive it in the sacrament. For as in the old law the blood of the paschal
lamb was commanded to be sprinkled upon both the posts of the door: Exodus
xii. Gr^go. ho. xxii.
even so the blood of Christ our paschall lamb, is sprinkled upon both the
posts of our door, when it is received not only with the mouth of the body
for redemption, but also with the mouth of the heart for imitation. Greg.
dialog. lib iiii cap. lviii.
Which blood is not now shed upon the hands and coats of the soldiers
that crucified him, but is powered into the mouths of the faithful that
receive him. And this new doctrine was not known to the world till our
Savior Christ taught it himself in his gospel. Cyprianus Ser. de Ce^na.
Origenes in Nu. ho, xvi.
For the old law did forbydde the eatinge and drinkinge of blood with their
mouths, and the new law does command it so to be dronken, for which cause
we that pertayne to the new law do use often times to drink of this blood,
knowing that except we eat his flesh and drink his blood we shall not have
life in us. Joan. vi. Chrysostom. hom. de David (...) Saul*
Wherein we are called to more dignitye than any of the prophets of the old
testamente was. For David did never eat of this body, nor never drank of
this blood, although he believed in Christ as well as we or rather better, and
so was only pertaker of them spirituallye by faith, and not corporally by the
sacrament as we be. Chrysostom. ho. xxix. in ^l. Cor. xiii
See with what great dignity almighty God does honor our mouths, by which as
by certain gates and doors our savior Christ enters into us when we
communicate and receive his body, and so having Christ within us by his
flesh, and in him corporally united by the sacrament of perfect and natural
unity, Hyllarius de Trinitate. li. viii.
we shall likewise be partakers of his propretie, which is life everlasting. I
will no more at this time (good people) occupy you with any longer process
concerning this most true and euidente matter, but shall speak of it at other
times, besechinge you in our lords name not to waver in your faith like
reeds blown a side with every wind, but to stand steadfast in the certain
belief of this most holy sacrament, which is set forth to us by the mouth of
our savior Christ himself and the sacred books of al his holy Evangelists,
and is confirmed with the blood of his martirs, with the miracles of God and
his faintes showed for that purpose, with the testymony of all catholyke
writers in every age, and with the authority and consent of the holle church
of Christ throughout the world, as well in general counsels assembled in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, as in every perticulare province and realm,
which is the pillar of truth, and the surest staff to lean unto for a
christen man to hold himself steadfast in truth, Hesichius in leuit. li. vi.
cap. xxii
so that the most manyfeste word which was spoken by Chr^ste our Lord
upon this holy Sacrament, and the true meaning of the same word declared
from time to time by his holy Catholic church, delivers us from all
ignorance, what it is, and assures us that in this most holy sacrament is
present by the omnipotent power of god the real and true body and blood of our
savior Christ god and man, under the sensyble forms of bread and wine, and is
there received of the faithful people not only spirituallye by faith but
also corporallye with their mouths for the attayninge of immortality and
everlasting life both of body and soul, the which GOD of his infinite goodness
grant us through the merytes of his son Jesus Christ, and the sanctification
of his holy spirit, to whom be all praise, honor, and glory, world without
end. Amen.

Of the change of the bread and wine, that is to say, of Transubstantiation.
Sermon. viii.
WHat is the substance of this blessed Sacrament, we have learned (good people)
of our savior Christ's own words, Mat. xxvi.
who the night before he suffered, at his last supper with his disciples took
bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his dysciples, and said:
take and eat, this is my body, and taking the chalice, he gave thanks and
gave it to them, saying: drink al you of this, for this is my blood of the
new testament, which shall be shed for many for remission of sins: Upon
these words of Christ all true christen men ground their faith concerning
this blessed Sacrament, and believe verelye that the inward substance of this
sacrament, ^
is the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ which suffered for our sins,
and that in the chalyce consecrate, is the same blood that did run forth of
Christ's side when it was opened with the speere. And furthermore upon the same
words of Christ, the holy church and all true christen men her members do
ground their faith concerning the change which the holy ghost by his
unspeakable power works in this sacrament, ^
where the inward substance of bread and wine is changed into the
substance of the body and blood of Christ, the outward forms of the said
bread and wine with the quantity and qualities of the same, still remayninge
unchanged. Which manner of change because it is singular and has none like
it, either in nature or otherwise, Co^cilium generale Lateranense.
therefore the holy Church does call it by the name of Transubstantiation,
the which word was invented by the holy church in the greatest general
counsel that ever was, which was called the counsel of Lateranense, where
there were present seventy Archbyshoppes and four hundred Bishops, and they
spoke of this change by that name, to the intent that like as the holy church
of Christ in every age did agree and was of one mind concerning this change
of the bread and wine: even so they should agree and be of one tongue in the
vtteringe and speaking of that change, that the diversity of many words
utters diversely in the books of learned men should not impair and bring in
doubt the old known truth reveled to the Church by the holy ghost. This
old truth the Church learneth of Christ's own words. For where as it was
but one thing or substance which our Savior Christ gave out of his hand to
his disciples to eat, which one thing he said plainly was his body which
should be given for them, and in saying so, made it so to be by his almighty
word, for that cause the holy church believes that it is not bread but his
very body in deed. And also where as it appears to al a man's senses to be
very bread, which se^ses be not deceived so far as they can skyll of and
reach unto, which is only to the outward apparaunce, and qualities or
quality and not to the inward substance, therefore the holy Church
believes that the change which is in the sacrament, is made in the inward
substance of the bread, and not in the outward form of the bread, which
remains as it was, for which cause the Church calls that change,
Transubstantiation. For that bread which our lord reached to his disciples
being changed in nature and not in form, Cypria. Ser. de Cena.
by the omnipotency of his word was made flesh. And as in the person of
Christ, his humanity was seen and his divinity was secret unseen, even so in
this sacrament the outward form of bread appears to man's sight, and the
inward substance of Christ god and man appears not to a man's corporal eye,
but to the eye of his soul, which is faith, which faith is stayed upon the
omnipote^t power of god. For he that can create all things of naught with his
word, Emesenus orat. de corpor. and sang. Ambros. de iis qui initian. Exodus
vii.iii. Reg. xviii.
can also change things that be created, with his word: and if the
benediction of man can change the natures of things, as appeared when Moses
changed his rod into a serpent: what shall we say of the consecration of God
that works merueilously in his holy sacrament? If the word of Helyas was able
to bring fire from heaven, shall not the word of Christ be able to change
the substance of bread? therefore upon this ground of gods almightye power,
we submit our reason to our faith, and above the reach of reason we believe
Christ's word, and that there is not the substance of bread which nature
formed, Ambros. de iis qui initian.
but the substance of Christ which benediction has consecrate. And so we
esteem this Sacrament otherwise than an infidel does. Like as an unlearned
man when he looks upon a book, Chrysostom. in epist. i. Cor. ii. ho. vii.
he understands not the meaning of the writing, but a learned manne will
find much matter hyd there, as the lives and stories of men, the unlearned
man will think there is nothing else but paper and ynke, the learned man will
understand an others speakinge, and speak to one being absent, and ask by
his letters what so ever he would have: even so it is in these mysteries, the
infidels althouhh they here what it is, yet they seem not to hear. But the
faithful man who has experience of the holy ghost, can behold the virtue
and power of God in the secret mysteries, where the substance of bread is
consumed by the substance of Christ's body, and cease to be there any more,
even as wax when it is put in the fire, Chrysostom. in enceniis
it melts away and the substance of it remains no more. These similitudes
(whereof the books of the old writers be full) be not to satisfy the subtle
wits and curious questions of men that lack faith, whose reasons brought out
of natural experimentes, may in no wise be admytted of a Christen manne to
dysproue any part of our faith received, but they be brought in to declare
what is our faith in this point, to which faith Gods pleasure is, that
every man's reason should be taken captive, and serve to the belief of his
wonderful works and Sacraments: ii. Cor. x.
even as the natural inclination of our will, should serve to execute the
commandment of godly charity. For whatsoever flesh and blood does bring
forth, Cypria. Ser. de Cena.
or the subtlenesse of man's wit, not endued with the spirit of God can inuente,
is to be rejected from the judgment and dyscussion of this holy mystery, and
only that is to be admitted which the father of heaven by the mouth of his
son, and the inspiration of his holy spirit has reveled to his church. And
therewyth is every good christen man contented and satisfied, not like the
unfaithful Jews asking how it can be so, seeing nothing is impossible to God,
but geuinge full credit to the church of God in the presence of Christ in
this Sacrament as the blessed virgin Marye did to the Aungel of god in the
incarnation of Christ in her womb, and as she gave full consent to the
Angels word when he told her that the holy ghost should come into her,
and the power of the most high god should ouershadow her: Damascenus de
orthodoxa fide. li. iiii. cap. xiiii.
even so ought every faithful soul to give full credit to gods church, when it
teaches by the word of God that the holy ghost ouershadoweth this mystery,
and makes present the body of Christ above the speech and reason of man, and
changes the bread and the wine into Christ's body and blood, the outward
forms remaining still, so that now there be not two substances remaininge, but
one and the self same that was given for our redemption, otherwise the manner of
it is not searcheable. And it ought to believe also, that like as the Church
of god in the first general Counsel at Nyce did very well when it did
inuente the word of Consubstantialitie, to express the old truth that Christ
was no creature, but equal god and of one and the same substance with the
father, to the confusion of the heretyke Arius and all his adherentes: even so
that the same church of god did very well in the general counsel at Laterane,
when it invented the word of Transubstantiation, to express the old truth,
that there is but one substance of Christ in the Sacrament, and that the
former substaunces of bread and wine be converted and changed in to the body
and blood of Christ, the qualities and figure of the same remaining still
unchanged, to the confusion of the heretykes Luther and zwinglius and all
their adherentes. Furthermore it is to be considered, that in this change of
the bread, god did show his great merciful goodness toward us, that for our
relief, bearing with our infirmity he has suffered the outward forms of
bread and wine to remain vnchaunhed. For as our nature abhors the kylling
of a man's flesh, Aug. contra aduers. legis. lib. ii* cap. ix.
and the sheding of a man's blood, so much more it abhors the eatinge of
man's raw flesh and the drynkinge of man's lively blood. And where as our
savior Christ declaringe the necessity of this Sacrament to thatteining of
everlasting life, said: Joan. vi.
that except we did eat his flesh and drink his blood we should not have
life in us: therefore has he by his godly wisdom inverted this way to give us
his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, and yet our nature should not
abhor the eating and drynking of it, but comfortablye and obedientlye receive
it. For he gives it in such nutrimentes of bread and wine as we be daily
accustomed to be fed withal, Theophilactus in Mark. cap xiiii. and in Mat.
cap. xxvi.
and so co^descending to our infirmity lest we should abhor the sight of his
flesh and blood in their own likeness, he reserueth the outward forms of
the bread and wine, but their substaunces he changes into his flesh and
blood. Beside diverse other commodities that come to us thereby, as that our
faith is more exercysed in believing that to be there present, which we see
not with our corporal eyes, and the propretie of the sacrament is retained,
which is to teach us by the composition and nature of the outward element,
what the holy ghost works inwardly in the soul of him that worthylye
receives it, which is the unity and perfyte conjunction of Christ's
mystical body. And also the holy Sacrament it self is kept and co^serued in
his due honor which otherwise should be contemned and despised of the paganes
and infidels, if they perceived how we christian men did eat the flesh and
drink ye blood of Christ our lord god. For these causes he has ordained it,
to be ministered in the forms of bread and wine. And although our savior
Christ when he did first institute this sacrament in his supper, Aug. ad
fra^res. ser. xxviii.
did minister it to his Apostles who^ he than made priests, under both the
kinds of bread and wine, to the intent his death and passion might be declared
and remembered thereby, where his blood was separate from his body, as the bread
was seperatly consecrate from the chalice, which manner is yet continually
observed in the sacrifyce of the Church which is the Mass: yet for diverse
weighty considerations as well concerning the honor of the sacrament and the
auoidinge of theffusion of Christ's bloods which might chance, as for the more
commodious administration of the Sacrament to the people, the holy church has
used even from the time of Christ himself and his Apostles, to minister this
sacrament under the form of bread only, both to lay men and women and also
to priests, saving when they do consecrate and minister to them selves with
their own hands, Aug. de consens, e^uang. li. iiii cap. xxv. Theophilactus in
Luc. cap. xxiiii. Co^cilium gene. Co^stan. Sess. xiii. Eusebius Emesenus orat
de. corpor. and sang.
in which doing it has the example of Christ, who the day of his resurrection
ministered this sacrament to two of his disciples in the Castle of Emaus under
one kind alone, and also the people be defrauded of no part of Christ's body
and blood nor of no effect or grace that comes by the worthy receiuinge
thereof, for it is most certain that the holle body and blood of Christ is as
truly contained under the one kind of bread, as under both the kinds of
bread and wine, seeing that Christ's living body cannot be without his blood,
nor his lively blood with out his body. And it is also most certainly true yt if
the outward element of bread be divided into small parts, there is ye holle body
of Christ contained in every part as it was in the holle eleme^t before it was
divided, even as the soul of man is but one and holle in the holle body, and
is likewise one and holle in every part of the body, and also as a glass when
it is broken into pieces, the holle image of a man's face appears in every
part severally, which before in the holle glass appeared but one, Cypria.
Ser. de Cena.
eue^ so the holle body and holle blood of Christ is given under every part of
the outward forms, equal portion is given to every one, it is holle
delivered, it is distribute to many, and not dismembered, it is incorporate to
the receivers, and suffers no iniurye, it is received and not included, it
dwells with weak persons, and is not made weak, and is much delited with
the pure faith and clean mind of him that receives. For these most weyghtie
and godly considerations when the Sacrament is ministered to other than to him
self that consecrateth it, it is delivered under the form of bread only,
and the chalyce is not consecrate, nor yet delivered as any part of the
sacrament, but for the more commodyous receyuinge of the other part wherein
was contained the body and blood of our savior Christ. Therefore seeing that
the doctrine of Transubstantiation is (as I have showed) a truth necessarily
deduced of Christ's manifest words, saying: This is my body, declaring the
singular and only substance of that he gave to them to eat, to be his
body, and so not bread, seeing the universal Church of Christ has
determined this to be gods truth, and for final ending of all
controuersyes, that all men might speak one thing, and be of one tongue has
ordered it to be spoken of and uttered in this term of Transubstantiation,
and seeing the testimonies of aunciente doctors to be all agreeable in this
point, that the bread is changed into the body of Christ, whereby appears
the consent of the universal church, which is the pyller and vpholder of all
truth: for that cause let every man that loves the truth, and the salvation
of his soul stedfastlye keep himself in the belief of this truth, and so to
be a member of Christ's catholic Church, without the which there is no
salvation, and let him not join himself to any faction of men out of the
catholyke Church of Christ, that for syngularitie or gain of the world
trouble the peace of the Church, and stir up the ashes of old heresies,
which by the greateste aucthorytye that ever Christ left in his Church,
that is to say, by the judgment of the successor of saynct Peter in the
chair of Christ, and of the Bishops and pastors of Christ's flock called
from all the parts of the world in a general counsel, have been discussed
before this time and fullye determined. Let us not show so much dyshonor to
our most certain and heavenly religion, as to think that it may be variable
after the wylful and furious appetite of a few men, which is one and uniform,
and so has been from Christ's time till this day, being by gods holy spirit
the scholemaister of his holy church inspyred, reveled, multiplied, ordered,
continued, and so stablished that hell gates, that is to say, tyranny,
schisms, and heresy, shall never prevail against it. He that by unity of
faith in doctrine, and by the peace of charity in good living keeps him
self within the fold of gods catholic Church, as a lively member of the
same, may be sure of the protection of gods holy spirit, in grace, and be in
good hope to attain the glory of God in the kyngedome of heaven by the merits
of Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be honor, and
praise, world without end. Amen.

Of the effects of Christ's body and blood in the worthy receiver. Ser. ix.
HOw much (good people) are we bound to love our Lord Jesus Christ, Bernardus
in cantica. Ser. xxxi.l.
that like a good shepeherd has given his soul for us his sheep, and his
flesh to be our meat, and his blood to be our drink, and so is he both
our redemer, and redemption, our feder, and our daily food. Greater love can
no man show, than this which Christ our Lord has showed to us, Joan. xv.
but if we would consider for what cause and purpose he fedeth us with his
flesh and blood, and what wonderful graces and effects he woorketh in us
both in body and soul by those heavenly meats, our love toward him
should be a great deal more increased, and our desire should be more
inflamed to fill our hungrye souls with so profitable and precious meats. In
which matter I intend God wyllinge to labor at this time, and to make but a
short recital of certain bene^ytes which the worthy receyuinge of this
most blessed Sacrament works, first in our souls, and than in our bodies:
for to speak perfitly at length of it, and as the worthynes and dygnitie of
the matter requires, would ask a great process and a long time, which I
verelye hope your good affection in perceiving the truth and in following
the same in your lives will supplye. First of all, this holy Sacrament is
ordained and given to man to nouryshe him to eternal life. Theophilactus in
Ioa^, (...) xix.
For when our savior Christ was dead upon the cross, and his side was
perced with a spear, there came forth of it water and blood, where upon he
fourmed and builded his spouse the church: For by the water he gives to us
our being, because by it we are brought to be christen men, and by the
blood he gives to us our life, because by it we are nouryshed and fed and
preserved to continue christen men. Aug. in Ioa^ tract. xxvi.^^vii. Bernardus
sermon. in cena domini.
For by eating of him which is eternal life, we are su^e that he gives to us
the same thing that he is him self, which is life, which of our selves we
had not before, It is not given to repair the ruin and decays of this
temporal life, which like a vapor continues but a while, but to repair the
decay of our spiritual life in Christ, and to give unto our souls eternal
life, and to bring us thither again from whence we took our beginning. Aug
de verb. ^ do^mini. Ser. (...)*
This decay of our spiritual life is sustained by consentinge to sin, and
like as he that has a wound will seek for a medicyne, even so when we are in
sin, we may have this heavenly and honorable Sacrament for a medicyne. I
mean not of him that lies dead in his soul by deadly sin, for as no man
gives corporal meat to him that is dead in body: so this spiritual meat
of Christ's body and blood may not be given to him that is spirituallye dead
in his soul by deadly sin, for than he receives it unworthily to his
further judgment and condemnation, i. Cor. x^.
being gilty as Judas was of the body and blood of Christ.

Therefore if the wound of sin be so great that this sacrament can not then
be worthily received, Aug. ad Ianuar. epist. cxviii.
let him then go to penance, and by that medicine procure himself to be
restored to life again. For no doubt of it he receives this blessed sacrament
unworthily, that receives it at that time when he should do penance. But
if his sins be but venial, and such as this mortal and frail life can not
be passed over without them, then let him not forbear the wholesome medicine of
this sacrament, Cypri. ser. de cena. Ambr. de sacra. lib. iiii, cap. vi.
which is profitable to the life and health of the holl man, being both a
medicine to heal infirmities, and a sacrifice to purge iniquities. And because
a man does daily offend, and so decays in his spiritual life: therefore
ought he often to receive this spiritual medicine, which is called our daily
bread, and thereby to recover that health and strength he had lost before.
For as Adam and Eve contrary to Gods commandment by eating of the fruit of
the tree which was forbidden them, Seduli. li. i. carm. paschal.
were made mortal and subject to death, both of body and soul: even so
every Christen man and woman according to Christ's commandment by the
worthy eating of the body and blood of Christ, who is the true (...) and the
tree of life, is made immortal, and has a pledge of eternal life, both of
body and soul. And if god preserved the temporal life of the people of Israel
forty years in wilderness without any bread of sown corn, Theophi. in Ioa^.
cap. vi.
but with Manna that came from above: how much more will God preserve our
spiritual life in this world with the heavenly bread of his own flesh which
was made of the blessed virgins pure substance without the sede of man? For
this meat is the strength of our soul, Chryso. in i. Cor. x. hom. xxiiii
the synewes of our mind, the knot of our trust, the foundation of our hope,
our health, our light, our life, if we depart out of this life armed with the
strength of this meat, we shall ascend to the heavenly palace of God with
great trust and boldness, and as it were apparelled with a cote of gold.

The figure of this meat which was the blood of the paschall lamb by the
virtue of this blood which it figured, Chryso. in Ioa^. hom. xlv.
did purge the sin of the people and saved them from the sword of the angel,
and if the figure has such strength, and was so sovereign medicine against
death, what shall we think of the truth, which is the health of our souls,
whereby our souls be washed, they be adourned, they be kindled, they are made
clearer then the fire, and brighter than gold. For as a man bieth his servant
with gold, and also anourneth him with gold likewise: so Christ has bought
us with his precious blood, and does anourne us and apparelleth us with the
same blood, Chrysostom. homi. xvi. ad Hebre.
which is not now sprinkled upon us outwardly, and washed away again as the
blood of the sacrifices of the old testament was, but it enters into our
souls, and makes them spiritually clean and strong, and works in them an
unspeakable beutie, Bernardus ser. de cena domini.
so that this heavenly food is a protection and safegarde for us in all the
pilgrimage of this life, and a safe conduite for our free passage out of this
wicked world, and a strong vitale, making us able to endure the painful journey
to the kingdom of heaven. Damasce. histo. duorum milit. August. in psa.
xxxiii. Theophi. in Luke xxiiii. Cyrillus in Ioa^. lib. xi. cap. xxii,
And more over the worthy receiver is inwardlye lyghtned and sanctified, for as
they did crucify him, and put him to death, were darkened and blinded by him,
so we that worthily receive him be lightened and our eyes be opened to know
him. For the flesh of Christ to that effect has marvelous and unspeakable
virtue, as appeared in his two disciples that knew him in the breakyng of the
heavenly bread. And this virtue has Christ's body, not in that it is a
creature of God, and the body of man, but in that it is the body of God
united to the Godhead of Christ in unity of person, Theophi. Alex. lib.
pascha^i Origenes cont. cellu^ lib. viii. Cypri. lib. ii. epist. iii.
and being sanctified it self by the virtue of Christ's divinity joined to
it, it is able thereby to work sanctification in them that worthily receive
it, being made by the mistical prayer a body, not only holy and sanctified in
it self, but also sanctifyeng them that receive it with a pure mind. And as
by drinking of common wine a man's mind is refreshed, and his heauynes driven
away: so by the eating and drynkyng of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament, the remembrance of the old man, and the heauynes that for his
worldly conversation and sinful life grieved a man's heart, is put away, Ambro,
in psa cxviii. ser. xv.
and his godly affection is made dronken with spiritual wisdom and the
knowledge of God, and is endued with gladness for the remission of his sins,
and is no more combered with the cares of the world, nor the fear of death.

Thus have I declared unto you certain godly effects, which this heavenly
meat of Christ's body and blood woorketh inwardlye in the soul of the worthy
receiver, which effects and a great many mo be set forth at large in the
books of the holy fathers of the catholic church, and as I have shortly
touched those that perteine to the soul, so shall I God wyllyng with like
shortness touch those that God works by the worthy receiving of this
Sacrament in the body of man. For as the spiritual disease and death of a man
is in the soul, the occasion whereof comes by the corrupt affection of the
flesh: so this spiritual medicine of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament
works his effects, not only in the soul of man, but also in the body of
man by healynge it, by defendinge, sanctifyinge, strengthening, and reducing it
to immortalitye.

Cypri. ser, de cena.
First, seeing that we mortal and synful men be flesh and blood, we can not be
reformed in the corrupt and weak nature of our bodies and souls, nor come
again to the lykenes and symilitude of God in purity and life, except a
convenient plaster be laid to our old disease, and in the healing of our
desperate infirmity, one contrary be removed by an other, and like things be
applied and made agree unto like, as Christ's lyuelye and sanctified body to
our mortal and synnefull flesh, which thing is done in the receiving of this
most blessed Sacrament, Ibidem.
where the virtue of so great and wholesome a medicine does perse al parts both
of body and soul, and does renew and make holl whatsoever sycknesse the
corruption of old noughty living had before caused and engendered in the flesh
or in the spirit. For the body of Christ our lord received into us by the
mystical benediction (which is the sacrament) and remaining in us, Cirillus in
Ioa^. lib. iiii* cap. xvii.
drives away not only death, but also al sickness, and the poison that was
brought in by original sin, and it pacifieth and keeps under the raging law
of our members, it strengthens devotion, it quenches the froward and synful
affections of the mind, and those small sins we be in, it regards not, but
heals the sick, restores the bruised, and from falling it lifts us up.

In baptism we were washed from all sin and the writing of our damnation was
cancelled, and grace was given unto us, Bernardus sermon. de cena domini
that the con^cupiscence and carnal desire of our flesh should not hurt us,
if we abstein from consenting to it, and so the corrupt and putrified matter
of our old sore was removed and taken away. But who is able to overcome the
violent motions of his flesh, and to quench the heat and itch of such a sore ^
surely no man of his own strength, but we may be bold, for grace helps us,
wherewyth we be endued by receiving Christ's blessed body and blood in this
sacrament, which has in us two effects, the one to take away our small sins
that we feel them not, the other to take away or refrain our consent from
great and mortal sins that we do them not. So that if any of you all do feel
and perceive in himself, not so great motions, or so violent prouocations to
anger, to envy, to lechery, or to other vices, or not so often times as he
did before: let him give most humble and hye thanks to the body and blood of
our lord, for the virtue of the sacrament does work in him, and he may be
glad that the rotten sore and old disease of his sensual concupiscence, is
better amended and well nygh brought to health, and that the commotion and
rebellion of his sudden passions and carnal affections be so well ceased and
pacifyed. Nazianze. in Iulianu^. orat. ii.


Furthermore beside the healing of our sinful flesh, it sanctifies and
strengthens it in virtue and godly living, for like as material bread does
comfort and make strong a man's body: Euthi mius in Mat. cap. lxiiii.
even so the bread of life that came from heaven, which is Christ's body one
person with the godhed, does likewise make strong our bodies in grace, and more
then that, it sanctifies both body and soul. And like as wine makes glad a
man's heart, even so the blood of Christ does fulfill a man's heart with
spiritual gladness, and beside that is made a great stay and a sure defense for
it, Arnobius in psalm. xc. Ambro. in i. Cor. xi.
which to a godly man, is as it were a shield against his enemy, and therefore
in all dangerous and perilous times, in remembrance of Christ's passion, by
which al grace and strength was purchased for us, we receive Christ's body and
blood for the defense and preservation of our bodies and souls, Ignat. epis.
ad Ephesi. Cypri. li. i. epist. ii.
whereby the power of the devil is resisted and his fiery darts of tentations
be driven away. So the church of Christ uses to do with her faithful
soldiers, in all persecutions either of furious tirantes, or deceitful
heretics, for when it provoke and exhorts the^ to fight against their
enemies, it does not leave them naked and unarmed, but does harnes and defend
the^ with the protection of Christ's body and blood. For seeing this sacrament
is ordained for this purpose to be a defense to the receyuers, therefore it
armeth al them with the harnes and shield of our Lords meat, who^ it would
have to be safe from the hurt of their enemies. Chrysostom. homi. ad Neophi.
For after a man has received woorthely the heavenly meat of our Lords body
and blood, the devil forsakes him and flies away swifter then the wind, and
dare not approach nere. When the angel that destroyed the first begotten in
Egypt, Exodus xii.
saw the door posts sprinkled with the blood of the paschal Lamb, he passed
by and durst not enter in to kill. How much more will the wicked angel the devil
run away when he shall see, not the blood of the figurative lamb sprinkled
upon the posts, but the body and blood of the true lamb of God in the mouth
of a Christen man? If the angel gave place to the shadow or figure, Ambro. in
psalm. cxviii sermon. viii.
how much more will the enemy be afraid when he sees the truth? When he
shall see the house of the soul occupied with the brightness of Christ's
heavenly presence and al entrance for his temptations shut away.

Thus are we made strong against our enemies, by the virtue of this heavenly
food, whereby also our bodies being purified and refreshed, be set at liberty,
Hieron. in cap. v. ad Ephesios.
and does freely follow the soul and the motions of our spirit, being
delivered from the heavy burden and weakness which our carnal nativity did
cause, and finally, they be made no more corruptible, Iren. li. iiii ca.
xxxiiii. Nicenum concilium Athana. de p^^o^ in spiritu^ sanctu^ Iren. li. iiii
cap. xxxiiii Ioa^. vi. Cirillus in Ioa^. lib. iiii cap. xv. and li. x. ca.
xiii. Hillari. de ^rini. li. viii Cirillus in Ioa^. lib. x. cap. xiii. and lib.
xi. cap. xxvii.
having this heavenly meat for their hope and pledge of their resurrection to
life everlasting, whereby they be preserved and prepared to the atteynyng of
the same life. For how can our flesh come to corruption and peryshe for
evermore, and not receive eternal life, which is fed with the body and blood
of our Lord, as our savior himself taught us, saying: He that eats my
flesh, and drynketh my blood, has life everlasting, and I shall raise him up
at the last day, that is to say, my body which is eaten, being the body of
life, shall raise up his body to eternal life in the last day. For the very
cause of our life is, that we have Christ by his flesh remaining and abidyng
in our flesh. And it were not possible for this corruptible nature of our
flesh, being subject to corruption, and death to be brought to incorruption and
immortality in the kingdom of heaven, except an immortal nature, such as is
the body of Christ being God and eternal life it self, were joined to it
after the way of meat, by participation whereof it might be delivered from
the possession of death and corruption, and be endued with the property of
Christ's body, which is eternal life. For as Christ reduces our souls to
life eternal, Cirillus in Ioa^. lib. iiii cap. xiii.
by giving to them his holy spirit in the sacrament of Baptism, even so he
reduces our bodies to life eternal, by giving to the^ his living and
immortal body to eat in the sacrament of the Altar. And this is the ordinary
way of gods working in us, although he be not always bounden to his
Sacraments, but that he saves men some times of his absolute power before
Baptism, and rayseth some to life eternal without this sacrament, such as for
lack of age can not prove them selves, or depart in the faith of Christ
without contempt or refusal of the said sacrament, when by some vyolence or
other impediment they were let to receive it in deed.

These be (good people) some of the effects which Christ woorketh by this
Sacrament in man's body, which in very deed be merueilous, but above all other
this is the greatest that he makes us all that worthelye receive him to be one
body with him, endued with his holy spirit, whereby the perfect influence of
his grace being our head is derived and deduced unto us that be members of
his body, flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones. For as s. Paul says we
that be many, are made one bread, one body, i. Cor. x.
because all we do receive and eat of one bread, which is the natural body
of Christ, the bread of life that came from heaven, which he promised to give
to us al, as he gave it to death for us all. Ioa^. vi.


Cyrillus de trinit. lib. i.
In nature we be all diverse persons, and have sundry and diverse substances, but
because we be all fed with one singular substance of Christ's flesh which can
not be divided into parts, and also are sealed with one holy spirit, that
likewise can not be divided, therefore these singular things vndiuisiblye
received into our bodies and souls, draw us to their unity and make al us
one body mystical with Christ. Which unity is to be called true and natural
unity, Hillari. de ^ri. lib. viii.
and not only in will and affection by faith and charity, where (according
to Christ's prayer immediately after his last supper) he is in the father by
the nature of his divinity, Ioa^. xvii.
and we in him by his corporal nativity, and he in us by the Sacrament of his
flesh and blood, and so by Christ is made a perfect unity. Cirillus in Ioa^.
lib. x. cap. xiii. and lib. iiii. cap. xvii. Leo epist. x. ad Cleru^ Constant.
Like as when two waxes be melted at the fire, one holle thing is made of them
both: even so by the communion and receiving of Christ's body and blood into
ours, he is in us and we in him, and so by receyuynge the virtue of this
heavenly meat, we are incorporate into his flesh, that for our salvation was
made our flesh.

Therefore (good people) consyderyng these glorious and wonderful graces and
effects which by this holy sacrament he works both in our souls and bodies,
let us not defraud our selves of them, Cypria. de ora. doica.
neither by to long absteyning from it, nor yet by the unworthy receiving of
it, but as his exceedyng love toward us moved him to give it to us, so let it
and the benefits we receive by it increase our love toward him, and as he
that gives his life for us, and his flesh to us, will deny us nothing that
may do us good: so let us serve him with heart and will, and omyt nothing
that may please him, so shall we finally inioye the special fruit of this
most blessed Sacrament in the kingdom of God, which is incorruption and
immortality of body and soul by his grace and free gift, to whom with the
father and the holy ghost be al honor, glory and praise for evermore. Amen.

An exhortation for the worthy receiving of the holy Sacrament. Sermon. x.
Being sufficiently and most manifestlye taught (good people) by the mouth of
our Savior Christ, that in this most holy sacrament he gives unto us his
body and his blood, that was slain and shed upon the cross for the life of
the world: Chrisost. in Mat. ho. lxxxiii.
Let us faithfully believe God by his word, and not repugne against him,
although it seem not so to our senses and our carnal thoughts, for his
mysteries exceed our reason, wherein we ought to consider not what our eyes
shows us, but what his word teaches us. For our eyes may easily deceive us,
but his word can not deceive us, who in sensible things gives us heavenly
and intelligible things which our senses can not judge and discern, but
gives place to our faith directed by Gods word to the knowledgynge of this
infallible truth.

Therefore it is now our parts to prepare and make clean our bodies and
souls from al fylth of the flesh or spirit, that we may receive this
heavenly meat woorthely, considering the manyfolde graces that come by it,
and the eternal dampnation that hangs over their heads, that vnwoorthelye
presume to receive it. Remember how every man is displeased and angry with
the traitor Judas, and them that crucified our Savior Christ, and so beware
that you be not likewise giltye of the body and blood of Christ. Heb. x.
Theophi. ad Hebre. cap. x,
They most cruellye shed his blood, but he that unworthily receives him
with a foul and sinful conscience, spitefullye treads his precious blood
under his feet. No fylth or mire is so unworthy his pure and heavenly body,
as is the body or soul of man defiled with mortal sin. Chryso. in Ioa^.
homi. xlv.
And as the thing we come unto is most honorable, so the worthy receiving of
it, is most profitable. But if a man come unto it with a gilty and noughty
conscience, it increases his fault and dampnation, i. Cor. xi.
for he that eats and drinks the body and blood of our Lord unworthily,
eats and drinks judgment and dampnation to himself. For as they that do
defile the kings purple robe, are worthy to be punished as well as they that cut
or rent it, even so it is no marvel if they that receive Christ's body with an
unclean conscience, do suffer the same punishment that they do which did
nail him to the cross. Se how terrible a pain S. Paul threatens to the
unworthy receyuer, saying: Hebre. x.
A man that transgresses the law of Moses being convict by two or three
witnesses suffers death: how much more and greater punishment deserves he to
suffer, that treads under foot Gods son, and with no reverence regards
the blood of his testament, Beda in Mark. lib. iiii. ca. xiiii*
by which he was sanctified, but takes it as common meat, and does injury to
the spirit of grace, and in that he betraieth and delivers Christ as Judas
did, not now to the synful Jews, but to his own sinful members wherewith he
presumes to dishonor so inestimable a sacrament. Bernardus ser. in cena
S. Peter and Judas at one table, in one supper, did both eat of one
consecrate bread which was Christ's body, but Peter received by it life,
Judas death: to Peter it was an increase of goodness, to Judas it was a
testimonye of his noughtynesse: Peter being good and clean, took it for his
salvation, Judas being a traitor and unclean, took it to his dampnation.
August. in psa. cxlii.
The thing that was given was not evil, but a good thing was noughtely received
of an evil man to his dampnation. For after the receipt of our Lords body, the
devil entered into Judas, not that the devil did despise or contemn our Lords
body, Chrysostom. ho. de prodito^e Iudae
but the impudent wyckednes of Judas made entrye for the devil to dwell there,
whereby we be taught that the devil lies in wait and preuayleth over them
that use these secret mysteries with a corrupt mind. So that Judas as soon as
he with his traiterous mind touched the heavenly food, Cypri. ser, de cena.
and the sanctified bread entered into his cursed mouth, his myscheuous mind
not able to bear the strength of so great a Sacrament, was blown forth like
chafe out of a barn, and so headlings he ran to his treason and money, and
so to desperation and hanging. Mark the great mercy of our Savior
Christ, Chrysostom. ho. de prodit Iudae.
and the madness of Judas, for Judas bargained for thyrty pence to sell his
master, and Christ did minister to him the same blood which he sold, to
the intent he should have had remission of sins, if he would have forsaken
his wickedness. O cruel heart of this traitor, with what eyes could he look
upon him, whom he had in his mouth to eat, being both at once to Christ a
murderer and a gest, sellyng his master for a little money, and loosyng God and
him self for evermore. Even so at this day, Bernardus ser. in cena
there be in the church of God good men, as Saint Peter was, and noughtye men
as Judas was. The good receive the blessed Sacrament to their salvation, the
evil men being like dogs and swine, to their dampnation. They be dogs that
irreverently come unto it, and therefore they depart in Gods hye dyspleasure.
For they that live after the flesh, and be fettered in the cheynes of sin
and vice, they receive with Judas the traitor poison, and run to the halter
of spiritual hanging in hell, being condemned both for their other manyfolde
sins, and also for the contempt of Christ's most precious body, which in
very deed they receive, but in substance only, and not in any profitable
or wholesome effect.

Osa the priest in the old testament, put to his hand to the Ark of God to
stay it when it was like to fall of the cart, ii. Reg. vi. Eucheri. in lib. ii
Reg. cap. vi.
and God being displeased for his rash e^terprise did smite him by and by with
sodayn death. Where we may evidently se and understand how much he offe^deth
that rashly with a gilty conscience comes to the body of our Lord, when the
devout priest was punished by death, that with less reverence then he ought to
have done, did touch the Arc, which was but the figure of our Lords body.
Leui. xxii. Hiere. aduersus Pelag. lib. i.
In the old law it is said, that if a man do eat of the sanctified meat of
the sacrifice by ignorance, his sin and iniquity shall be imputed unto him,
for which cause S. Paul does warn us to come unto this most holy sacrifice of
the new testament, with much caution and warenes, least we take it to our
damnation. For if ignorance in the old law be condemned, how much is a giltye
conscience in the gospel condemned? Look how much Christ himself passes
and excels the material temple of God which Solomon builded: Basilius de
baptis. ser. ii, cap. iii.
even so much more grievous and terrible is it to receive Christ's body in
deadly sin, the^ to eat rashly of the sacrifices of the old law. Chrysostom.
ho. de prodit Iudae.
Therefore let no false and covetous man as Judas: let no man that uses
simonie or usury as Symo^ Magus: let no man bearing a malicious heart to his
neighbor as king Herod, come to this board of our savior Christ, this
sacrifice is spiritual meat. For like as common meat when it fyndeth a
man's stomach full of evil humors, it does him no good, but great hurt: even
so this heavenly and spiritual meat, if it find a man's heart full of
iniquity, it makes him worsse, not for any fault of the meat, but by the
fault of the receyuer. Chryso. ad Ephesios. ser. iii.
If he be worthy punishment that kysseth the kings hand with a foul mouth,
what pain is he worthy that kisseth the mouth of the king of heaven with a
stynkynge soul? And lest men should think that these were but vain
threatninges of Saint Paul and other holy men, Ambros. in episto. i. Cor. xi.
and that God would not enter in to judgment with them that so villanouslye
and contemptuouslye abuse Christ's body: Saint Paul does further show as
it were an image of Gods judgment to come against such unworthy receyuers
declaringe how that for that same heinous fault many now in this world are
punished with sickness, with infirmytyes, with mischaunces, with great
aduersitye, and also with sudden death of the body, to thyntent that the
multitude should be affrayd and learn by the example of a few, knowing that
god will not leave the contempt of his body unpunished, and although many
escape free here, yet they may be sure to be more extremely handled there,
both for abusing Christ's body, and also for contempninge the example of
other. And these plagues of sickness and death chance to many, because they
will not judge them selves, Origenes in psalm. xxxvii.
nor will not understand what it is to communycate with the Church and to
come to so hye and so heavenly Sacraments, and so they suffer that which men
that be in a fever be wont to suffer, when they kill them selves by
presu^^^g to eat of holle men's meat. And also these plagues chance because
they will not judge Christ's body, that is to say, Aug. in Ioa^ tract.
xxvi.lxii.
they will not discern and consider the greatness and majesty of this present
misterye, but negligentlye and contemptuously take Christ's body as other
common meat. For if they did consider and esteem of what excellency and
majesty he were that is present there before them, Oecumenius in Paulu^. i.
cor. xi.
and given them to eat, they should need no other persuasion to make clean
their hearts, and to receive him with his most honor and reverence, but he
alone would cause them to take heed and to purge them selves. For they would
consider that they receive and taste upon his body and blood, Chrysostom. ad
Ephesians. sermon. iii.
that sits in heaven, that is honored of Angels, that is of infynite
power, that made both heaven and earth, that redeemed and governs the holle
world, that shall judge both quick and dead. And on the othersyde they
would consider that if God did give unto us the heaven, the sea, the earth,
and all the riches and treasures that be in these, and if he did send unto us
his patriarchs, his prophets his Angels, he should neither give nor send to
us any thing equal with this, which is the head of all goodness, who
spared not his only begotten son to save us, that were his fugytiue slaves.
And Christ our Lord was not content only to be made man and to be whipped
and slain for us, Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. lxxxiii.
but also has brought us (as it were) into one heap of Leuin with himself,
and not only by faith, but also in very deed has made us his body: what
thing th^^ ought to be so clean as he that should receive that sacryfyce?
yea the very beams of the son be not so pure as his mouth ought to be that
should receive this merueylous body and blood of our Savior Christ.
Remember manne how God honors thee, of what meat art thou pertaker? Thou
art fed with the same thing, that the holy angels tremble at, and be not
able to behold it, for the bryghtnesse that comes from it. What shepeheard
ever fed his sheep with his own body, many mothers do commit their
infantes to be nursed of other women, but Christ does not so, who feadeth
and nourishes us his sheep or rather children with his own body, and so does
join us to him in one body. And as young infantes with great gladness do suck
the breasts of their mothers or nurses, eue^ so with greater gladness ought we
to come to the breast of our Savior there to suck the grace of the holy ghost,
and to take it most heavily and with most sorrow, if we be for our deserts
excommunicate and depryued of that spirytuall food. Therefore let us pull
down the wall that makes division between God and us, let us by penance
remove our sins, and wash our consciences, let us amend that kind of
beastlye living which we be ashamed should be laid to our charge and let
us wythdrawe our minds from the insatiable greedynesse of this world. For
what shall it profit a man to gain the holle world and loose his soul?
Mat. ii. Chrysostom. ser. de be^to philagonio,
The three wise men came out of the East country of Persis to seek Jesus
the king of the Jews, but let us go forth from our worldly cares and
carnal delites to see Jesus.

It is no great journey, we need not to pass over the sea, nor to clyme over
the mountains, but sytting at home if we be compunct in heart, and bent
toward godly devotion, we may pull down the wall of our sins, and make
short the long way of our journey and see Christ. For God is a god nigh hand
and not a far of, and nigh unto al them that call upon him in truth, Hier.
xxiii
yet now a days there be many christen men that be so full of sin, and do
so contemn godly religion, that they take no care for their soul health, not
considering that the time to receive this most holy sacrament is not this day
or that day, but when their consciences be pure and purged from sin. For as
he that is clean, may come every day, so he that is unclean, and is not
penitent for his sin, he may not come at those days, which by the Church be
appointed. For to come once a year does not deliver us from our sins, if we
come than unworthily, but rather it increases our damnation. For which cause
I shall exhort you al in our lords name that ye come not to these fearful and
terrible mysteries for a custom, as compelled by the appoyntmente of the
Church, without diligente preparinge of your selves, but that ye purge and
wash your souls diverse days before by penance, by prayer, by alms, by
spiritual exercise, and that ye do not turn afterward to your old sins, as a
dog turns back to eat again his castinge. Is it not against all reason
to have so much care of worldly things, as when the feast draws nere to
prepare new and costly apparel, to prepare great and sumptuous fare, and by
all means to trim up the body, and to have no respect of the soul but to
suffer it to be ragged and torn and to dye for hunger? and the body is decked
for the sight of the world, but the soul is always in the sight of god that
most greuouslye punishes the neglecting of it. If any man have an enemy by
whom he is hurt or offended, let him dissolve his enmity, and refrain his
hot affection and swelling of mind, that his soul be quiet without trouble
or tumult. For by this blessed communion thou shalt receive the king into thy
soul, and when the king enters, there ought to be great quietness, silence,
and peace. And although thine hurt or injury showed by thy enemy be very great,
yet thou must remit it. Because thine enemy has hurt thee, will thou therefore
hurt thy self more? whatsoever he has done, it can not be so great harm to
the, as thou do to thy self, if thou be not reconciled unto him. Will thou
show spite and villainy to God because thy neighbor has showed the like to
thee before? For to retein displeasure against him that offended the, is not so
much to avenge thy quarrel against him, as it is a spiteful contempt of god
the author of this law and commandment, that we should be reconciled to
our enemies before we come to his aultare. Therefore have no respect to thine
enemy nor to the greatness of thine injuries sustained by him, but to God
almyghtye, and printing his fear depely in thy heart consider this, that the
greater violence thou do use to thine own heart in co^pelling it to forgive
thine enemy and to be in friendship with him: the greater reward thou shalt
receive of god that commanded the so to do, and as thou do after that sort
receive god with much honor, so shall he make the reward of thine obedience a
thousand fold. This is the duty of a christen man when he comes to Gods
board to procure himself to be purged from all corruption of the flesh or
spirit, Basilius regul. lxxxi. cap. xxi.
and to have perfect holiness in the fear of God and the charity of Christ,
and to have no spot or wrincle or any such thing, and to have a perpetual
memory of him that was dead and rose again for us, and to make clean his
soul with faith, baptism, virtue, and the doctrine of the Gospel, Gregor.
Nissenus de vita Moysis.
that the corrupt manners of such as be strangers and not gods people, and the
manner of living which was used in Egipte, in the time of king Pharao, that is
to say, the holle heap of vice, be not now used but banyshed away, and so
let him come to this heavenly bread which was not brought forth of the ground
by tilling and sowing and labor of man, but which came from heaven, and is the
true bread of life, and causes the worthy receiver never to be hungry again
but to live always in immortalitye. If no man dare lay his bread upon a foul
clo^^e nor put it into a foul vessel, Primasius in epist. i. Cor. xi.
how much more may it not be received in a foul heart, which filthiness above
al things he most abhors, as the greatest injury that can be done to his
body. For as Joseph the just man wrapped Christ's body in a clean cloth, and
buried it in a new sepulcher, so ought we to lay it in a clean heart and a
chaste body. Which thing if we diligently procure, as it may be done in little
time, and make our selves not unworthy receivers of so great a treasure, than
shall Christ our lord with the Father and the holy ghost come unto us, and dwell
with us, and work in us all the godly and wonderful effects of this blessed
Sacrament both in our souls and bodies, and nourishe us into Christ's mistical
body with his own natural flesh, which as a pledge makes us to be in
sure hope of life everlasting, to the which he bring us that made us, to whom
be all honor and glory, for evermore. Amen.

How a man may come worthily to receive the blessed Sacrament. Ser. xi.
I Purpose by the grace of god in this Sermon to instruct you (good people)
how to prepare your selves to come worthelye to receive this holy sacrament,
ye know the great and marvelous benefits which Christ our Lord works in
their souls and bodies that worthelye come unto it, and also ye know the
dangerous and damnable state of them that come to it unworthily: and that ye
may the better avoid the one and be pertakers of the other, First ye ought
certainly to know that it is required that ye do come to it and receive it.
For as the unworthy coming is perilous: so not to be pertakers of this
mystical supper at all, Chrysostom. in epist. i. Cor. x. ho. xxiiii. Joan. vi.
primasius in Apo. li. iii. cap. ix. Aug. de verbis domini Ser. xxviii.
is a great offense, and a very destruction of a man's soul, as our savior
Christ taught us, saying: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you, and he that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood has life everlasting. Which is to be understand of
him that eats Christ's flesh as it ought to be eaten. For many eat it
that do not dwell in GOD nor GOD in them, because they eat it not with a
clean heart, and after that manner which Christ saw when he said so. Many
forbear to come to it, because they perceive their conscience grieved with
deadlye sin, and in that they do well, if they can so forbear iustelye
without offense of other persons. But if they forbear because they have a
wrong and false opinion of this holy Sacrament, or because they will not be
reconcyled to their neighbors, or intend not to amend and forsake their
noughtye living: then beside their heresye and other damnable living, they
offend deadlye diverse ways, both in contemninge Christ and his Sacraments
which he has ordained to be instruments wherewyth he might give unto us
grace and salvation, and also in contemninge the Church of Christ, which
has ordained that every manne and woman being of years of discretion, Ex
Council. gener. de. penitent and remiss. ca. omnis.
should faithfullye confess alone to his own curate, or by his permyssion to
some other mete and learned Priest all his sins once in a year at least,
and should to his power fulfill that penance and satisfaction which is
enjoined him, receiuinge reuerentlye at least at Easter the blessed Sacrament
of the aultare, except perchance by the counsel of his own curate, for some
reasonable cause he think meet for a time to forbear the receiuinge of it.
And that he which contemns this ordinance, should be accursed and kept from
the entering into the church among christen men, and when he is dead should be
kept from Christen men's buryall. This is the discipline and ordinance of the
Church at this day, which is not a restreyning of a man to come but once a
year, but correcting of him that comes not once a year. The oftener he
comes the better it is, and the more is he nouryshed to everlasting life.
And the better the man is, the more desirous is he to be joined to god
corporally by this Sacrament. For as Christ by giving to us his flesh and his
blood declared most of all his exceadinge love toward us, even so declares
he his love most of all toward GOD that the oftneste and with most
reverence comes to receive this precious food of his flesh and blood.
Chrysostom. in Ioa^. ho. xlv. Job. xxxi.
So did the holy man Job say of his servants that loved him most, repetinge
their words which were these. who shall give us of his flesh to eat that we
may be full withal? Which no man ever did but Christ our Lord to the intent he
might bind us to him with more charity. Such was the feruente charity of
the people in the beginning of the Church, that came every day, or in a
manner every day to this holy Sacrament, and afterward when devotion
decreased, they came every sunday, and further as the charity of the people
waxed cold the fewer times they prepared themselves to receive this Sacrament,
Fabianus decret. vii. Council. Elibertinu^. Council. A gathense.
in so much that it was decreed by certain provincial counsels, that he that
came not thrice a year, that is to say, at Easter, at Pe^thecost, and at
Christenmasse, should not be taken as a Catholyke manne. But after that, when
devotion decayed and charity was cold, and iniquitte did abound, so that men
geuinge the bridle to the flesh, were careless of their salvation, than the
Church our mother being careful for her children, and compelled by love,
partly to condescend to the infirmity of the people, and partly by discipline
to reduce the people again to their duties, did in a general counsel decree
that every person of discretion should fulfill gods commandment in receyuinge
this Sacrament once a year at least, Council. Lateran. cap. xxi.
as I have said before, under the pain of excommunication, which is the
spiritual sword of Christ to compel men to do their duties, which need not
to be drawn but for the hardness of our hearts, that love the world more than
God, and to serve the devil rather tha^ Christ the author of al grace which
is given to us in this blessed sacrament. Whereunto I shall most earnestly
exhort every man and woman as they love their own souls, and to be
preserved in grace and the favor of God, to dispose themselves often times
effectuallye to receive the body of our Savior Christ, which is every
day both offered to GOD the father for the sins and infyrmities of the
people, and also is prepared and offered to all them that will with a pure
heart receive it. For they that wilfully abstain from it, they deprive
themselves of all the graces and Godly effects which be given by it, they
loose their spiritual strength to fight against the devil, and they wax
rotten and dead members of Christ's body, lacking their food and spyrytuall
nourishment, and so are meet for nothing else but to be cast into the fire.
And they that be in conscience of deadly sin, let them by penance make
clean their conscience, for otherwise we that be ministers may not minister
but to the worthy receivers so far as we know, for if we know any man to
come to it unworthily, Chrysostom. in Mat. ho lxxxiii.
we ought rather to shed our blood, than to give Christ's body and blood to
dogs and beastly lyuers. And that every man when he is dysposed to receive
this most holy sacrament, may do it worthily to his salvation, he must observe
three things before he come to it: he must prove and judge him self when he
comes to it, he must judge and discern the body of our lord after he has
received it, Chrysostom. de prodit. Sermon. i.
he must imitate Christ and communicate with him in his passions. First he
that intends to eat the lamb of GOD, he must have the innocence of a
lamb, and may not be a wolf having woluish manners, because this is the bread
of the children of God, and not of fylthy dogs or ravenous wolfes. Justinius
martyr Apolog. ii.
And no person may be pertaker of it, but he that believes all things to be
true that be taught of the Catholic church, and is baptized in the water of
regeneration, and frames his life after that manner which our savior Christ
did set forth in his life and Gospel. Exodus xii.
For as in the old testament three sorts of people were not admytted to eat
of the paschall lamb, as strangers borne, such as were not of the stock of
Israel, and they that were not circumcised, and they that by touching any dead
or unclean thing were made them selves unclean: even so there be three sorts
of men in the new testament that may not be admytted to eat of Christ's body
in the sacrament, which was fygured by the paschal lamb, Hesechius in liuit.
li. vi. ca. xxii. Syrillus in Ioa^. lib. xii. cap. l. Aug. xxi. sentent. cap.
iii.
first al infydels such as be not true Israelites and of the house of
Christ's church by receiuinge his law and faith, secondly they that be not
baptized and so circumcised in heart, not having the vain thoughts and
works of the flesh cut away by the holy ghost, and thirdly they that be not
clean and pure in conscience but priuye to their own giltinesse, or in will to
remain in sin still. These three sorts of persons be not worthy to receive
the lamb of god our savior Christ in the blessed sacrament, but if they
presume so to do, they do it to their own damnation. Therefore whosoever will
come worthily to so great a misterye, he must be a christen manne and
steadfastly believe whatsoever truth god has reveled to his holy church, and
specially concerning the truth of this sacrament, neither oppugning it by
malicious heresye, Hesichius in leuit. li. vi. ca. xxii.
nor being ignorante of it by lack of knowledge, but acknowledginge that it
is the body and blood of Christ Gods son, verilye and in truth as
Christ's word spoken of it does plainly testifye. Moreover he must prove
himself as saint Paul teaches us, that is to say, i. Cor. xi.
he must search if he be giltye of any deadly sin, and if he find his
conscience to reprove him, Origin* in Job.
than he must refrain from the holy sacrament, till he have by true
contrytion and the sacrament of penance made clean his conscience receiuinge
remission of al his sins, and than being clean let him eat of this most
holy sacrifice of Christ's body and blood. Aug. de eccles. dogmat. ca. iiii.
And if he perceive that his conscience is privy to any venial sin, and yet
not having a will to sin after any more, than before he receive let him
satisfy for that sin with weping and prayer, and putting his hole confidence
in the mercy of God that uses to forgive sins to all that devoutly confess
them, he may boldlye and fruitfullye come to the blessed sacrament. The more
dylygence he takes in examining, serching, and purginge his conscience after
that sort as is declared in the sacrament of penance, the more boldly and
worthily shall he receive, not that any man should think him self worthy to
receive the most precious body of Christ god and manne, in respect whereof the
highest angels be unclean, but that if a man do that lies in him to wash
away the fylthynes and spots of his soul and body by contrition and the
sacrament of penance, and prepares his heart with humility and reverence to
receive the body of his lord god, than does God esteem and accept him as
worthy, that is to say, further from unworthiness than he is that takes no
penance for his sin at all.

This worthynesse may be considered and known by such observations as were
commanded to be used about the eatinge of the paschall lamb. Exodus xii.
For as the lamb was the figure of Christ in this Sacrament, so the manner of
eatinge that, is an instruction how we should worthily eat this. They that
should eat one paschall lamb were commanded to eat it in one house, and to
carye no part of the flesh out of the doors. So we be commanded to eat the
flesh of Christ our lamb no where else but in the house of god the catholic
church, Beda in leuit. cap. vi. Hieron. in Hierem. li. iiii. cap. xxxii.
and thereby all heretics and scismatikes which be out of the church are
forbidden to presume to eat of Christ's flesh, which can not be worthily
eaten but of them that be members of the Church. They were commanded to have
their reins girded: so are we commanded to have our bodies and souls
gyrded, that is to say, Clemens epist. ii. Hieron. contra Iouinian. lib. i.
Co^cilium Elibertinu^ cap. lxxxii Grego. ad interrog. August. x* Aug. Ser.
ccxvi. de tempore.
refrayned and kept from the works and lusts of the flesh by abstinency
and chastity, and not only from the unlawful vices of fornicatyon, adultry,
and such like: but also a man should abstain from the act of Matrimonye with
his lawful wife for a certain space before: how be it he that uses his wife
not for thyntent to fulfill his carnal pleasure, but only for desire of
increase of children, he ought to be leafte to his own judgment concerning
the receyuinge of this mystery, with this exhortation, that he presume not to
come, but with a pure conscience, a chaste body, and a clean heart. Also they
were commanded to have their shows upon their feet so we be command to
have the fete of our souls, Chrysostom. de prodit. Sermon. i.
which be our affections mortified by the fear of god, and preserved from the
corruption of worldly things, by the love of heavenly things, to be in love
and perfyt charity with all men, without malice, envy or double heart
toward any man. Chrysostom. de beato philagonio.
For when the king of heaven enters into us, there must be great peace,
silence, and quietness without trouble of worldly affection, all injuries,
displeasures, enemities, and trespaces must be freely and clearly forgiven, as
we would Christ should forgive us, for this is the mystery of peace and the
unity of Christ's mystycall body, Aug. Ser. ad infa^tes.
and he that receives the misterye of unity, and keeps not the bond of
peace and unity, he receives not the misterye for him self, but a testimony
against him self. Therefore of all things let us be sure of this that we be
in charity, Aug. ser. c. de te^pore.
and that no anger freate us, no pride inflame us, no lechery defile us, nor no
envy torment our hearts, when we come to our Lords table. They also did eat
the lamb with wild and sour lettes, Grego. ho. paschali. xxii.
even so must we take the flesh of our lamb with sower contrition, we must
afflicte and punish our hearts with sorrow and bitter tears for our sins,
that the bytternesse of our penance might wype away the filthy humor of
our corrupt life from our souls.

The Jews did eat their lamb standinge having their stafes in their hands,
Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. lxxxiii.
and in great haste ready to fly out of Egipte: even so ought we to stand
in true faith and good life, and not to sit or lie in corrupt doctrine or
living, but to have the staff of true hope of eternal joys to come in our
hands to stay us in the dangerous journey of this world, that we neither
faynte for werines, nor give over for cowardnes, to our gostly enemies, knowing
that their journey was but from Egypt to Iewry, and our journey is from the earth
to heaven, the strong and wholesome vittale, of which journey is this heavenly
food of Christ's body and blood. And as they were in readynes to depart out
of Egypt by and by after the eating of the lamb, Chryso. in Mat. hom. lii. op.
imperf.
so ought we coming to this blessed sacrament to have our lives so up right
and pure from all sin, as though we should even then depart out of this
transitorye world. For look in what state of clean life aman would adventure
his soul when he dies, let him with all diligence provide and procure that
his soul be in the same state when he comes to communicate. By this
comparison ye may learn (good people) how to prove and judge your selves, and
so to come worthily to this heavenly food. August. in Ioa^ tract. lxii.
Oecumenius in paul^ i. Cor. xi. Aug. ad Ianuar. epist. cxviii. Cirillus in Can.
xi. co^cilii ephesians. Ambros. i. Cor. xi.
The next thing is to learn how to judge and discern the body of our Lord when
we come unto it, that is to say, we may not vndiscretlye and negligentlye take
it, but we ought to discern Christ's body from other common meats, and
considering the great dignity and worthynesse of it, we ought to give honor
and reverence due to so great a thing as is the flesh and blood of Christ God
and man, not the flesh of man one lie, for than it could not give life, but
the proper flesh of Gods son united to his person in divinity, and is
therefore able to give life eternal to our mortal bodies. For which cause we
ought with fear, reverence, and a devout mind to come unto it, which being
the same in substance that suffered, is also the best witness of Christ's
paynful passion. Wherefore when thou do go up to the Aultare to be fed
with this spiritual and heavenly meat, Emesenus ora. de cor. domini.
behold with faith the most holy body and blood of thy God, honor it, marvel
at it, touch it with thy mind, take it with the hand of thy heart, and
specially drink of it with the draughte of the inward man. August. in psa.
xcviii. Ambro. de spu^s. lib. iii cap, xii.
No man eats worthily this flesh, but he that first honors it with godly
honor in the holy Sacrament, considering that it is great sin not to
honor it, saying it is the body of him that made thee, and with it redeemed
thee, and shall by it raise thee out of dust and ashes, for the which thou
hopest to receive heaven and the joys that be therein, Chrysostom. ho. xxiiii.
in.i. Cor. x Gerson de exercitiis simplicio^.
and to be associate to his holy angels. But where as in this sacrament there
be two things contained, the outward form of bread which is seen with the
eyes of the body, and the body and blood of Christ which is seen only
with the eyes of the soul which is faith: Therefore let every man or woman
when he sees this sacrament in the Priests hands, direct the eye of his
faith and his intent, to honor only that substance of Christ God and man,
which he sees not with his bodily eyes, but believes it most certeinlye to
be there present, and let him not fyxe his thought upon the visible whitenes
or roundnesse of the bread, which be sensible creatures reserved there for the
use of this mystery, and may in no wise be adowred and worshipped with godly
honor, but let him intend to honor the body and blood of Christ, and yet not
those as only creatures, but as they be united to the Godhead and made one
person in divinity, for only God is to be honored with godly honor,
which we do when we honor Christ God and man present in the blessed
Sacrament.

This honor specially consists in our true and lively faith which we have
of Christ there present, which honor we declare outwardly by kneling and
other reverent behauour of our bodies, protesting thereby what is our faith
and judgment concerning the substance of this most blessed Sacrament, and so
we truly judge and discern our Lords body. And for further honor to be
given unto it, Sedulius in Paulum. i. Cor. xi.
when so ever we receive it, we take it fasting before all other meats,
except extreme sickness, or the instant danger of death do require otherwise to
take it when and as we may. Aug. ad Ianuar. epist. cxviii.
For ever since the Apostles time, it pleased the holy ghost, that for the
honor of so great a Sacrament the body of our Lord should first enter into
the mouth of a Christen man, before all other external meats. For this manner
and custom is observed universally througheout the holle word. Council,
generale Latera. ca. xx. Justinius Martyr. A^polog. ii.
And for that cause it is decreed by the universal Church of Christ, that
this most honorable Sacrament should be reserved for the necessity of
them that be sick or absent, least (where as it can not be duelye consecrate
at all times and places, of a priest not fasting) the sick folks should die
without this heavenly food which is their strength, and the stay of their
passage to the next world.

Furthermore, at the time of the receiving of this Sacrament we ought to have
our minds occupied in remembryng the passion of Christ. For by this sacrifice
which Christ gives to us, we know assuredly that he boughte us with no worldly
treasure of gold and silver, but with this same his most precious body and
blood, Chryso. in Mat. hom. ^^vi.
and by it we are provoked to remember always his most hye benefit, and
therewithal continuallye to render most humble thanks to him in devout
affection and obedient service, according to his good will and pleasure. Thus
receiving the body and blood of our Lord, Cirillus in Ioa^. lib. xii cap.
xviii. August. in Ioa^. tract. xlvii.
we ought thankfullye to remember and confess that our savior Christ has
given his body to death, and shed his blood for us, knowing that we ought
again rather to suffer our bodies to be slain, and our blood to be shed for
him, and in defense of his truth, and edifyeng of his people (if the case so
required) than to forsake or deny him or the truth of his gospel reveled by
the holy ghost to the catholic church.

By this (good people) ye know how to judge and discern the body of our
Lord, and how to behave your selves when ye come to receive it. Now likewise
know what is your duty to do after ye have received it: Ye ought to keep and
preserve your selves clean from sin, rather after than before, lest you
commit any thing that might displease the presence of his majesty, who^ ye
have received, and thereby be an occasion of his departing from you, and of
wythdrawing his grace from your hearts, that have desire to have sin, which
is the mother of death, rather to reign in your mortal bodies, tha^ to have
Christ and his heavenly father with the holy ghost to make their habitation
there. As it is more shame for a man to dislodge his honest gest, and thrust him
out of doors after he has received him into his house, than at the first time
to have said him nay, and to have denied him lodging: even so it is greater
damnation, to defyle this our flesh with the fylthines of sin, when it has
received Christ's flesh and blood, and so to tread under foot Gods son:
than to have absteined and not to have received him before, making the last
end worse then the first. Wherein we be like cursed Absolon that called his
brother Amnon to a feast, ii. Reg. xiii
and caused his servants to kill him there. And also we be like to the
traitor Judas, that after with Christ in his supper he received Christ's body
at Christ's hand, gave place to the devils suggestion, and betrayed Christ his
master to the wicked Jews, and we be also like to the Jews that met Christ
coming to the city with vows of palms and olyue trees, and within five
days after cried, Crucifige upon him, and pursued him even to the death. But
our duty is to give as much reverence to Christ being present and dwelling with
us, as we did when he was coming to us, Basilius de baptismo ca. vltimo.
and not to take his precious body and blood in vain, and with out cause, but
to express in our lives that we imitate and follow his footesteps, and so keep
a perpetual commemoration of him that died for us, and rose again, in that we
be now mortified to sin and the world, and living to GOD in Christ our Lord.
For this sacrament of the Aultare, Bernar. in psalm. qui habitat. ser. iii.
wherein we receive Christ's body and blood, does signify and teach us that we
should communicate with Christ in his passions, and follow that conversation in
our manners, which be showed in his flesh, and as his body in form of bread
is seen to enter into our mouths: so we may know that he also enters into
us by that conversation which he used in earth, to dwell in our hearts by faith.

Therefore he that so remembers Christ's death, Bernardus de diligen do deo.
that he according to Christ's example, does mortify his members which be upon
earth, that is to say, fornication, uncleanness, noughtye desires,
covetousness, and such like, he eats woorthely Christ's body and blood, and
has everlasting life remaining in him, and sufferynge with Christ, shall
raygne with Christ in the glory of his father with the holy ghost world without
end. Amen.

()

Of the sacrifice of the new Testament, which is called the Mass. Sermon. xii.
AS Christ our Savior has given unto us his most precious body and blood in
the Sacrament, to be our meat to feed and nouryshe us to everlasting life: So
has he given (good people) unto us the same his body and blood to be our
daily Sacrifice for that teynynge of remission of sins and eternal
salvation, Luke xxii.
and as he commanded us to take and eat that his body which he gave us, so
has he commanded us to offer it to GOD the father in remembrance of his
passion. So that the Sacrifice of the Mass, which is the proper Sacrifice of
the new Testament (whereupon by Gods help I entreat at this time) is the
execution of Christ's commandment in his last supper, when he said to his
disciples: Do this in my remembrance, where in the bread and wine be consecrate
and changed, and the body and blood of Christ being made present there by
the almyghtye power of the holy Ghost, be offered to God the father by the
Church, for the Church, and be received of the faithful people. Christ our
Lord God, who loved us sinners so excedynglye, that for our redemption and
salvation abased him self to be made manne, Philip. ii.
and was made obedyent in humblynge himself to the most paynefull and vile
death of the Cross, and for our justification rose again the third day,
and ascended to heaven, to the glory of his father, which be the wonderful
works of God, and therefore m^rueylous in our sight: has also instituted
and ordained a memory of these merueyles, saying: Aa^obi. in psalm. cx.
So often as ye shall do these things, ye shall do them in my remembrance.
And when said our merciful Lord that word? verelye even than when he gave
the meat of his body to them that feared him. And than in his last supper did
he, Cypr. li. ii. epist. iii.
being our most hye Priest, first of al offer a Sacrifice to God the father,
and commanded the same to be done of the Priests of his Church that occupy
his office, Ireneus lib. iiii.
in memory of him, and so taught the new oblation of the new Testament,
which oblation the Church receiving of the Apostles, does offer to GOD
throughout the holle world.

And for playner understanding of this matter (good people) I pray you call to
your remembrance, the sum and ground of all our faith, which is, that we
believe to be saved only by the merits of our Savior Christ, and that he
bearing our sins in his body upon the Cross, Ioa^. i.
and being the innocent Lamb of God, without all sin him self, shed his
most innocent blood for us sinners, and by the voluntarye Sacrifice of his
own body and blood, made satisfaction for all the sins of the holle
world, and reconciled the wicked world to the favor of God again.

This bloudye Sacrifice made Christ our Savior upon the Aultare of his
Cross but ones, and never but ones, Heb. ix.x.
and it is the propitiatorye Sacrifice and a sufficient price and ransom for
the sins of al people, from the beginning of the world to the last end. Al
our comfort and joy is and ought to be in this Sacrifice and passion of our
Savior Christ, by which only we have and may have sure hope of salvation.
All that were saved from the creation of the world and the fall of Adam, were
saved by the virtue of this Sacrifice, and by lyuelye faith in Christ that
was promised to Adam, and Noe and Abraham, and the other Patriarchs and
fathers of the old testament, and all the Sacrifices which they offered then,
were but fygures of this Sacrifice of Christ, whereby they did protest their
faith in Christ to come. And likewise all we that have been justified and
saved since Christ's time, and shall be to the worlds end, obtain and
receive that redemption, remission of sin, and salvation by the only virtue
of the same bloodye Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross. When so ever we be in
sin, we resort to that passion to have remission, when so ever our works
be insufficient and imperfect, we run to that passion to have that supplied
that lacks in us, when so ever we go about to render thanks to God for all
his benefits, we can not do it woorthely and sufficientlye, till we join
our selves to that passion, that makes our thanks giving acceptable in the
syghte of GOD. No tongue can particularlye express the woorthynes and
commodities of this Sacrifice of Christ's passion, which has purchased for us
all pardon, all grace, all rightwisnes, all holiness, every good gift, and
eternal salvation. The action and doing of this Sacrifice was not long, but
accomplished and ended upon good Fridaye, which was the day when Christ dyed,
and he dies no more, but lives ever: but the operation and virtue of this
passion, is a long thing, extended to the salvation of man, from the beginning
of the world to the last end, from the time when Christ was first promised
to be the Savior to all men, till the time when he shall come again in his
Majesty to be the judge of al men. And although the sufferyng of his passion
was but short, and is already ceased: yet the effect of it which is man's
redemption and satisfaction cease not, and because it is applied to every
man that is partaker of it by lyuelye faith in continual succession during
all the time of the holle world, Eusebius Emesenus orar de ^orpo. et san.
domini.
therefore Christ our Savior wylleth that the Sacrifice of this redemption
should never cease, but be always to all men present in grace, and always
be kept in perpetual memory.

For which cause he has given and committed unto his church, the most clean
and pure Sacrifice of his body and blood under the forms of bread and wine,
and has commanded it to be offered to God, and received of us in the
remembrance of his passion, till his last coming. Which thing the church
most faythfullye and obedientlye observes and uses, Dionisius Areop, specul.
cap. iii
not by presumption, taking upon it self to offer that Sacrifice of our Savior
which is far above the dignity of man, but by commission and warrant of his
most holy word authorized to offer Christ Gods son to God the father, that
is to say, to represent to the Father, the body and blood of Christ, which
by his omnipotent word has there made present, and thereby to renew his
passion, not by sufferyng of death again, but after an unbloody manner, not
for this end that we should thereby deserve remission of sins, and
delyueraunce from the power of the devil, which is the proper effect of
Christ's passion, but that we should by our faith, devotion, and this
representation of his passion, obtain the remyssion and grace already
deserved by his passion, to be now applied unto our profytte and salvation,
not that the passion of Christ is vnperfytte, or needs any work of ours
to be added to supplye the imperfection of it, but to comfort and relieve our
imperfection, that some drop of grace may be drawn and brought unto us
out of the fountain of all grace, and wellspring of his passion, not that we
can apply the merits of Christ's death as we list, and to whom we list,
but that we by this representing of his passion, most humblye make petition and
prayer to almighty God to apply unto us that remission and grace which was
purchased and deserved by Christ's passion before, after the measure of his
goodness, to al those whose faith and devotion be known unto him. So that the
host or the thing that is offered both in the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, and in the Sacrifice of the Church upon the Aultare, is all one in
substance, being the natural body of Christ our hye Priest, and the price
or ransom of our redemption, but the manner and the effects of these two
offrynges be diverse, the one is by sheddyng of Christ's blood, extendyng to the
death of Christ the offerer, for the redemption of all mankind: the other is
without shedding of his blood, only representynge his death, whereby the
faithful and devout people are made partakers of the merits of Christ's
passion and divinity. Greg. Na^^anze. in Iulia^. ora. i. Psalm. cix. Oec^men.
in cap. vii. epist. ad Hebreos. Council. Nicenu^ gene. Hierom, quest. in gen^sin.


Thus is Christ a Priest for evermore after the order of Melchisedech, who in
his last supper offered his body and blood without sheddynge of his blood,
and so taught and delivered to his Apostles and their successors Bishops
and Priests, the manner how they should offer him, being the lamb of God in
sacrifice for evermore to the worlds end, after the order, that is to say,
after the ryte and manner of Melchisedech, under the form of bread and wine,
who in old time in figure of Christ offered bread and wine, Paula ad Mercella.
and did dedicate and prophecy before the mystery or sacrament of us Christen
men in the body and blood of our savior. Whereof also spoke Malachie the
prophet saying, Malachi, i.
that in this our time of the new testament God would reiecte and detest the
Jews and all their sacrifices of brute and unreasonable beasts, and that his
name should be magnified among the Gentiles from the rising of the Sun to the
setting, Aug. co^tra Iudeos. cap. ix. Aug. de. ciuita. dei. li. xvii ca. xx.
and that one singular and pure sacrifice without spot or imperfection, should
be of them offered to him, not only in one place among the Jews, but in every
place among the Gentiles, which sacrifice should succeed all the other
sacrifices of the old testament which were offered in the shadow of this to
come. Aug. co^tra faustu^. lib. xx. ca. xviii
For the Jews in their sacrifices of beasts, did as it were by prophecy
declare and signify before, that saving sacrifice which Christ offered upon the
cross: and the Christen me^ now do celebrate the memory of the same sacrifice
of Christ that is past, even by the offering and receiving of the same body and
blood that suffered passion. Aug. de. ciuitat. lib. x. cap. x^.
For as Christ upon the cross being the head of all us his mystical body the
church, offering there himself, did also offer all us that be of the church
to God the father, for the pacifyeng of his wrath and indignation against our
sin: so we being his mistical body, do use to offer to god the father Christ
our head, and by his merits do beg pardon for our offe^c^s, knowing that
God, Romans viii*
who spared not his only begotten son, but gave him to us for our
redemption, will now deny us nothing for his sake that we have need upon,
who is now also at the right hand of God and makes intercession for us. So
that Christ in heaven and al we his mystical body in earth do both but one
thing. For Christ being a priest for evermore, after his passion and
resurrection, Heb* i^.
entered into heaven, and there appears now to the countenance of God for us,
offering him self for us, to pacify the anger of God with us, and representing
his passion and all that he suffered for us, that we might be reconciled to God
by him: Even so the church our mother being careful for all us her children
that have offended our father in heaven, Grego. ho. xxxvii*
uses continually by her public minister to pray and to offer unto god the
body and blood of her husband Christ, representing and renewynge his passion
and death before God, that we thereby might be renewed in grace, and receive
life, perfection, and salvation. And after the same sort the holy angels of
God, Chrysostom. hom. iii. de inco^p. dei. nat^*
in the time of this our sacrifice do assist the Priest and stand about the
host, thynking than the meetest time to show their charity toward us, and
therefore holding forth the body of Christ pray for mankind as saying thus:
Lord, we pray for the^ whom thou have so loved, that for their salvation, thou
haste suffered death, and spent thy life upon the cross, we make supplication
for them, for whom thou have shed this thy blood, we pray for them, for whom
thou have offered this same thy very body, O Lord what earnest desire should we
have to be present, and to associate our selves in the oblation of this our
Sacrifice, which we know Christ him self always to do, and also his holy
Angels and Archangels, and is so acceptable a thing to God the father, for all
our sins and ignoraunces* Chryso. in Act. ho. iii
For in that hour when Christ's death is renewed in misterye, and his most
fearful and acceptable Sacrifice is represented to the sight of God, than
sits the king upon his mercy seat, inclined to give and forgive what so
ever is demanded and asked of him in humble manner. Cypri. ser, de cena.
In the presence of this body and blood of our Savior Christ, the tears of
a meek and humble man never beg pardon in vain, nor the Sacrifice of a
contrite heart is never put back, but has his lawful petition granted and
given.

By resorting to this Sacrifice of the Mass we euidentlye declare and protest
before GOD and the holle world, that we put our singular and only trust of
grace and salvation in Christ our Lord, for the merytes of his death and
passion, and not for the woorthynes of any good work that we have done or can
do. Bernard. in cantica. ser* xxii.
And that we make his passion our only refuge. For when wisdom fails,
which only comes by the doctrine of Christ, when ryghtewysnesse lacks,
which only is gotten by the mercy of Christ, when virtue cease, which
only is received of him that is the Lord of all virtue, than for supplieng of
these our lackes and needs, our refuge is to Christ's passion, than we ru^ne
(as the prophet says) to the cup of our savior, P^al. ^^v.
a call upon the name of our lord, that is to say, we take his passion, and
offer to God the father in mystery, (...). in p^a^. l^xv.
the work of our redemption, that by this memory and commemoration of it, it
would please his merciful goodness to innouate his grace in us, and to
replenish us with the fruit of his sons passion and death. For that
commemoration of which our Lord said, Origin. in (...), hom xiii.
do this in remembrance of me, is thonelye commemoration that makes God
merciful unto us. We are become debtors to almighty god two ways, for our
manifold sins and iniquities done against him, and for his manifold benefits
and graces given unto us. As for the debtes of our sins, many pay very
evil that drive of their penance to their last age, and many pay nothing at
all that die with out penance and charity, and they that labor to pay all
they can all their life, can never fullye pay their holle debte, no, scant one
farding of a thousand pound. What remedy then have we, but to ru^n to the
rich man our neighbor that has enough to pay for us all, I mean Christ our
Lord that has paid his heart blood, for no debte of his own, but for our
debte, and there whiles we celebrate the memory of his passion, we acknowledge
and confess our sins which be without number, and grant that we be not
able fully to satisfy for the lest of them, and therefore beseech our merciful
father to accept in full payment and satisfaction of our debtes, his passion,
which (after this sort as he has ordained to be done in the sacrifice of the
Mass) we renew and represent before him, and where our sinful life has
altogether displeased him, we offer unto him his well-beloved son Jesus in
sacrifice, with whom we are sure he is well pleased, most humbly making
supplication to accept him for us, in whom only we put all our trust,
accompting him all our rightwisnes, and the author of our salvation* And as for
his manyfolde benefits and gifts of nature, of grace, and of fortune, what
have we to render to God again Sinners that have taken their soul in vain,
and give both their souls and bodies to serve the world and the flesh, and
abuse the goods of the world, as sticks and matter to kyndle the fire of
their vain and carnal lusts, they be most unthankful, and deserve most
punishment. But other men that consider all they have to be Gods gifts, and
given to them, not to do their wills withal, but to give an account again of
the well using of them, and therefore bestow their external goods in the works
of mercy and pity, and bring their bodies in bondage to their spirit, and
their souls to be ruled by the spirit of God, and so dedicate the^ selves
holy to Gods service: These men be good, and make of their goods, their
wylles, their bodies and souls sweet sacrifices of praise and thanks giving
to almighty God, but yet al these sacrifices in comparison of the great heap
of benefits which God has given, does give, and shall give unto us, be but
as it were one drop to the hole sea, a little warte to a great mountain, and
because they be imperfect and in many things spotted with sin and unclean,
therefore they be not worthy to be represe^ted before God as thanks, seeing all
we have done, is but our duty and skarse that. For which cause we resort to
the body of Christ, Bernardus ser. de Epiphania. Chrysostom. in. Math. hom. xxvi
whom God has given to us, and him as being ours, we offer to God again, and
so in him we supplye that we lack in our selves. For it is he that by his
propiciatorie sacrifice (which we celebrate in the holy Mass) does reconcile
us to God, and with the plenty of his gfites makes us thanks geuers, and in
all things takes upon him our person, and supplieth that we ought to do, and
by the very nature of his sacrifice, which is his body, styrreth us to
continual giving of thanks, so that our Sacrifice being Christ's body, as it
is the greatest gift that God gave man: So it is a worthy and a real giving
of thanks for all his other gifts. Aug. co^tra faustu^. lib. xx* ca. xxi.
And therefore it is also called Sacrificium Eucharisticu^* a sacrifice of
thanks giving, not only for that we by it give thanks to God in words and
prayers, but also for that it is it self a sacrifice of thanks for our
redemption, for the hope of our health and salvation. Aug. co^tra faustu^. lib.
^^. ca. xxi. (...).
And where as sacrifice is the greatest and chiefest kind of adoration that can
be, perteyning to Godly honor called Latria, therefore we do make sacrifice to
no creature, neither to Saint nor Angel, but only to the holy Trinity,
which is the only and true God, and all our Temples and Aultars be builded,
erected, and dedicate only to God, there to do Sacrifice to God, and to no
Saint, Aug. de ciuit. lib. viii cap. xxvii. et lib. xxii cap. x.
although in our Sacrifice we name, and have remembrance of the holy Martirs
and saints, both to thank God for their vic^ories, and also to provoke our
selves to imitate them in the ouercomming of our ghostly enemies.

By this (good people) that I have declared unto you, ye ought truly to
understand and believe that Christ's natural body in the blessed Sacrament, is
the proper sacrifice of Christ's church, and that Christ himself, both by
his own deed, and also by his express word and commandment, did
institute and ordeyne that the church his spouse should by her public
ministers being Priests, offer to almyghtye God the father, with the son and
the holy Ghost in sacrifice, the same his natural body in remembrance of his
passion, which passion the church now daily to the worlds end does renew
in misterye, and does represent before God in the holy Mass, for the
atteynynge of all the graces and benefits purchased by the same passion
before, after the measure of his goodness, and as our faith and devotion is
known unto him, and in all her needs and troubles, it resorteth to GOD,
trustyng to have relief and mercy, only for the merits of that passion,
which it represents to GOD, as a full satisfaction for all her offenses, and
as a full per^ection of thanks for all his former benefits and gifts. And
finally by this Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in the Mass, we certainly
declare and profess that nothing does exercise our faith in the knowledge of
God and of our selves, more then this Sacrifice of the Mass does, and that
nothing does more increase our charity and hope in the mercy of God, and it
declares that we believe that there is no Savior, but only Christ our
Lord, and that we have no refuge but to him, ascribing altogether to the
merits of his passion, and so by it we most of al set forth our humility, and
the glory of Christ and his true honor.

Which sacrifice if we daily and devoutly exercise and come unto, and behave
our selves as becomes Christen men, and in such affection and intent as I
have declared now how the church does, no doubt of it, but we shall perceive
great comfort in our hearts, great amendment in our lives, and great
furtheraunce to the atteyning of everlasting life, to the which he bring us,
that by his passion redeemed us, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be
all honor, glory, and praise for evermore. Amen.

()

Of the godly prayers and ceremonies used in the sacrifice of the Mass. Sermon.
xiii.
IF in that Sacrifice which is Christ, Cypri. li. ii epist. iii.
no man is to be followed but Christ: it is meet for us to be obedient, and
to do that thing which Christ did, and commanded to be done. And therefore
(good people) considering that this our sacrifice of the Mass, is (according
to Christ's commandment) the commemoration of Christ's passion, the holy
Church of Christ ever since the time of his passion, has obedientlye used to
do as he did. He did consecrate the bread and wine with his omnipotent
blessinge, and made there present his very body and blood, and also he
offered that his body and blood after the order and manner of Melchisedech to
his father, and thirdlye received it him self, and gave it to his disciples:
Even so the holy Church in Christ, and Christ by the holy Church, does the
same in all points at this day: for the special and substantial part of the
Mass consists in these three points, in consecratinge the bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ, in offering of the same body and blood
of Christ to God the father, and in receiving of the same by the devout and
faithful people.

Christ also after his supper and before his passion did say an hymn, before
he went forth to the mount Oliuet, and he taught his disciples many necessary
things, Mat. xxvi. Ioa^. xv.xvi
and promised to send unto them his holy spirit, which should teach them all
truth, which then they could not bear, and afterward prayed long and
fervently for his faithful disciples, Ioa^. xvii.
and for the holle Church that should by their word believe in him, and
specially for their peace and unity in God, and among them selves.

In these things also the holy church does follow the example of Christ
her head, which in the ministration of this Sacrifice uses to join almost
all the other in ward Sacrifices of a Christen man, as confession of sins,
invocation of Gods mercy, the praise of God, petitions for things needful,
the doctrine of the people, the profession of our common faith, the giving of
thanks to God, prayers for all states of Gods church, the honoring of
Christ, the asking of Gods peace, the exhorting to the same with diverse other
godly exercises, which I shall (God wylling) at this time shortelye and
particularlye show unto you, to the intent you may know how there is nothing
contained in the Mass, but a heap of all godlynes and spiritual Sacrifices,
and thereby to be the more provoked and disposed to the often using and
frequenting of the said Mass.

First of all the holy vestementes wherewith the priest goes to the Aultare,
beside other mysteries which they teach and signifye, they renew the memory of
Christ's passion in our hearts. Luke xxii.
For as the Jews did first cover Christ's face, and did mock him and buffet
him, so has the Priest in memory of that, an Amise put upon his head, and
also the white Albe put over al his body, Luke xxiii.
does bring us in remembrance how Christ was contempned of king Herod, who
in mocking of him, put upon him a white apparel, and sent him back again to
Pilate. And the Maniple upon the priests arm, and his gyrdle about his white
Albe, and the stole about his neck, do show to a man how Christ was bounden
fast to a pillar when he was whypped and scourged. Ioa^. xix.
And as Christ was crowned with thorn, Mark. xv.
and had his hands and feet nailed to the cross, so in the Amysse and Albe
of the priest there be tokens of these five wounds. And the the upper
vestement of the priest puts us in memory of the purple robe that Pilates
soldiers put upon Christ after they had scourged him. Math. xxv
And upon the back of this vestement commonly there is made the sign of the
cross, teaching us how Christ was compelled to bear his own cross upon his
back through the city, Ioa^. xix.
so that when so ever we see the priest thus appareled, go up to the Aultare to
celebrate the commemoration of Christ's passion, we may remember how cruelly
Christ was handled of the Jews, and after what sort he went up to the
mount of Caluerye to suffer his passion for the redemption of man.

The priest coming to the Altar begins first of all with the sacrifice of
a contrite heart, without the which no man can do the work of God
woorthelye, The confession.
and there beside the Sacramental confession, which he has made before (if his
conscience did reprove him of any deadlye sin) he makes also a general
confession of al his sins, not excusing his fault or laying the blame upon
God, or any other thing, but knocking upon his breast, accuses and judges him
self. And because our deadly offenses be done against God, and his hole
church, therefore he makes his confession to God, and to the holle church,
both triumphant in heaven, and militant here in earth, requyring of God pardon
and remission, and requyring of the Church aid to join with him in prayer,
and as they that do there assist him, do pray for him in his hearing, so is he
sure that the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven are of their aboundaunt
charity glad of his penance, and pray for his pardone and amendment.

In the mean time the quere and the Priest also at the Altar, The office
do begin the office of this ministration with an Hymn or Psalm, or some part
of a Psalm, as the church does in all other service, and with it he uses an
other inward sacrifice, Kyryeley^on*
which is the invocation of Gods help and mercy, which for fervent desire to
have his petition granted of almightye God by the merits of Christ, he
repeteth it diverse times.

And for such certain and sure confidence, which he has of Gods mercy for
Christ's sake, he begins by and by after that the Sacrifice of praise,
Gloria in excelsis.
and uses the same words that the Angels praised GOD with all, when they
brought the glad tidinges of Christ's nativity to the world, which the Priest
and the quere do prosecute and continue for joy that God has wrought
mercyfully among men.

And then the Priest saluting and wyshyng well to the people, Dominus vobiscum.
The collect.
to stir their hearts to devotion, and to join with him in the common
prayer, says the collect which is a Sacrifice of prayer for all such things
as the people has need upon, and is called a Collecte, for that the common
petitions of the people be collected and gathered together in one prayer, and
is offered and uttered only by the mouth of the Priest in all their names,
whereunto the people answeryng Amen, gives their consent, praying GOD to
grant that for all their salvation, which is required in all their names.

After these Sacrifices of Confession, invocation, praise, and petitions,
Epistle.
the Priest conuerteth his words to the doctrine of the people, and first
begins with some part of the law and Prophets, or of Saint Paul's epistles,
wherein is showed the true meaning of the law and Prophets, preparing their
hearts to the most perfect and most wholesome doctrine of the Gospel of Christ,
the spiritual food of men's souls, Gospel.
to the intent that such as be not partakers of Christ's body and blood
corporallye in the Sacrament, may yet by the instruction of the holy word
of God be fed spiritually in their souls by faith, that like as the holy
Mass is the exercise and practice of good living, so it might also be the
school and teacher of true faith. And between these two doctrines of the Law
and the Gospel, are said or song certain Canticles or songs of Gods praise,
according to the condition and nature of the time, as the Grale and Tract for
the time of penance, G^ale. Tr^ct. Alleluya.
when men lament their sins and myserye of this life, and the prolonging of
the life to come, or else the Alleluya, which is a song of Gods praise for the
time of joy and gladness, when men rejoice, considering the state of their
eternal felicity to come, using still the old strange word without
interpretation, declaring thereby that as yet they be ignorant of such joys as
God has prepared for them that love him.

At the rehersyng of the Gospel the priest saluteth the people, preparyng
their hearts to the hearing of Gods word, wishinge grace to be g^uen to them
of God, to receive his word with humility and meekenes, which is able to save
their souls. And the people rising up, and standing reverently bareheaded,
declare them selves to be attent and ready to hear the Gospel of Christ, and
do glorify God that has vouchesafed to make them partakers of his Gospel,
which is the virtue of God, Romans i.
for the salvation of all them that believe.

And the priest making a cross upon the book and his forheade, declares that
this doctrine is not invented by man, but reveled by God, and perteyneth to the
mystery of Christ's cross, and our redemption, and also protests with the
people, that their duty is not to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ's
cross, but to believe in their heart, and to confess it with their mouth. And
for proof of the same, Roma. x.
that faith comes by hearing of the word of God, by and by after the
readyng and preaching of the Gospel, the Priest begins to profess and
offer the sacrifice of faith, Creed.
which the quere or people also profess with great gladness, in such form
of words as the ancient and holy fathers assembled in the first general
council at Nyce, did utter their faith, to the confusion of all heretics
that were before them, declaring that they have the foundation of their faith
no where else, but of Christ's mouth, and the preaching of his holy word.

Here ends the Mass of them that be but only learners of our faith, and be
not yet Christened, Missa Catechumenorum*
which in old time were not admit to be present among Christen men, in the
time of the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, but after the prayers and
doctrine ended, were secluded from the Church, but this manner is not used now
in the Church, because every one is Christened being a child, and learneth
our faith afterward. And the Priest proceeding forward, Offertory or oblatio^*
exhorting all the people to pray, does offer to God the matter of the
consecration, which is bread of wheat, and wine myxed with water, which be
not yet consecrate, but prepared to be consecrate, and directinge his eye and
intention to the body and blood of Christ, that afterward be made present by
the consecration, as Christ prayed before his passion, for all them for whom
he suffered: so the Priest before the mistical oblation, says that he offers
it to God, in the honor of God and all his Saints, for his sins and
offenses, for the salvation of all that be living, and for the rest of all them
that be departed, and prays that God would so accept it. For to this end
every Sacrifice that we make, and every good deed that we do, is intended and
directed, which they be not able to bring to pass but by the merits of
Christ's bloodye Sacrifice upon the cross. And here beginning this most holy
and sacred mystery, for reverence to the holy sacrament, the priest washes
his hands, that no outward filthynes should seclude him from the communion,
washing of hands.
and therwithal prays to be made clean from all uncleanness of body and
soul, that in clean life he might perform the holy work of God, which is
also a lesson to the people, and to put away noughty thoughts out of their
hearts, least God offended with their sinful thoughts, do turn his face
away from their oblations and prayers. And as the Priest before exhorted the
people secretlye to prayer, Secret collect. Chryso. de sacer. lib. iii
so does he pray secretlye him self, with much devotion, that their common
Sacrifices may be acceptable to God for them, and that it would please
almyghtye God to grant that the influence of his grace might discende and
sanctify the oblations, Council. Laodicense. cap. xix.
that when they be sanctified and received, the heavenly virtue and effects
of the blessed Sacrifices may take place in the hearts of them for whom they
be offered. To which prayer when the people has consented saying Amen,
Conci. Bracarense. i. cap. xxi. Sursu^ corda. Chryso. in Enceniis.
the Priest saluteth the people, and wishes well to them, and they to him
again, and he exhorts them to lift up their hearts to God, and so to prepare
their hearts to the Sacrifice of thanks, which they by their holle consent
promise to do.

Therefore I beseech all you (good people) to take heed to your promise, and
be ashamed to be found liars in the presence of God, Cypri. ser. de ora.
dominica. Prefatio.
specially in the time of the terrible sacrifices. Put away all carnal and
worldly thoughts, and think upon nothing but upon that ye pray. For the
Priest in this preface of the Mass before the canonical prayer, does exhort
the people to lift up their hearts to God (which they answer, they do) to
admonish them that they ought to think upon nothing but upon God. Shut the
door of your hearts against the devil, and let it be open only to God, and
let not Gods enemy enter in the time of prayer. For this is the subtyle craft
of the devil to call our minds from God, and so to make void our prayers,
that we should have one thing in our mouth, and an other thing in our heart,
where as God ought to be prayed unto, not with the only sound of the voice,
but with a pure intent, and a vigilant mind, earnestlye thynking upon that he
prays. For no man can woorthelye give thanks to God that has not his heart
lyfted up to God. August. de spirit. et litera. cap. xi
And because the true honor and woorshyppynge of God, stands in this most
of all, that our soul be not unthankful to him: therefore in the most true
and syngulare Sacrifice, we are admonished to give thanks to our Lord God,
which is most seeminge and right we should do, seeing he can not be called
thankful, that ascrybeth to him self that is given to him of God. And then
the priest begins the Eucharisticall Sacrifice of giving thanks,
Eucharistia thanks giving.
as a public person in the name of all the Church before the consecration,
folowinge the example of Christ, who in his last Supper gave thanks to God
the father, Mat. xxvi.
and than blessed and distributed his body and blood to his disciples.

In this geuyng of thanks by Christ our Lord, Chryso. de sacer. lib. vi
for whose merits they be only acceptable, he prays to be joined and
associate with the Angels and Archangels, and all the whole army of the blessed
spirits in heaven, who than do assist the Priest, and be present there in the
honor of him that is offered, praysinge, honoring, Esaias. vi. Apoca. iiii.
and adouringe the Majesty of almyghtye God, and with them sings the Hymn
of the Angels and Evangelists, geuyng honor, glory, and benediction to the
Lord God of hosts, Math. xxi.
using also the same words of praise that the children and the people of the
Jews used in praising Christ when he came ryding to Jerusalem as a king, and
yet humblye upon an Ass, not to take upon him the kingdom and pomp of the
world, but with his passion and death to redeem the world.

The rest of the Mass that follows, is that part which is called the Canon,
Canon.
which is spoken in silence, to declare unto us the heauynes of Christ's
passion, and that the priest may the better convert and set his holle mind and
attention upon the work of GOD, and the words of his prayer and
consecration. And he uses very few ceremonies, saving only certain crosses
upon the host, partelye to move the people that stand by, to consider the
passion, and partlye to declare that our redemption was wrought by the
voluntary will of God the father, that gave his Son for us, and also by the
will of the Son, that having such power of his own soul, that no man
could take it from him, yet offered him self by the holy Ghost a clean
Sacrifice to God, to purify our hearts from sin.

In this Canon all inuocations, all prayers and petitions be made and directed
to God the father, for his Soune Jesus Christ's sake our Lord, and be made to
no creature, neither in heaven nor in earth, but to him: and in it be
expresselye declared what we offer to him, for whom we offer, with whom we
offer, and to what end we offer.

The thing that we offer to God, is Christ him self, nothing have we that is
perfect and pure to offer to God, but Christ that is given unto us for that
purpose, whom we do not now offer in figure as the Jews did in the old law,
Aug. de trinita. lib. iiii cap. xiiii.
but in very truth, and yet in a Sacrament. For what is more meet to be
offered for man, then the flesh of man? and what flesh is so acceptable, as
the flesh of our Sacrifice being the body of our priest? For Christ
remains one God with him, to whom we offer, and has made him self one with
them, for whom we offer, and he is one with us that do offer, and he is the
one and the self same thing that is offered: So that our external Sacrifice
that perteyne now to the new Testament, is the innocent Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world, Concilium Nicenum. Chrysostom. ho. ^e laud
dei.
which Sacrifice lies upon the Aultare, and is offered now of the priests
without shedding of his blood, and is the holy bread of eternal life, and
the cup of everlasting salvation.

Secondlye because Christ sufferynge his passion, offered his body and blood
for the holle Church, both those that were alive, and those that were dead,
therefore the Church renewynge in mystery Christ's passion, offers likewise
the same body and blood for the holle church, both for the quycke and the
dead, and that in special words. First generallye for the holle Catholyke
Church of Christ, secludinge all those that be out of the Church, (for no man offers the body of Christ, but for them which be the members of
Christ) and then particularly for the Gouerners of the Church, and of common
wealths, Chryso. and Theophil. in Ioa^. cap. xxi.
as for the Popes holiness the Successor of Saint Peter, to whom Christ
did commytte the cure and charge of his universal Church throughoute the
world, for Bishops, for Kings and Princes, and in especial for such as
the Minister any way is bound to pray, and for them that be present and
communicate with the Priest in true faith and devout affection: And also the
Church offers Chris^e for the souls of them that be departed, having at
their departing the signs of faith, which be the holy Sacraments and good
works, and sleepynge in the sleep of peace, which is the peace of
conscience toward God, with sure hope and trust of remission by Christ,
that is to say, for such as in their lives obtained so much grace of God,
that our charity and Sacrifices might help and relieve them after their
death. For seeing the souls of such be not separate from the Church, which
is the kingdom of Christ, among the members of which kingdom there is a
mutual communion of all good deeds and godly works or Sacrifices,
therefore the Church commends them to the mercy of GOD, and the intercession
of Christ's oblation, Innoce^tius iii. lib. iiii* cap, v.
verelye beleuyng that the precious blood of Christ, as it is profitable for
the salvation of the lyuinge, so it is also auaylable for the absolution and
perfection of them that be dead, that they being for a time deteyned in the
temporal afflictions and purgacions, might the sooner by the virtue of this
blessed sacrifice be delivered and brought to the place of light and eternal
peace, where nothing enters that is spotted and imperfect.

Thyrdlye, because the blessed virgin Marye the mother of God, and the holy
Martirs and Saints in heaven, be also our brethren and members of Christ's
Church, for the which Christ suffered his passion, and being knyt to us in
one communion by the band of perfect charity, and being careful for us, and
they be sure for them selves, cease not to communicate with us in prayer, and
to require of Christ the perfection of his body, which is the church:
therefore in our oblation of Christ's body and blood, we join with them, and
with honor and reverence we remember them at our Lords table, not to pray
for them as we do for other, August. in Ioa^. tract. lxxxiiii.
that rest in peace, but rather that they should pray for us* that we may
follow their footesteppes, and in all our affairs be defended by Gods
protection, and that by the merytes of Christ, whom we pray not to weye our
merits, but to pardone our offenses.

And last of all in the Canon is expressed for what end we offer Christ,
that is to say, in remembrance of his passion, his resurrection, and glorious
ascension, most humblye beseching that God of his mercy would accept him for
us and our salvation, and where as he is for him self most acceptable in his
sight, that likewise he would accept us, that be his body in earth for
him, that by participation of his most precious body and blood, we might
be fulfilled with all grace and heavenly benediction.

Thus does the church offer Christ her head to GOD the father, as a woorthye
Sacrifice of praise and thanks for her redemption, for the hope of health and
salvation, and for all his other benefits, and also it offers him as a
Sacrifice propitiatorye, by the virtue of his passion, for all her sins and
offenses, that we in this world might live in peace with GOD, and afterward be
delivered from eternal dampnation, and with his elec^es be rewarded in the
kingdom of heaven*

And to conclude this Canonical prayer, the Priest having Christ Gods Son
in his hands before him, who is the only Mediator between GOD and manne,
trustyng to obtain what so ever he asks in his name, and being instructed
by him, how to pray to the father, says boldlye the Pater noster, in which
prayer is contained all that is good and needful for the life of man, both
temporal and eternal. And so makes an end of the Canon.

And because this is the mysterye of unity and peace, which can not be
had, but by the mercy of Christ: therefore the priest turnyng him to the
Lamb of God, who only takes away the sins of the world, prays
devoutly for the peace of conscience which comes by remissyon of sin, and
for the peace of his affections which comes by the mortification of the
flesh, and also for the peace of brotherlye charity, which is poured into
our hearts by the holy Ghost, and so takes and gives to the people the
kiss of peace, the token and testimonye of unity and Christen charity.

The other prayers that follow in the Mass perteyne to the devotion of him or
them that receive the blessed Sacrament, that they may receive it worthily to
the profit and salvation both of body and soul, and that it might be
acceptable to God for all them for whom it is offered, therefore (good people)
seeing that I have now by Gods help declared unto you as shortly as I could
the holle sum of all that is said and done in the Mass, which is all most
godly, and most comfortable, perteyning al to this end, to set forth the
benefit of Christ, and the virtue of his passion, and containing in it
almost all the spiritual Sacrifices of the new law, and the exercisies of
true faith, as confession of sin, invocation of God, prayer, doctrine, gyuing
of thanks, and such other as I have rehearsed: I shall most heartily require you
(as you are most bounden) to have this work of God in such estimation as
becomes Christen men that be members of Christ's Church, redeemed with bys
precious blood, and that by using of this Sacrifice of the church, which is a
commemoration of Christ's passion, most acceptable in the sight of God, and
commanded by Christ to be done of us, ye might thereby receive plentuous and
abundant grace and mercy, both for you that be alive, and also for them that
be departed in the faith of Christ, and in all your necessities and
distresses, relief and succor. And when the consecration of the very body
and blood of our Savior is made by the power of his omnipotent word, and
the price of our redemption is lifted up for you to see by faith, under the
several fourmes of bread and wine to be adoured and woorshipped with godly
honor: then call to your remembrance how that Christ for your salvation was
lifted up alofte in the air upon the cross to be seen of all the world, and
how his precious blood ran forth abundantly, out of all the wounds of
his body, and then pray that God the father would look upon him for us, and
accept him for a full satisfaction of all our sins, over and beside all that
we can do and suffer, and for a perfect supplieng of all our negligences and
vnperfitenes, and for a worthy Sacrifice of thanks for all his benefits
given unto us.

And to the intent ye might be more intirelye joined to Christ, and be more
replenished with his gifts and grace, I would wyshe and exhort you the
oftener to prepare your selves to receive corporally the blessed sacrament,
which is ever ready prepared for you to receive, and when as of reverence you
forbear to receive him as ^he Centurio said, that he was not woorthye that
Christ should enter into his house: Math. viii.
yet at lest resort to this Sacrifice, and with faith and devotion receive
Christ spiritually, and geuyng thanks for all his gifts, commit your selves
hollye to the custodye and tuition of almyghtye god, who is always ready to
show us mercy for Christ's sake, to who^ with the father and the holy ghost be
all honor, praise, and glory, world without end. Amen.

()

Of the necessity and commodity of Penance in general. Sermon. xiiii.
OUr Lord and Savior Jesus Christ which came into this world too call and
save sinners, i. Timo. i. Luke. v. ii. Peter, iii,
dealing patientlye with them, not wyllyng any man to peryshe, but all men to
be converted and turned too him by Penance: after that John Baptiste, whom
God sent before his face to prepare his way by preaching of Penance, was
apprehended and cast into prison: than (I say) our Savior Christ began to
preach the gospel of his grace and glory, after this form, saying: Do
penance, for the kingdom of heaven draws nere: Math. iiii.
teaching us both by his word and deed, and like as John Baptiste goes
before, whose ministry was to preach Penance, and Jesus comes after, by
whose death we have redemption and remission of sin: even so in the heart of
every sinner, the effect of John's preaching which is true and unfeigned
Penance must go before, that theffect of Christ's passion, which is grace,
mercy, and remission of sins, may come after.

And as this doctrine of penance was first of all other taught by our Savior
himself, and by John his most holy Prophet, as a thing most necessary for
the instruction and salvation of all men: even so his holy Apostles in the
beginning of their preaching, observed the same matter and form of doctrine,
as Saint Peter in his first Sermon made at Jerusalem in the day of Pentecost,
when he had opened the work of the holy Ghost in the gift of tounges, and
thereby took occasion to set forth the mysterye of Jesus Christ, at the
last end his doctrine to the people, which were smitten with compunction of
heart by his words, was this: Do penance, and be every one of you baptized
in the name of Jesus Christ, Acts. ii.
for the remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost. And in his next Sermon written in the third chapter of the Acts, he
taught the same doctrine in these words: Acts. iii.
Do you therefore penance, and be converted, that your sins may be taken
away. Saint Paul also calls the doctrine of Penance the foundation of all
other doctrines in the heart of a godly man, Hebre. vi.
out of which do spryng such other virtues as bring a man to the perfection
of a Christen life. Likewise Saint John Evangelist began with the same doctrine
of Penance, writynge in his Revelation to the seven Churches that were in
Asia, saying thus to the church of Ephesus in the person of Christ: Remember
from whence thou haste fallen, and do pena^nce, ^po* ii.iii.
and do the first works, or else I shall come to thee soon, and shall remove
thy candlestick from his place, except thou do penance. And this doctrine
also did all the other Apostles first and principallye set forth to all them
that received the faith of Christ as most necessary for their salvation, being
taught and commanded so to do by our Savior Christ him self, when before
his Ascencion he opened to them their wits and understandings to
understand the Scriptures, saying to them, that it was so written that Christ
so should suffer and rise from death the third day, Luke xxiiii
and that penance should be preached in his name and remission of sin,
throughout al people, beginning at Jerusalem. For which cause and
consideration, I as a minister of our savior Christ, to whom he has committed
the word and ministry of reconciliation, ii. Cor. v.
using as it were his embassage to exhort you to be reconciled to him,
intending to teach you at this time what things to do for the saving of
your souls, and the atteynynge of everlasting life: have thought it most
expedient for satisfyeng of my duty in following the example and commandment
of our master Christ and his Apostles, and for your erudition to be taught the
straight pathe and hye beaten way for our Christen religion, to speak of
penance, and first to declare the necessity and commodity of the same, and
than in order the parts of it, and how to do it in such manner as it may be
acceptable to almightye God, and a mean to atteyne his mercy and remission of
sin.

First of al consider you (good people) that penance is a gift of God, as the
scripture says: God has given and granted penance to the Gentiles for life
and salvation. Acts. xi.
And it is God that stands at the door of our heart and knocks, by whose
inspiration we have the beginning of our conversion, Apoca. iii.
without whom we be not able and sufficient of our selves, as of our selves
to think any good thought. This gift of penance is a perfect and merueylous
great gift, ii. Cor. iii. Chrysostom. homi. de penitentia. Say^^^* xi.
being as Saint Chrysostom says, the mother of mercy, whereby (as the
wisema^ says) God does dyssimule the sins of men for penance, that is to
say, God of his mere mercy and fatherly affection, does bear with the syns
of men, and differreth to avenge and punysh the^ justly according to their
deserts, patiently looking for their conversion and penance, by means whereof
he might remit their offenses, deliver them from many dangers, give unto the^
plenty of grace, and conduct them to the fruitio^ of his glory. For if God
should by and by punish al off^dours, Chrysostom. ho. xxxiiii. in i. Cor. xiii.
neither Zacheus should have had space to have done penance, nor yet s.
Matthew, nor many other, being taken away to eternal death before the time of
their penance. But our most mecke father calling euerys one to penance, does
abide and tarry for us, which patience who so ever abuses and contemns by
remaining still in his former sins, according to the hardness and obstinacy
of his own heart, does store up to himself Gods indignation in the day of
Gods anger and just judgment, Romans ii.
when he shall render to every one according to his works. And as he says
himself, except in very deed we do penance, Luke xxiii.
we shall all peryshe and be condemned, whereby we understand how
profitable and necessary a medicine penance is, without the which sins be
not remitted to them that have the use of their understanding and reason. The
Serpent in Paradise moved Eve to sin, penance loosed her again, Chrysostom.
hom* de penitentia.
and from thence came good and evil to manne. Our father Adam was expulsed
out of Paradise for sin, and we and all other that be his children, be
called thither again by penance. For penance opens, that sin has shut,
and the merciful goodness of God does call us thither again, from whence his
anger has cast us out. What a great power and virtue has this virtue of
penance, which by the mercy of God remitteth sin, opens Paradise, heals
the contrite man, makes glad the heavy, reuoketh a man from destruction,
restores him to his former good state, renews his old honor, repayreth all
the decays of virtue, makes him acceptable and bold with God, and does
purchase of God more plenty of grace then he had before.

This virtue is like a fruitful feelde, the fruit whereof when an hungry
sinner does eat, he is well refreshed in his soul, grows in credit and
trust with God, and after remission of his sins, waxes fat in good life,
and speaks to God after this manner: Lord before thee is all my desire, and
the mournyng of my heart is not hid from thee: (...)* xxxvii
the fear of sin vexes me, the weyg^t of my conscience oppresses me, in my
self I have no hope to live, nor boldness to dye, at thy judgments I
tremble, and fear the pains prepared for the wicked spirits, hear me I
beseech thee whiles time is, and pardon that I fear before I go, and shall be
no more. To s^che a penitent heart is remission given, and life granted.

August de pen^tentie (...). cap* i.
And for better knowledge of penance, it is to be considered that the doing of
penance is three ways spoken of in holy scripture: one is for all kind of
sin before Baptism. For he that is judge and ruler of his own will, when he
comes to Baptism, he can not begin a new life, except he take repentance
for his old, and he must have hope and love to be made that he was not, and
hate that he was. From this kind of penance before baptism only young
children be free, which as yet can not use their free will* and for their
consecration and remission of original sin, the faith of the church which
is professed by the Godfathers and mothers as representyng the church, does
profit and suffice, and so by the Sacrament of faith which is Baptism, they
are made faithful, and members of Christ's mystical body. Of this penance
speaks Saint Peter saying thus: Do you penance, Acts* ii.
and let every one of you be baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
for the remission of your sins.

The second way of doing penance, is for venial sin after baptism, and is
daily done or ought to be done throughout a man's holle life, so long as we be
in this weak, frail, mortal, and synful flesh. Aug. ad Se leu^. epist.
cviii.
For which cause we knock upon our breasts, saying: forgive us our trespaces,
as we forgive them that trespace against us. For we require not to have those
sins forgeuen us, which we be sure were forgeuen in baptism before, but
those which through our frayltie and sensuality by little and little
continually creep upon us, which being many if they were all gathered
together against us, and we contemned to avoid them in time, they would so
grieve and oppress us, as one mortal sin. For what difference is it to have
a man's ship drowned at once with one great surge and wave of the sea, or to
suffer the water to enter into small holes by little and little till the ship by
contemning to draw the poompe be full, and so sink and be drowned? For the
which cause we fast, do alms and pray, wherein when we say, Math. vl*
forgive us as we forgive, we declare that we have something to be forgeuen, by
which words we humble our souls, and cease not after a certain manner to do
daily penance.

The third way of doing penance, is for such deadlye sins after baptism, as
be prohibited by Gods x. commandments, Gala. v. Aug. de vi^ilitate
penitentie.
of which the Apostle says, al they that do such, shall not posses the kingdom
of heaven. And this penance ought to be more grievous and paynfull, because the
fault is great, causing a deadlye wound in our souls, as adultery, murder,
or sacrilege. But although the wound be great, grievous, and deadly: yet
almyghtye GOD as a good Physician, after the suggestion of sin by the devil,
the delectation of the flesh, the consent of our mind and freewyll, and also
the doing of the sin in deed, as though we had lain in grave stynking
four days as Lazarus did, does not so leave us, but cries Lazare veni
for as, Ioa^, xi.
Come forth O Lazare, and by and by misery gave place to mercy, death to
life: Lazarus comes forth and is bounden as men be in confession of their
sin doing penance, Of this speaks Saint Paul to the Corinthians, ii.
Cor. xii.
saying: I am affrayde lest when I shall come again, God do humble and
afflict me among you, and least I lament and mourn for many of them that have
sinned before, and have not done penance for their fornication and unclean
life they have used.

This last kind of penance is that whereof we specially treat upon at this
time, Hieron. in ca. iii. Esaias
and is called by the holy fathers the second table or board after baptism.
For all sinners being as it were drowned in the floode of sin by reason of
original sin that from Adam ouerfloweth all the world, or else by their own
actual sin which they have done in their own parsones beside, may be saved
and escaped out of this floode if they will take hold of the first boorde
which is Baptism. But after the Sacrament of Baptism if they fall into the
waters again by deadlye sin, there is no remedy to be saved from drowninge
and dampnation, but only penance which is the second boorde that God has
ordained to save us by, so that who so ever takes hold of it unfeignedly,
during the time of this natural life, no dout of it, it will by Gods merciful
grace bring him to the haven of salvation, were his sins never so great and
heinous, whereby we may understand how necessary a treasure this is, as
being the only remedy now left unto us to restore us to the favor of God
which by sin we had lost before.

Wherefore I do exhort every man and woman in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as they tender the health and salvation of their souls, to be diligent
and careful to use this special remedy ordained of God for remission of
sin, neither contempnyng his justice, nor dispayring of his mercy, which
two be the lettes of true penance, and enemies to the grace of GOD in
remission of sin. psalm. vii.
For God is a just, mighty, and patient Judge, forbearyng and forgeuyng the
penitent sinner, iudgeynge and condempnyng thee obstinate sinner. As the
consideration of his mercy should speedely provoke us to amendment: so the
fear of his just judgment should utterly take away all delays. We be
in danger on both sides, both by to much hopinge, and by dyspayringe. He is
deceived by hopyng that says, God is good and merciful, promysinge pardon
when so ever we convert, therefore I will do that pleases me, I will give the
bridle to my lusts, and satisfye the desires of my mind. On the contrary
side he is deceived by desperation, that falling into grievous sins, and
thynking them not able or woorthye to be forgiven, says to him self: I shall
be dampened, therefore I will do that pleases me, the one is in danger by
presumyng of Gods mercy, promysyng to himself long life, the other is in
danger by indiscreet fear of Gods justice, and horror of his great and
manyfolde sins. But every Christen man and woman ought to go circumspectlye
in the myddest, and beware for falling on either side, remembrynge that the
Scripture says to him that is in danger by to much hope. Be not slack to
turn and convert to God, Eccle. v.
nor do not differ from day to day, for Gods anger will come sodaynelye,
and in the day of vengeance he will destroy thee. And to him that is in
danger by despair, God says: In what so ever day a sinner shall be
converted, Eze. xviii
I shall forget al his iniquities. For him that dispayreth, God has set open
the haven of forgyuenes, to him that vaynely hops and delayeth his
conversion, he has made the day of death uncertain.

Thus taking heed to our selves, not abusing Gods mercy by delaying our
amendment, nor mistrustyng his goodness, for fear of his judgment, but
speedelye whiles time is now offered unto us, imbracinge this necessary and
present remedy of fruitful and true penance, we shall be reconciled to
almightye God, and be pertakers of his heavenly kingdom, through Christ our
Lord, to who^ with the father and the holy ghost be al glory for ever more.
Amen.

()

Against Desperation. Sermon. xv.
Every sinner (good people) that intends to obtain of God by the merits of
Christ's passion remission of his sins, must expel and put out of his mind
all manner of despair, and al fear and dout that should or might move him to
think that he shall have no mercy and forgeuenes at Gods hand, what sins so
ever he has done, be they never so many.

Two things there be that bring a sinner in despair: One is, if he think
that his sins be so great that god can not forgive him. And this is very
false and against Gods omnipotencye, who has power and is able to do what he
will. An other is, Psalm. cxiii.
if he think that almighty God will not forgive his sins, and this is also
false, and against the ryghtwysnes and goodness of almighty God, who has
promised to forgive the penitent sinner always his offenses, and if we
confess our sins, Eze. xviii.xxxiii.i. Ioa^. i
God is faithful and just to remit unto us our sins, and to make us clean
from all kind of iniquity. And in witness of this our Savior Christ has
ordained the holy Sacrament of Penance, that is to say, the Sacramental
absolution, which the Priest gives unto the penitent person truly
confessing his sins, Ioa^* vltimo
which absolution is allowed and confirmed in heaven, and the penitent
restored to the state of salvation: so that to mistrust or fear that God can
not or will not forgive the penitent sinner his sins, is deadlye sin in it
self, blasphemye to almyghtye God, Gene, iiii.
and dampnation to the party with Cain and other that did despair.

There is an other kind of despair of mercy and salvation, which they have
that intend or do kill them selves, which they take not in remembrance of the
multitude or greatness of their sins, but for the heauynes and thought of
the world, as the wyseman says: Multos occidit tristitia, et non est vtilitas
in ea. Eccle. xxx.
Sadness and thought has killed many, and there is no profyt in it. And Saint
Paul says: i. Cor* vii.
The sorrow of the world woorketh death. These men come to this despair thus.

First they take sorrow and thought for such things as have chanced against
their minds, and than they do not put that thought away, but rather set it
wondrous deep and fast in their hearts, and let it continue there still,
and so it grows till it be so great and so paynfull unto them, that they be
weary of their lives, and would feign be dead. And because they can not dye by
sickness, so shortly as they would, nor by course of nature, therefore they
determine to kill them selves, and so they despair to have everlasting life in
heaven, or else think not of it, and also do not believe that they shall have
damnation in hell, but think that if they were once dead, that then they should
have no more sorrow nor pain in their mind. And so upon that ungracious and
false belief, they kill them selves one way or other, and than be their
souls damned in hell, ii. Re. xvii. Mat. xxviii
and be there with Achitophel and Judas and other of that sort in more vexation
and pain in their minds, then all the wits in the world can devise.

The remedy against both these kinds of despair, is to be well and thoroughly
persuaded of hell, and of the infinite greatness of the pains that be there, and
how they never have end, but endure for evermore. And in the beginning to
avoid and put out of mind al thought and heaviness for loss of worldly
goods, or for any mischaunce, or for any rebuke or shame deserved by them, or
otherwise, which they may do by opening the cause of their sorrow to some one
discret person or mo. For the longer the cause is kept secret, the more grief
and pain it woorketh, and shall be the harder to put away.

Therefore let every man and woman understand this, Chrysostom. de reparatione
lapsi
that the devil does move a man to despair of obteyning, for this end, that he
might cut of all hope of goodness, which is the ancre of our health, the
foundation of our life, the guide of our journey, whereby we return again to
almighty God. For the Apostle says: by hope we are made safe, Romans viii.
and that hope which is seen, is no hope. It is hope therefore wherein our
salvation consists, which hope as a cheine cast down from heaven, draws
our souls that hold fast by it, up to heaven, and delivering them from
earthly greeues, makes them to forget and contemn this present life. But if a
man having his mind hollye set and fyx^d upon sin and worldly cares, let
slip out of his hand the ancre of hope: he must needs fall into the pit, and in
the botome of all evils be drowned and slain, which when our enemy perceives,
and sees us abhor the multitude of our sins, and to be afraid with the
biting of our gilty conscience: streightway he comes nere, and does suggest
the thoughts of despair, making us heavier then any sand or lead, which
thoughts if we receive and agree unto, by and by letting go the hold of our
salvation, we must needs by the very weight of them be drowned in the botome of
al mischief, contemning the commandments of a meek and good Lord, obeying
the will of a cruel and fierce tyrant and enemy to our salvation. For to
conversion and penance, desperation is utter enemy: which if it once rest and
dwell in a man's mind, have he never so earnest an intent, and fervent desire to
be saved, yet the same desperation shall let his purpose and stop the ways
and passages to the salvation of his soul. If the way penance be be once
stopped, then is the door that leads to salvation, shut also. And how can he
that is out of the way, and to whom the door is shut, do any good work? when
as he can find no entrye to goodness being let by desperation? For this cause
the devil by all means he can, goes about to plant such thoughts in our
hearts. For when desperation has carried us far from the way of truth, then
has the devil no more contention against us, Against whom should he fight,
when no man wythstandeth? But if the man can loose this band, by and by his
strength comes again, and takes delight to renew his battle a fresh For
he shall perceive how he chaseth away the devil, whom he fled before, and
shall have a pleasure to pursue his old persecutour. And if perchance his
foot slyppe and he fall (as oftentimes the condition of war is,) he may not
by and by despair for shame of a fall, but he must remember that this is the
law of fyghting, not never to fall, but never to yield, for men do not call
him ouercommed that often falls, but him that at last yields. Likewise he
that is ouercommed by the thoughts of desperation, how can he recover his
strength, or withstand his enemy, seeing he runs away and will not turn
back to fight again? I would not ye should think that I speak only of those
that were a little blotted with a few small spots of sin: but I speak of him
that has given place to all kind of sin, that for the outragiousnes of his
wicked living has excluded him self from the kingdom of heaven, and not of
infidels, but of Christen men, and such as have before times pleased God
highly, but afterward have fallen to adulterye, and other filthy living,
such (as the Apostle says) is shame to speak of. These men I say ought
not to dyspayre of salvation, although they had lain walteryng in such like
filthynesse even to their extreme age: what the reason of this saying is, ye
shall hear If Gods anger were a passible affection, we might well say that
the flambe of it could not be quenched, which was kyndled with so many and
great offenses. But when the truth of Gods word does define the nature of God
to be vnpassible, we must understand that now although God does punish and
afflict us, yet he does it not with passible anger, but with most unspeakable
clemency, with thaffection of him that heals, and not of him that punishes,
and for that cause he very gladlye receives the penitent, seeing that God does
not punish for him self sake (as I said before) as it were auenging his own
quarrel and iniurye against the sinner for Gods nature receives no such
passion into it self) but he does al for our profit. For our profytte and
correction he does punish, not to revenge himself, but to amend us. He that
abides still in the hardness of his heart, is like to a man that turns his
eyes from the light which does no harm to the light, but brings him
self into darkness: Even so he that through an impatient heart thinks to
contemn the power of God, hurts in God nothing, but secludeth himself from
all health and salvation.

If a Phisician suffer a little iniurye of his pacient vexed with a phrensye, or
distempered in his brain, yet is he not grieved with the same, nor yet angrye,
but does all things that his art of Physic requires, although his
pacient seems too be grieved with his medicines, which grief is not
auengynge of the Physicians iniurye, but a curing of the patientes maladye.
And if the sick man begin a little to amend in his health, ye shall see by
and by the Physician rejoice, and with more gladness do the rest of his cure,
not remembrynge the iniurye he suffered before, but procuring the patientes
health more and more. How much more almyghtye GOD, when we fall into extreme
madness of the soul, is not moved with the affection of vengeance for the
offenses we have done against him, but is desirous too heal the old rotten
sores of sin that are corrupted within us, for the which he says and does
all things, as only tenderynge our health, not delited with our pain. Such
is the goodness of God toward man, he never refuses penance, if it be
symplye and purelye offered unto him. Although a man were come to the heyght
of sin, and yet from thence would return again to the way of virtue, he
receives him, he most fatherlye embraces him, and does all things to
revoke him to his first state again, and also which is greater and more
excellent than all this, although a man could not fulfill all the order of
satisfaction, yet he refuses not his penance how small, how short so ever
it be done, but accepts the same, and suffers him not to loose the reward
of his conversion, be it never so little. This seems Esaias to show where he
speaks such like of the people of the Jews. For his sin I have a little
made him sad, Esaias, lvii.
and have smytten him, and have turned my face from him, and he is sad and
walks an heavy manne, and I have healed him, and have comforted him. But the
wicked king Achab gives us a more euidente testimony, which through his wives
wickedness, obtained the pray of his own covetousness, but afterward being
troubled with the great enormitie of his own sin, did repent, and putting on
hear and sack cloth wept for his offense, and provoked so the mercy of God
toward him, that he pardoned him of al his sins. For thus said God: And
God said to helias, Haste thou not seen the contrition of Achab before me?
iii. reg. xxi.
And because he has wept in my sight, I will not bring in these plagues in
his days. Manasses also that passed all other tyrauntes in crueltye of
wickedness, ii. parali. xxxiii.
that filled Gods temples with Idolles, that ouerthrewe the service of God in
true religion, and the observation of the law, this man I say, exceeding all
men in abomination of sin: yet because he repented, he was afterward numbered
(...) the friends of god. And therefore if either this man, or the other we
spoke of before, consideringe the greatness of their sins, had dispaired to
come to Gods favor again by conversion and penance, they had lost al these
benefits that chanced to them by their amendment. But they castyng their
eyes upon gods unspeakable mercy and the depenesse of his infinite goodness,
losed the deuelishe ^heynes of desperation from their necks, and lifting up
themselves were converted to the way of virtue. Thus much have we spoken of the
examples of holy men. Hear now how we are provoked of god to conversion by the
words of the prophets. Even this day (says David) if ye hear his voice, do
not harden your hearts, as in the day of provocation in the wilderness. psalm.
xciiii.
In that he says this day, he means all the time of our life till we come
(if it so chance) even to the extreme age: for penance is not weyed by length
of time, but by pureness of affection. Have we not red how the Levites washed
away their most grievous sin in the wilderness, not in a great long
continuance of time, but in a little short hour of one day. The thief also
that hong upon the cross neded no long space to enter into Paradise, Luc.
xxiii.
but so much space suffysed him as would serve for the speaking of a few
words, so that in a little moment of time, obteininge remission of the sins
of his hole life, did enter into Paradise before any of Christ's holy Apostles.
What shall we say of martirs? have we not seen them often times in one day,
yea, some times within the space of an hour, receive the crowns of eternal
reward? we must therefore begin only, and set upon it with a manly courage,
and first let us be moved and angry with that harlot our own lust that
deceived us, and than let us turn our holle affection and love to the exercise
of virtue. For that is it that God wylleth and requires of us. He seeks not
that length of time, but specially looks to this if our conversion be true and
pure. For which cause we often see that many which began last, are by their
faithful endeavor made formest. It is not so evil to take a fall, as it is to
lie still after the fall, and not to rise again, and with a certain pleasure
and determination of mind to walter still in sin, and at last to cloak and
cover his noughty purpose of sinning still under the words of desperation.
Against whom the prophet cries out with a certain indignation, saying: Hier.
viii.
does not he that falls arise again? Or is not he that is turned backward
converted again? If thou say, the state of our question is, whether any
faithful and Christen man if he fall, may be restored again? To this question I
answer. In this same that we say, he fell, we grant that once he stood before
he fell. No man says that he is fallen, that ever did lie, and never stood.
Yet let us bring forth holy scripture concerning this matter, if any thing be
spoken either in parables, or in plain sentences. What other thing think you
is meant by the sheep, Luc. xv.
which going astray from the other nynetie and nine, was afterward sought and
brought home to the flock upon the shoulders of the shepeherde, does it not
plainelye declare both the fall and the restitution of a Christen man? For
that sheep and the other nynetie and nine, were al of one flock and under one
pastor.

It fed upon the same pasture, drank the same water, and was lodged within
the same fold that the other were, but it wandered a great way, it strayed far
through the hills and hard rocks and many crooked ways of error, yet the
good shepeheard did not leave it nor suffered it to perish, but seeks it, and
brings it home again. Not compellinge it by pricks and beating, but bearing
it upon his own shoulders. And not only this parable does show unto us
the commodity of returninge, Luc. xv.
but also that other of the prodigal and ryottous son, and that was a son,
not a stranger, and brother germayn to him that never went from his father. He
was a son which is reported to have gone to the furtheste borders of all
sin, for he went into a far country, far from god that was the rich
man, and being a noble man borne, was made worse than a bond manne or slave.
But yet returning home, and repentinge him, was received into his former state,
and restored to his former glory. But if he had despayred and consideringe
those miseries that chanced unto him, had been ashamed to return to his
father, and had bidden still in the far strange country: he should never
have attained these things that he has, but by penury and famine should have
suffered most miserable and unhappy death. You see now how great profit there
is of penance, and how great hope there is of conversion by penance. The
prodygall son received his former state of glory by penance, which his
elder brother kept still by pe^seuerau^ce. Therefore derely beloved, having
these exaumples of penance, let us not continue in evil nor dyspayre to be
reconcyled, but let us come again to our Father, and draw nere to almighty
GOD. Believe me, he will never turn his face from him that turns to him, if
we do not make our selves strangers to GOD. Hier. xxiii
For GOD him self says, I am God that is nere hand, and not God a far of.
And again by an other Prophet: Esai. li^.
Your sins (says he) make distaunce between me and you. If we therefore
take away this wall, that is to say, our sins that separate us from GOD,
there is nothing that can let us to be joined to god. Will you that I show
these things not only spoken in parables, but fulfilled in deeds? There was
a certain man among the Corinthians, as it seemed of no small estimation: This
man had committed such a sin, as is not wont to be done among the heathen.
And he was one of the number of the faithful and familiars with Christ, what
than? Did Saint Paul cut him from the number of them that be in hope of
salvation? Nay, rather when he had suffycientlye rebuked the Corynthians for
him, willing again to declare that there is no wound, no disease, which
gives not place and is not healed by the plaster of penance. He commands
him to be delivered to Satan to the destructyon of the flesh, i. Cor. xv.
that his spyryte may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Yet he commanded this before he knew any thing of his penance, but when
he had done penance, he says, let this correction and rebuke suffyse,
which was given to him of many. And he adds more, I beseech you confirm
your charity toward him, lest Satan have him in full possession, for we
be not ignorant of his crafty subtlenesse. Also the holle Church of the
Galathians, after that it believed in Christ, and had received the holy ghost,
so that in spirit it did many virtues and miracles, and had suffered much
persecution for the faith of Christ, after all this (I say) it fell from the
faith, and was restored again by the good exhortations of the Apostle. And
that thou may know that by the holy ghost they did miracles, hear how
the Apostle says: who than gave you the spirit, and wroughte these miracles
among you, Gal. iii.
was it of the works of the law, or of the hearing of faith? And again,
that they did suffer much after they had received the faith he declares in
this, where he says: Have ye suffered so great affliction in vain, if it be
in vain? After that they had walked and profited thus much in the faith, they
did commyt such a sin that was able to alienate them clean from Christ,
whereof the apostle spoke. Behold, I Paul say unto you, if you use
circumcision, Christ will profit you nothing. Gal. v.
And again, you that be justified by the law, be fallen from grace. Yet after
these decays of faith, after so great falls, he calls them back again,
and with motherlye affection does cheryshe them, Gal. iiii.
saying: Mine own little children whom I labor to bring forth again as a
mother does of her child unborn, whiles that Christ be formed in you. What
other thing is taught by these, but that it is possible that Christ may be
formed and dwell in him again by penance, that has fallen from Christ by
extremity of sin before. Almighty GOD wylleth not the death of a sinner,
but that he convert and live. Let us therefore be converted, Eze. xviii.
and let us yield our selves to the accomplishinge of Gods will. For so long
as we be in this life, how great sins so ever we commit, it is possible to
wasshe them all away by penance, but when we shall be taken out of this
world, there although we repent us, for we shall repent very much, yet we
shall have no profit of our repentance. And although there be gnashinge of
teeth, yowlynge and weeping, although we pray and cry out with innumerable
obsecrations, no man will hear us, no man will succor us, no not so much as
with his fyngers end power a little water upon our tongue that burns in the
flambe, but we shall hear that the rich man heard of Abraham, that a great
wast distaunce is put between us and you, Luc. xvi.
so that none from thence may come hither, nor from us to you. Let us
therefore good brethren cast up our eyes to our Lord Jesus Christ, and let
us like good and profitable servants seek him, and not dyspayre so long as
we enjoy this life, by penance to obtain pardone for our sins, only in
hell, as I said, the medycynes of penance will profit nothing, but in this
life, although it be in the last crooked age and in the extremity of sin,
yet believe me it will cure us and bring us to perfyte health. For this cause
the devil moves and does all that he can to bring desperation into our
minds. He knows full well that if a man do penance but a little space, be
it never so short, yet his conversion shall not be vnfruytfull. Only let
us now begin to do better. Ever the beginning seems hardest. At the first
step the way of virtue seems to be hard, and not able to be commed unto:
For so is the nature of all things, all labor seems painful so long as it
is weyed only in the consideratyon of a man's mind. But when we come to the
experience of the thing, and begin to go through a little of the labor,
than is all the fear of the gryefe driven clean away. The success of the
work brings sweetness, and the increase of virtue new repaired brings
gladness to our minds, and by and by makes us stronger, when the hope of
salvation begins to seem nyghe at hand. For that cause the devil took
Judas out of this life, least knowing that there was a way to turn to
salvation, he might by penance refourme his fall. Therefore let us now
enter the iourneye of life, let us return to the heavenly city, wherein we
be elected and appointed as free citizens. The gates of this city desperation
has shut, but hope shall open them, and sure confydence shall make the
entree large and broad. When the soul begins to despair of salvation, it
regards not then after what sort, or into what vice it cast it self, it
fears to do or to speak nothing that may be contrary to her salvation.
And as we see often in them that be mad, when they have once lost the
stay of their right mind, then they fear nothing, nor be ashamed of
nothing, but are bold to speak, and do whatsoever they list, though they
should fall into the fire, or into a deep pyt, they stick not nor pull not
back their foot: even so they that be taken with desperation, are made
intolerable, and run through the ways of iniquity, neither shame, nor
fear lets them, neither present miserye does stop them, nor pain to
come does affraye them, only death which they can not avoid, ends the
execucyon of their malice. Wherefore I most entierlye beseech you (if there
be any here that despair or be in doubt to attain mercy and forgiveness
(to take again the sweet yocke of our savior Jesus Christ and his light
burden, and not to suffer so great a treasure of Gods former gifts and graces
utterly to peryshe. It will perish if we continue in sin prouokyng GOD more
and more with our noughty deeds. Let us arise therefore now without delay,
and believe me, our adversary will fly away, our boldness shall make him
affrayde, the more fyerce we be, the more fearful will he be, and GOD
will be present, and both diminyshe the conscience of our sins and
undermine his might and strength. So shall we faythfullye serve him here, and
reign with him eternally in the next world through Christ our Lord, to whom
be all glory for ever. Amen.

Against presumption of mercy. Ser. xvi.
Like as penance is the mother of mercy and a virtue most agreeable to the
will of GOD: even so (good people) an vnpenitente heart is an enemy of mercy
and most repugnaunte to the fountain of al goodness, Hier. ad ^abinianum.
and such a vice as only can never atteyne forgiveness at Gods hand, who
daily through his unspeakable mercy provoke sinners to penance, whom
obstynate sinners delaiynge their conversion do provoke to anger. Many there
be that purpose to continue still in their sins, upon hope of remission and
forgiveness at the last end, or in their old age, abusing Gods goodness
and contemninge his justice. These men gooe from evil to worse, and abuse the
precious treasure of time, by their continuance in sin, which GOD grants
to man as a special remedy against sin From this most detestable vice
the consideration of Gods inestimable and infinite benefits should withdraw
us, lest our unkindness do appear, which stops the ways of grace, and
suffers remission to have no entrye into our souls. GOD the father has so
loved us, that to redeem us his servants, Joan. iii.
he has not spared his only begotten son.

God the son has so loved us, that to make us his servants, Bernardus Ser
ii. in festo penthecost. i. Petri. i.
he has redeemed us not with corruptyble gold or silver, but with his own
precious blood which he has shed forth aboundauntlye. They both have sent
and given unto us their holy spirit, God the holy ghost, who has endued us
with heavenly and marvelous gifts, by whom we have strength of good life,
light of true knowledge, and assurance that we shall inherit the kyngedome
of heaven if we convert from sin and continue in grace, which conversion
God most patiently abides, and most fatherly provoke by many and sondrye
ways, whose conception makes clean ours, Bernardus in eodem Sermon.
whose life instructs ours, whose death destroys ours, whose resurrection
is cause and example of ours, whose ascension prepares ours, whose spirit
helps our infirmytie. What obdurate unkindness is this `not to recognize
these so great benefits, but the more he heapeth precious gifts upon us, the
more to displease him, to disobeye him, and to increase our own damnation? The
better he is to us, the worse to be to our selves, and so spitefully to abuse
his mercy, by making it which of it self is the cause of al our wealth and
salvation, to be by our prolonging the cause of our sin and the continuance
in the same? Job. xiiii.
knowing that the time of this frail and mortal life is but short, and as it
were a vapor or smoke appearing for a time, Jacob. iiii.
and shortly vanishinge away, Eccles. xiiii
and that death tarieth not, nor manne knows not his end, but as fishes be
taken with the hook, and as birds be taken with the net: Eccles. ix.
even so men be taken in the evil time, when it comes sodeinly upon them. So
that the consideringe of the certeintie of death which no man can escape, and
the vncerteintye of the time of death, Aug in psalm. cx.
which god has made uncertain to man, lest he should live worse under hope
of forgiveness, should be a great cause to move every man to make have to
amend his synnefull life For like as in the fyrmamente a star does soon
rise and sodeynlye sets again, Bernard^s (...) ca. ii*
and as a sparkle of fire is soon quenche^ and put^e out: even so ends a
man's life wh^^ he lives in this world most pleasauntlye, and thinks he
shall live many years, and dysposeth things to be done by long times,
suddenly is he caughte by death, and at unawares the soul taken from the
body. Ibidem. cap. iii.
Therefore I pray you consider every man with himself, where those men be now
that not long ago were so holly set upon the world, and given to satisfye
the pleasures of their flesh and private wills? Nothing remains of them
here but ashes and worms. Mark diligently what they be, and what they have
been. They were men as thou art, they did eat, drink, laughe, Job. xxi.
and led their lives in pleasures and went to hell in a moment of time, here
their flesh is committed to the worms, and their souls to the fire, until
they both be knit together again, and as they were fellows in sin, so to be
joined in eternal pain. What profyted them their vain glory, their short
mirth, their authority of the world, their pleasure of the flesh, their
false riches, their great famylye, and their noughtye desires of so great
gladness what heaviness does ensue: out of that great wealth and pleasures
they fell into great misery and torments. What so ever happened to them, the
same may happen to the, being a man as they were. For thou art made of earth,
and do live of earth, and shall return into earth, when thy last day shall
come, which comes sodeinly, and perchance shall be to morrow. It is
certain that thou shall dye, but uncertain when, how, or where. Wherefore
saying death does always look for thee, if thou be a wise man, see that
thou look always for it. The justice of god can not judge otherwise, but as
our works deserve. For he that loves the world more than God, glotonye more
than abstinencye, lechery more than chastity, shall follow the devil and go
with him into eternal fire and pain. Which pains every wise man will fear
and so avoid them, lest by contemning of them he fall sodeinly into them.
Therefore remember the horrible throne of Gods judgment, Chrysostom. de repara.
^apli.
which is compassed about with a burning floude of fyrye flambe, where is
wepinge and gnashinge of teeth, where is outward darkness, and the worm of
conscience that never dies, and the fire that never is quenched. For the fire
here consumes and wastes all things it receives: the fire there what so
ever it receives once, it always tormenteth and reserueth it in continual
pain, and is therefore called a fire unquenchable, not only for that it is
never quenched it self, but also for that it never destroys and brings to
naught those it once receives. The scripture says, i. Cor. xv*
that sinners put on and are clad with incorruption, that is to say, not to
the honor of life, but to the eternity of pain. The violence of this pain
and the power of this fire no tongue can express. For in corruptible things,
there is nothing like that can be compared to things incorruptible, whether
it be good or evil. Yet let us imagyne at least some image of that fire and
pain. Remember when a man is inflamed with the vehemente heat of a burning
ague, what anguyshe, what torment is both in the body and soul? Now of this
temporal pain, measure how great the pains be which that eternal fire
does cause, which the fyerye floude that runs before the horrible judgment
seat of Christ does ouerflowe with his flambye waves. What shall we do
there? What may we answer? There shall nothing be there but gnashing of
teeth, but houling and weping and late repentance, when help shall cease, and
pains increase on every side, nor there is no comfort any where, no man shall
come to our sight, but only the ministers of pains, and the vggelye faces of
the tormentours, and that is most grievous of all, there shall be no comfort
of the air and light. For round about the places of pains shall be
outewarde darkness, and that flambynge fire which as it has the nature not
to consume and destroy, so it has not to give light, but it is a dark fire,
and a black flambe, to them that remain therein. What horrible trembling,
what resolution, and as it were a meltinge of his body and bowelles, what
rentinge of his flesh and members, what and how great affliction is in all
senses, no speech can express. There be diverse and sundry facions of pains,
and in every man and woman according to the number and greatness of sins, are
multiplied the pains. And if thou would say, how can a body suffice to
endure so great pains, which knows no end of time: Consider what chances
some times in this life, and of a little, conjecture the great. How sometimes
we see some wasted with a long disease, and yet can find no end of their
wretched and hateful life. But although the body is sometime dissolved by
death, yet the soul is not consumed. Whereupon it follows, that when the body
likewise shall receive immortality, neither than the soul nor the body can
with any pain be utterly destroyed. For in this present life it can not
chance that the pain of the body should be both vehement and perpetual,
but the one gives place to the other, because the frailtye of the body can
not sustain both. But when both are made incorruptible then may the pain
rage at will, and find no end. Let us not think that the extremytye of our
torment shall make an end of our sorrow, but as we said, our sins shall
kindle our pain, and incorruption of body and soul shall without end
continue the same. And if it were so that equal time and all one space were
appointed for the pleasure here and for the pain there, should there be any
man so folishe and so mad, that would chose for one day of pleasure, to
suffer one day of pain, when as the sorrow of one hour and every torment of
the body, is wont to make us forgette all time paste in pleasure before? But
now, where as it is possible in a short time, if we convert to God, to escape
all these torments of pains, and to atteyne eternal joy: why do we
linger, why do we tarry, and do not use the largeness and free gift of GOD?
The unspeakable and infinite goodness of God, has already provided, not to
extend the time of our labors and conflictes, nor to make it long or
eternal, but short, and as I might say, a moment of an hour. This is even
the life present, if it be compared to the life eternal. The goodness of God
has therefore provided that in this little short life should be our
conflictes and labors, and in that which is eternal should be the crown
and reward of our merytes, that our labors should soon be ended, and the
reward of our merits should endure for ever. But this, like as it reioyseth
them that through patience of labor receive the crown: So it tormenteth and
afflicts them in time to come, that see them selves for a short time of
pleasure, to have lost eternal glory, and to have gotten perpetual miserye.
And lest we come into this vexation of mind, let us now awake while we have
time. Loo, now is the time acceptable, ii. Cor. vi.
now is the day of repentance. But if we neglect our life, there remains
for us not only those evils which we shall suffer in hell, but an evil more
grievous then all that. To be excluded from all goodness, and to be deprived of
such joys as be ordained for saints, does engender such a grief, such a
sorrow, that if no other did otherwise vex us, that alone might suffyce. The
lack of the glory which we had in our power to enjoy, passes all the
torments that be in hell. For when the holle universal world shall come to
judgment, to be judged of that judge, that needs no witness, that seeks no
proves, that admytteth no orators, but all these set aparte, he himself
discovers and shows abroad both deeds, words, and thoughts, and every
thing as it were painted in certain tables, he lays open before the eyes of
them that did them, and of them that stand by: How shall not every creature
then shake and stand in great fear? And if then the flood of fire did not
ouerflow the world, nor the terrible angels assist God, and if there were no
face and horrible sight of torments, but only this, that if men were called
forth before the king and some should be accounted worthy praise and honor,
and other with shame, rebuke, and confusyon, abiected out of sight. If men
should only suffer this kind of punishment, would not it in a manner excede
all the pains of hell, that other men receiving rewards of the king, they had
deserved shameful repulse with confusion? how great (...) this is although my
words can not fully teach it now, yet when it shall come to experyence of
the matter in deed, then we shall plainelye know it, because we shall painfully
feel it. Add also to all these, the sorrows of the torments, and not only
the confusion and shameful reproach, but also put before thine eyes the way
that men be drawn to the fire and pains, think upon the cruel and horrible
ministers of the pains that throw down headlinge sinners into all kinds of
torments and that the same time that other which lived well are borne up by
the most clear and pleasant aungelles, before the high seat of the eternal
king, and are rewarded with crowns of glory, and immortal reward. It is no
marvel if the infidels, and they that believe not the general judgment and
the resurrection to come, care not how they live and have no co^punctyon of
heart, nor remorse of their sins, but for us that see things to come surer
then things present to live so wretchedlye and to take no remembrance of the
judgment to come, but to fall into utter contempt of it, it is extreme
maddenesse, and one of the greatest sins of all, when we that believe, frame
our lives like unto them that believe not.

To fall into sin is a point of man's infyrmitie, but to remain in sin
still, is a point of the deuilles obstinacye. Thus let us put before our eyes
the last day, Aug. in psalm. ci.
and make haste to amend our lives till we have time. For he that has
promised pardone unto us, whenever we convert, does not promise unto us
long life and to live while to morrow. Watch therefore (says our savior
Christ) because ye know not the day nor the hour. Mat. xxv. Gregorius hom.
xii* Esai. lv.
Ever ought we to be afraid of the last day which we can not foresee. We
ought than to seek our Lord GOD whiles he may be found and not to lie
sleping in sin as the five foolyshe virgins did till the spouse come, and the
door be shut. For than shall the door be shut to them that to late and
vnfrutefully shall lament, which now stands open to all that truly and
betymes will be penitent. There shall be repentance than, but not fruitful. For
than shall he find no pardon that now wilfully loses the time of pardon. If
we than pray with the foolyshe virgins, Lord, lord open the door to us, we
shall hear him say again, I know you not. For there is no man can obtain
that he asks, which here would not fulfill that GOD commanded. He that
will be out of all dout, and avoid the danger of eternal death, Ambros.
exhor. ad penitentia^
let him do true penance whiles he is in health and has space and
occasion of GOD offered to do it, and than may he be sure, because he has
done penance in that time, when he might have sinned more. But if he will
than take repentance when he can sin no more: than sin does forsake him,
and he not it, and than it is no maruayle though GOD contemn him in his
death, that ever before contemned GOD in his life. It is easy for a sinner at
the beginning to arise, but if he delay his conuersyon, the longer he
remains in sin, the harder it will be for him to arise. The longer the
devil has possessed a man, with the more difficulty will he let him go.
David smote Goliath in the forehead and so killed him, i* reg. xvii.
whereby we be taught that the devil is soon killed if we smite him in the
foreheade, that is to say, at his first entrye into us by sin and in the
beginning of our life. If by heaping one sin upon an other we accustom our
selves to the same noughtye lyuinge, in process of time, sin will wexe
strong in us, and prevail over us, and make us as bond men and slaves unto
it, Chryso^^. ho. lix. in genesim.
and to follow that way whether so ever the devil shall lead or move us.
Than shall Gods special grace gooe from us, Gods spyryte forsake us, and
we be left to our selves when one sin shall be a punishemente for an other.
A custom in every thing is merueylouse vyolent, Idem. lib. iii. aduers.
vitup^ratores* vit. mo. Ber^ard. ser. de septem donis
specially when it has bodily pleasure joined with it, first to entyce,
and than to enforce the soul to sin.

First a man that is not careful how to live and please GOD, by negligence
and not regarding his deeds suffers the fear of GOD to gooe away, and
than begins he curyouslye to search and love things without himself, as
worldelye vanities and estymation, whereby inward devotion in the heart
decays, after that curiosity he fyndeth soon that pleases his will, and
does practyse that that is evil and hurtful to his soul.

Thus proceadinge from vice to vice, he is led by his own lust, not stopped
by any shame, leaving that is lawefull and followynge that lyketh him. In this
damnable lust is he bounden by custom, which makes those vices that he
practices, to be as it were natural to him, and so from custom, falls into
contempt of sin geuinge lust the bridle and running headlinges whether so
ever it carries him. This contempt brings in extreme malice, and causes him
to be glad when he has done evil, and to rejoice in all iniquity. This is
the pernicious and deadlye chain of sin that draws a man even down to
the pit of hell, which can not be broken when it is once surely linked,
except he stop at the beginning and louse the linkes before they be knit one
by one. This cheyne made Lucyfer an Angel of light, to be a Devil in hell,
which falling from GOD by presumption, Bernard in psalm. qui habitat. Ser. xi.
increases in malice by obstinacye. This way go all they that be children of
the Devil, first by presumtion not carynge to sin, and than by obstinacye
refusinge to rise. But let us consider with our selves the danger which
we be in that have sinned and not done Penance.

Now is the axe put to the tree root, if we fall by death having evil fruit
and not good, Mat. iii.
we shall perish for ever more. Let us consider the casualtie of our frail
life, the malice of the devil our Ghostlye enemy, the nature of sin,
wherein the longer we tarry the harder it is to come out, the goodness of God
that so patiently provoke us to return, the unspeakable joy that by Gods
grace lies in our power to attain, the horrible pains of hell, which by
our sin we justly deserve, and let us without any deliberation or
counsel, but in all have fly out of Egipte, and run out of Sodom, that is
to say, out of the kingdom of darkness and sin, by the way of Penance,
vsinge Gods patience to our amendment, not abusing it to his anger and our
confusion. For if we say with the wicked servant, my lord prolongeth his
coming, Luc. xii.
and begin (as he did) to beat the servants and maids our fellows, by
any oppressyon or iniurye, and also begin to eat, drink, and be dronken:
the Lord of us and of that servant shall come in the day when we look not
for him, and in the hour when we know not, and shall give us our reward
among infidelles and unbelievers. Butte if we by and by at the hearing of
Gods word (as the Ninevites did at the preachinge of Jonas) do not
harden our hearts, Ione. iii.
but convert to him unfeignedly by Penance as they did: thanne may we be
sure of his mercy and remission, than shall be great gladness in heaven among
the blessed angels of GOD for our conversion, and we for well using of his
grace be brought to the fruition of his glory, the which God give us through
Christ our Lord to whom with the father and the holy ghost be al honor.
Amen.

Of Contrition Ser. xvii.
YE have learned (good people) by the words of holy scripture and by the
public and uniform teaching of Christ's universal church, that penance is
the only medicine after baptysme to heal the dyseases of our synnefull
souls, and the only mean ordained of Christ to reconcile us again to the
favor of almighty god, whom by our sin and the transgression of his law we
had greuouslye offended. And to the intent that every man might use this wholesome
medicine after the true sort, and in such wise as it may be acceptable to
God and profitable to his health and salvation: I shall (by Gods grace)
declare unto you at this time, which be the parts of penance, and than
principally rest in the declaringe of the first part. Chrysostom. Ser. de
penitentia.
Penance which is perfect and fruitful has three parts, Contrition in
heart, Confession in mouth, Humility, or satisfaction in work. For seeing
this Sacrament of Penance is exercised like a judgment where there is both
accusation, witness, and sentence, we may understand that god is the judge in
this court of our conscience, where our thought is our accusour, our
conscience witness against us, Aug. ho* v^^ma*
confyrmed with the confession of our own gyltinesse, which presupposes the
sorrow we take for our offenses, and contrary to the manner of all worldly
courts, because we do not stand in defense of our own deeds, but plead
guilty before GOD, who has promised to pardone al them that convert and
humble them selves before him, therefore sentence of absolution and free
pardone is granted to us by him that wylleth not the death of a sinner, but
rather his conversion and life. Which sentence is put in execucion when the
party gylty submits him self voluntarilye to the correction and discipline
of his mercyefull Judge, or of his minister in his name. And by this we may
perceive that of this Sacrament there be the three parts we spoke of before.

Now concerning the first part, (it is to be known) that Contrition is an
inward sorrow and repentance which a sinner wyllinglye takes for his sins
for the love of GOD: whom he has so vnkindelye offended, for the which he
fully purposes to sin no more, but to keep Christ's commandments truly,
and to make restitution, and to confess his offenses, and to do satisfaction
for them, as he shall be enjoined. This is the Contrition and repentance
that every sinner must take for his sins, and (for better knowledge of the
same) let every manne mark well every point and part of it.

First that is an inward sorrow which is taken, not for any natural
inclination, as for that sin of it self is dishoneste, or brings infamy
and slander to the doer, for such sorrow is not true contrition, because it
proceadeth not from faith which is the foundation of penance, Aug. de fide ad
Petrum. cap. xxxi.
which no man can do except GOD with his grace prevent him, and freelye by his
mercy convert him: nor yet only proceeds from fear of punishment either
temporal or eternal, for that declares that the sinner does not nor would
not forsake his sin, Gregor. in Job. li. iiii. cap. xxviii.
if he knew that he might continue in the same still without any pain or
punishemente, but it proceadeth from the love of GOD, whose majesty we have
offended, and therefore are angry with our selves and hate that our noughtye
sin wherewith we did offend, and had rather suffer any pain be it never so
great than to offend him again. This is the true sorrow of Contrition which
is taken for our sins, principally for this respect, that we have offended
our most merciful father, which contrition he will never despise, but receive
to mercy all those that with so pure an heart do turn to him. Blessed
Saint Peter in the repentance that he took for his sin, left an example
how we might have true Contrition, which is to do as he did. Mat. xxvi.
For he was very sorye and wept bytterlye for his offense alone by him
self: And yet he did not so for any bodily hurt, that he had for denyinge of
his master our savior Christ, nor for any loss that he had of worldly goods,
nor for any rebuke that was given him for his denial, nor yet for any fear
that the Jews would have put him to shame because he had denied his master,
for he knew they would neither hurt him nor blame him, but rather favor
him for it. But these things caused him to be sorry and to weep for his sin.
First he did remember and consider the great perfection, holiness and goodness of
his master, and how he was the very son of almighty God, and also he
remembered how he had taken him and made him his disciple, and how great favor
and singular kindness he had showed him, for the which he considered how
feruentlye he loved Christ and how greatly he was bounden so to do. And than
he remembered the promise he had made unto him, and how unfaithful he was in
breaking that promise, and unkind in denyinge and forsakinge his master. And
thus the remembringe and consideringe of these things, caused Sayncte Peter to
be contryte and to weep for his sin, and to wyshe that he had not denied
Christ, and further to will that he would never offend again nor break his
promise any more, but ever keep and fulfill iustelye all that ever his
master our Sauyoure Christ did command him to do. And so Saint Peter
did. After this manner should we consider our sins and be sorry and contrite
for them. Surely if we sinners did call diligently to our remembrance the great
goodness of our savior Christ ever showed unto us, as how he redeemed us with his
most precious blood and painful death, and has chosen us to his disciples
and made us inherytours unto heaven, and how merciful and gracious he is
always unto us, and how holy just, reasonable, laudable, and how easy a
law he has given us, and than consider further particularly and more in
special his goodness and that he has done and does daily for us, we should
than see that we ought to love, laud, and honor him above all creatures and
fulfill his commandments which we have vowed and promised to do. And
than if we did consider the vileness and noughtinesse of our sins, and how
much we did against natural reason and honesty in doing of them, and how
greatly we did offend God in presuminge to do so evil in his presence and
fight against his law, and in breakinge our solemn promise of kepinge his
commandments, and than if we did consider that in doing of our sins we
did not regard his gracious goodness and favor, nor fear his power and most
dreadful punishment, if we did well consider these things, and were fullye
persuaded of Gods mercy which he is ready to show to all that vnfeynedlye
will forsake their former noughtye ways and turn to him: we should than
take this contrition, and see that we ought to be more sorye for our sins,
than Saint Peter ought to have been for his. For our Savior Christ had
showed us more kyndenesse and had done more for us than he had done for
Saint Peter at that time. For he dyed afterward for our sakes and redeemed
us, and delivered us out of the hands of the Devil. And again our sins
be moo, and we have oftener broken our promise than Sayncte Peter did, for
he brake it but once and that was for fear, and we have sinned often times
without any fear or compulsion, but rather wyllynglye, yea, and diverse times
we have desired to sin and studied how and where we might fullfyll our
ungracious lusts and desires. And thus ye may see that we ought to be more
contryte and sorye for our offenses than Sayncte Peter ought to have been for
his. By this example ye may know for what cause and by what mean ye may
have contrition. And surely the sinner that does well weye and consider this
that I have spoken, shall be sorye that ever he sinned and did against the
will and commandment of our Savior Christ, which is so good and
gracious, and he shall will that he had never offended, and he shall hate
sin, and purpose and atende to live well and to make amends and restytutyon
of that he has wrongfullye taken or done, and shall humble himself by
knowledginge and confessing his faults, and submytte himself hollye to the
correctyon and dyscyplyne of GOD and his holy Church, not doubting but that
he shall be received to grace and mercy and remission of all his sins.

Furthermore it is to be noted that the sorrow and repentance which a thief
takes for his theft when he shall suffer death for it, and the repentance
that a myslyuynge manne or woman takes for their mislyuinge when they shall be
brought to any open shame or shall get any painful disease thereby, is not
that true Contrition that we speak of, nor yet any other like sorrow that men
may have and take for their offenses in other like cases. Because such sinners
and offenders be not sorye, for that they did against Gods law and
offend him, but they be sorye for the death, or shame, or other pain which
they shall suffer for their noughtye living.

Yet notwithstanding these other pains whereunto they come by order of law,
they may also be sorye for their sins, specyallye and most principallye
because they did offend GOD in despysinge him in doing their sins, more
thanne for any shame or pain that they shall suffer here for them, and if
they so do having the mind and will to sin no more but to make
restitutyon and to confess and make satisfactyon for the same than they have
true contrition, and may be sure of mercy and be saved if they dye in that
mind.

And although a man is not truly contryte when he is sorye only for the
fear of pain be it corporal pain or everlasting pain: yet the fear of
pain is an introduction prepairinge the way for true contrition. Basi^ius in
psalm. xxxii i. Joan. iii. Aug. de Catechis. rud. cap. v.
For charity without the which no man lives in soul by grace, is builded
upon fear of Gods judgment when a man is glad to be loved of GOD whom he
fears and dare be bold to love him again, and is afraid to displease him
whom he loves although he might do it without punishment. For no man
comes to GOD that is not smytten with some fear. For which cause Saint John
Baptiste, preparing the way for Christ and remission of sin, Mat. iii.
bette into the peoples heads the horror of their sins, and the fear of
Gods judgment. And S. Peter in his first Sermon after that he had brought
the Jews in fear of Gods anger by declaringe unto them how they had
crucified and killed Jesus whom god had made Christ their Lord, Acts. ii.
and so had smitten their hearts with fear: than he taught them to do
penance and to take true contricion for their sins. Thus when a sinner
loking upon gods law either written in the book or written in his own
heart, whereby he sees as in a glass what pleases or dyspleaseth almighty
God, and sees also by faith that God threatens damnation and everlasting
death to all sinners, and than is accused secretlye by his own conscience
that he has broken that eternal law of god not only in thought but also in
deed, and perceives the vileness and greatenesse of his own sin how often
he has offended and into what misery he has brought himself, and of what
great graces and joys he has deprived him self thereby, being than separate
from the spiritual communion of Christ's church, and guilty of eternal
dampnation: than if there be any sparkle of grace left in that man, if he be
not obdurate and clean forsaken of God he will begin to fear and tremble,
which fear will break the hardness of his heart, and prepare the way for
wisdom and grace to enter in. Without the which fear, no man can receive
remission of sins and be made ryghtewyse. Which fear of hell is not in
charity, but prepares a place for charity, and as charity increases in a
man's heart, Ecclesi. i. i. Ioa^. iiii. Aug. tract. ix. in. i. Epist. Ioa^.
so it decreaseth till perfyte charity possess the holle. After this fear a
sinner begins to hate and abhor his sin, whereby he was brought into so
great danger and miserye, and so proceeds to lament and be sorry for his
offenses. And as in the doing of his sins, there were two things, the
noughtye deed, and the carnal pleasure that was joined with the same: so in
the forsaking of his sins there must be two things, ceasing from the deed,
and sorrow for the sin past. For so the Prophet cries, Quiescite perverse
agere, Cease to do evil. He that continues still in his noughtye doing, Esaias.
i,
is far from al kind of true penance. For how can he turn to God, that is
not turned from his sin? nor he can not be sorye that still is doing the thing
for the which he is sorye. And it is to be understand that this sorrow of
Contrition is inward in the heart, and not fained, only pretended in the
outward behavior. Which the very word Contrition does signifye. For that
is called contrite, that is bruised and beaten into small pieces or powder: even
so when the hardness of a man's heart is mollified with sorrow and tears for
that he has by sin displeased God, than is his heart contrite. An hard heart
is that which is not cut with compunction, Bernardus lib. i. de co^siderat.
nor made soft with pity, nor moved with prayers, nor yeldeth to
threatninges, but is unkind after benefits, without shame of dishonestie,
without fear of peril, geuyng no place to any good motion, but withstandyng
by continuance in will to sin. Even so on the other side a man's heart is
contrite, when it is cut with compunction, mollified with pity and devotion,
moved with prayers and exhortation, is affraide by threatninges, allured by
kindness, ashamed of dishonesty, giving place to Gods inspiration, puttinge
away the will and love to sin, abhorring his former filthye living,
dyspleasing himself and lamentyng for the same, and with sure trust of Gods
mercy submytting himself hollye in all points to obey his will and
commandment.

An heart after this sort contrite and humbled, Psalm l.
GOD will never despise nor reiecte, but accept it as a sweet Sacrifice, of
the which the Prophet said: Be ye turned unto me in all your heart in
fasting, Joel. ii.
in weeping, and lamenting, cut your hearts and not your garments. And our
Savior says: Blessed be they that mourn, Math. v.
for they shall receive comfort. Which mourning is not from the lyppes
outward to say or pretend them selves to be sorye, but to declare it
outwardlye in deed as much as they can by weeping and lamenting.

And this Contrition is the Cross of Christ, which every Christen man and
woman that follows Christ in this world, bears voluntarilye upon his own
back, and so shows the virtue of Christ's cross in his own flesh, ever
carrying about the mortification of Jesus Christ in his body, ii. Cor. iiii.
that the life of Jesus may be showed in his body. And because we must turn to
God with our holle heart, the quantity and greatness of this sorrow is to be
measured by the quantity of our crimes, Cypria. de lapsis.
so that he which has sinned much, do lament much, that his penance be
found no less than his crime. And the more that he does humble himself by
sorrow, the more shall he be exalted to grace, Ambro. de penit. li. ii. cap. x.
the more abiecte he is in his own syghte, the more accept in the sight of
God. Therefore our Savior Christ forgave Saint Peter his sin by and by,
because he wept bitterly and did not increase his fault by driving of his
amendment. For a true penitent loses not time. For the time paste he
redeemeth again, whiles that he calls to remembrance all his years past in
the bitterness of his soul. The present time he does fullye possess by
sorrow and exercise of that virtue which is contrary ^o that he offended in.
The time to come he loses not by constantlye endeavoring himself to perform
that good purpose of sinning no more, which he has godly begone. Remembering
the sayings of the Apostle, Gala. vi.
while we have time let us do good. And he that continues to the last end,
shall be saved. For except a sinner determine surely with himself in his mind
to leave and forsake all sin and intend never to do any again, Math. x.
but to keep Gods commandments justly from that time forward: he shall not
obtain forgiveness of his sins at Gods hand, nor his contrition is not
perfect and profitable unto him. Wherefore it is to be feared that many, yea,
and all those which shortly after confession turn to their sins again,
did not will and intend to forsake all sin before they were confessed, for
if they had so intended, either they would have so continued, or if it had
chanced them sometime to have fallen, they would have risen again by and by
and forsaken their vice. And this Contrition although it seem to a carnal
man a paynfull thing, yet to him that is truly penitent it is very sweet
and pleasant, and is the very joy of the holy ghost in his heart. For as the
Prophet says. Psalm. xciii.
According to the multitude of sorrows in my heart, thy comfort have made glad
my soul. The mo the sorrows be in a contrite heart for the love of god, the
more does comfort abound, when he knows and sees that he shall have mercy
and forgeuenes for all his offenses, according to Gods most loving and mercyful
promise. And also he that has this contrition his good deeds which he shall do
afterward be acceptable to God, and profitable for his salvation, so long as he
has it, and is in that mind. And if it should chance him to die before he
can be shreuen and make satisfaction: yet then shall he have mercy and
forgiveness and be saved, what sins so ever he has done for the contrition
which he had, and for the good mind and purpose that he died in, and as the
prophet says: the iniquity of the wicked man shall not hurt him, Ezechiel.
xxxiii.
in what day so ever he shall be turned from his iniquity. For in this case GOD
accepts a man's good mind instead of that he should have done, which our
savior Christ showed in pardoning and saving the contrite and penitent thief
that suffered with him. Luke xxiii.


Therefore good people, let us not neglect our souls, Chryso. de reparatione
lapsi.
which is that precious treasure that god has committed to our cure, seeing we
may return easelye and repair it with small labor. How so ever we esteem
this affliction of penance, yet in very deed it is but light and short as
saint Paul says, ii. Cor. iiii.
the light shortness of our affliction in this present life, works the
eternal weight of glory in time to come, in us that look not to things which
we see, but to things we se not, for things that we se be temporal, things
that be not seen be eternal. It is now only required of us to leave that
most shameful bondage of sin we were in, and to return to our former
liberty, considering the pain that follows riot and the glory that is
reserved for virtue, and as we have been rash in falling to sin, so let us
be circumspect in the remedy, being well wa^e of our doings hereafter, by
reason of our fall before. Thus shall we mitigate the displeasure of almighty
God, whom we have offended, and after our reconciliation shall proceed
further from grace to grace, til we come to the greatest grace of all which is
the glory of God, to the which he bring us that made us, to who^ be al glory
and honor. Amen.

Of inward Confession to almighty God. Sermon. xviii.
IT is to be known (good people) that true Contrition whereof ye have been
some thing instructed, is never without humble and meek confession of a
man's sins to almyghtye God, which Confession is truly done when we open
our sins to almightye God secretelye in our own hearts, condempning our
selves and our deeds before GOD with much sorrow and compunction taken for
them, always lookyng at Gods mercy and free pardone for the merits of his
son Jesus Christ. And as prayer is always to be used, i. Tess. v.
as Saint Paul commands, so this Confession is likewise at al times to be
used, August. in psalm. lxvi.
which ought to be the chief part of our con^inuall prayer. Whereby we
humble our selves before GOD, confessing our iniquitye and his goodness,
blaming our selves, and pray^ynge him. Being severe Judges over our selves,
to the intent he might be our merciful Savior.

This Confession is a part of true Contrition, and a distinct thing from the
Sacramental confession, which is made to a Priest for the atteyning of
absolution, wherein consists the sacrament of penance, which hereafter in
another Sermon shall be by Gods grace declared unto you. For every man that
sees and perceyueth his own shameful and beastelye lyuinge, is both by the
law of nature written in his heart, and otherwise by the law of GOD, and
inspiration of his holy spirit moved and provoked to be ashamed of him self,
and to accuse him self, his own thoughts accusyng or defending his deeds.
Romans i.
Which to a man endued with the knowledge of the true living GOD, and
delivered from the superstytious darkness of the unbelieving Gentyles, is a
great furtheraunce to cease from his sin and to amend his life. Seeing that
the confession of a fault is a profession to leave the same: Hylarius in
psalm. cxxxv.
Therefore we ought first to forsake our sin, whereof we have begone to
make Confession, and than to have good hope of forgiveness. For it is not
only sufficient to accuse our selves, and to be seen to declare our sins,
Chryso. ad Theodoru^ lapsum.
but to do it with this affection, that we may have hope thereby, to have
some Justification given unto us through our penance. For so we may let
in shame into our soul, confessinge it self, that it fall no more into the
same crimes it confessed before. For to condemn and call himself a sinner,
is a common thing to all Christen men, and infydeles.

Many of these beastelye men and specially unchaste women call them selves
sinners, and myschieuous persons, but they do it not for this intent, that
they desire to be amended, and therefore this is not to be called a Confession,
for it comes not forth of a contrite heart, and in the bitterness of
tears, nor yet with that affection, as men that hate that which they blame,
and have a will never to do it any more, nor yet to hear of it, but the
thing is only in words, and in words from the lyppes outward, not
proceeding from the inward sorrow of the heart, so that some times they
require to be praised for that as they were men that would not lie, but
although it were against them selves, yet would they say truth: as who
say, the crime seemed not to men so grievous, when that it is spoken of him
that did it, as when it is reproved of an other. But this do they that for
much Desperation, lack also the feelyng of sorrow, and then fear not the
reproach of men, but with impudent boldness blase abroad their own
faults, as they were other men's.

But I would have us do none of all these, neither with Desperation to
confess our synnefull life, but with good hope of pardon, the root of
Desperation being clean grubbed out. And like as when a man vexed with a
grievous syckenesse, Chryso. in psalm. l.
has need of many medicines, and has little to bye them wythall, if a
Phisician come unto him that is sick and say, thou haste need of diverse
kinds of medycines, and knowing that thou art not able to bye them all, yet
bye me one or two of the best of them and least woorthe, and the rest I shall
find of mine own cost freely: even so almightye God says to us. Give me
thy confession, and the tears of penance, and the rest shall I find of my
gentleness and free gift.

God gives mercy and health, and the sinner gives the confession of his
sins, which was given him before to give. A small thing but yet that he is
able to give, as David said: I knowledge and confess mine iniquity. psalm. ^.
But on the other side. How many sinners be there that live careless, that
rob and steal, and will not understand, that oppress the wyddowes and
fatherles, that cyrcumuente the simple, and live other ways wretchedlye, and
yet will not recognyse and see the destruction and mischief that hangs over
their heads, and in the mean time do that evil they like with boldness,
neither mourning nor weepynge, nor confessing their faults. How can these
men be saved, not acknowledgynge their sins, nor having the judgment of
GOD before their eyes? Yet blessed David made plain confession, saying: for I
knowledge my sin, and it is always in my sight. He forgatte it not
although it was forgeuen, but had the adulterye and murder which he
committed painted in his conscience, as in an Image, and every day he saw
the corruption of it, and therefore said, my sin is always in my sight.
Lord I see it, do not thou consider it, I write it in my conscience, Lord put
thou it out.

This is it that Esaias said: If thou remember it, God will forgette it, Esaias.
xliii.
if thou forgette it, God will remember it, for God says of himself: I am he
that blotteth out thine iniquity, but be thou always myndefull of it. Why
would GOD have a man always to remember his sin? That his mercy should
be to the sinner more thankful, and that he should perceive the better what
God has forgeuen him. He that always remembers the heap of his sins,
shall also remember the greatness of Gods merciful benefits.

Such were the holy men in old time, they did not call to their
remembrance their virtues but their sins, and did not as men do now,
forgette their sins, being desirous to hyde them and keep them close, and
show forth to all men their good deeds if they have done any, and boaste
them selves of them. But if thou haste done any good, keep it secret that
thy Lord may see it and praise thee for it. For if thou boast thy self of any
good deed, thou haste received glory of men. If thou have done evil, remember
it, that GOD might forgette it: if thou shall tell thy faults, thou haste
made them less, but if GOD shall tell them and lay them to thy charge, he
shall increase them. If thou be ashamed to tell thy sins to thy neighbor,
then tell them daily inwardlye in thy heart, I do not bydde thee tell them to
thy neighbor and fellow servant, to the intent he should upbraid thee with
them, and utter them again to thy confusion, but tell them to thy Lord GOD
that shall not vpbrayde thee with them, but heal them and take them clean
away. Not for that GOD does not know them, seeing he knows all thing, and
was present when thou dyddest them, and knew them before they were done, but
for that he would have thee to know them, and by confessing of them to
recognyse the greatness of Gods mercy in pardonynge of them, and so always
afterward warelye to avoid them, and humblye to thank him.

Chrysostom. hom. xx. in Genesim.
This medycine is neither costlye nor grievous, and yet restores a man
parfitelye to his former health. For he that would have his disease healed and
be brought into health, let him put out of mind all worldly cares, and with
repentance go to GOD the Phisician, and before him pour forth his warm
tears, and with much diligence confess his sins against himself, and
brynging steadfast faith with him, let him trust and put his confidence in
the art and connyng of the Phisician: what cost or grief does this
merciefull Phisician require of us? He requires Contrition of heart,
compunction of mind, confession of our fall, careful and humble
continuance, and he does not only heal our diseases, but makes us
rightwise men which were laden with sin before. What great mercy and
excellent goodness is this? when he that offended confesses his fault and
asks forgeuenes, is by and by pardoned and made ryghtwyse. And for plain
declaration hereof, hear the Prophets words. Tell thou thine iniquity
first, Esaias. xliii.
that thou may be justified. He says not only: Tell thine iniquities, but
tell them first: that is to say, tarry not till they be laid to thy charge,
and thou reproved for them, but prevent thou thine accusoure and have the first
word, and so thine accusour shall be domme.

See the excellent mercy of this Judge. If a man should do so in worldly
judgments, and should confess before he were accused, were the Judge never
so pytyfull, yet he should have sentence of death: but such is the clemencye
of our merciful Judge, and the Physician of our souls, that if we prevent our
adversary the devil, which at the last day shall stand before our face,
and in this present life before judgment fall to confession, and preventing
all other be our own accusours: we shall provoke our Judge to so great
mercy, that he will grant us not only to be delivered from our sins, but
also to be accoumpted in the number of just men. For if Lamech which had no
law whereupon he might learn, nor heard no Prophet, Gene. iiii.
nor had no other admonition, but even by the judgment which was given to
him in nature, being priuye to his noughtie murder, confessed openly against
him self that he had done, and condemned him self, what excuse can we
have, that with all diligence will not show our sores to the intent we might
have them parfitelye cured? For there is no greater enemy to a man's sin,
Chrysostom. homi. iiii. de Lazaro Idem ho. de la^rone.
than a man's own proper condempnation and confession of his sin joined with
repentance and tears. Whereof we may take an example of the thief that was
crucified with our Savior Christ. Which when he was suffering for his own
crimes, took no care of himself, but opened his sins to Christ. For as his
sins did make him foul and vile, so the confession of them opened Paradise
to him. For no doubt of it, if he had confessed his sins here, he should
have been compelled to have confessed the^ there where more pain, and more
shame should have followed. Idem ho. de penitent. et co^fessi.
And yet the shame (if it be well and truly considered) ought rather to be
in the dooynge, than in the confession of our sins, for it is no shame to
confess to GOD, but rather virtue and rightwysenesse, for if it were not
virtue, GOD would never have promised a reward for it, saying (as I said
before:) Tell thou thy sins first, Esaias. xliii.
that thou may be justified. And who shall be ashamed to do that deed,
whereby he is made ryghtwyse, seeing GOD commands us to confess our sins,
not to punyshe us, but to pardone us. For which cause least a man should
fear to be punished after confessing of his fault, David says: Psalm. cxvii.
Make confession to god because he is good, and his mercy is for evermore.

What profit should a man have if he should not confess his sin? Can
he keep it from the knoweledge of God, who knows the secrets of man's
heart, and all things before they be done? No no. It is worse not to
confess the sin, Chrysostom. ho. de confess. pero^.
than too transgress the law, it is worse too refuse our conversion, than
to contempne Gods admonition. It is worse not to mitigate Gods dyspleasure
by our satisfaction, than to deserve his displeasure by our transgression.
The Ninevites confessed their sins and lived. The Sodomites neglected
confession and perished. Gene. xix.
The Israelites when they sinned, they were delivered too their enemies: when
they confessed their sins, they were delivered from their enemies. For like
as no man escaped Gods plague when he sinned, so every manne had Gods
pardone when he confessed his sin. Through hope of this holy David prays
to GOD that he might be washed more and more, Psalm. l.
because he knew his iniquity, and his sin was always in his syghte, not
by delectation to frequent and continue it, but by hatred to avoid and abhor
it. The Publicane in the Gospel confessed his sin and went home justified,
the proud Pharisie boastynge his good deeds, went home in worse case: Luke
xviii
Confession is the fruit of humility, which is also the mother of grace, for
the atteynynge whereof the holy Ghost teaches us always to be occupied in
this kind of Confession, saying by the Prophet, that the ryghteous man is
ever first of all the accuser of him self in the beginning of his words.
Prou. xviii
Wherefore (good people) let us be as diligent in preserving and encreasyng our
treasure in heaven, as these worldly Merchants be in preseruyng their
treasure in earth. Chrysostom. ho. de penitentia et co^fessione.
For it is a common trade of these rich men, least the charges of household
do exceed their gaynes* ayrelye in the morning as soon as they rise, before
they go about their business, to call their servant, and to ask an
accoumpte of their expenses, that they might know what is evil spent, what
well, and if they see their stock decay, than to seek an occasion how to
restorre it again: Even so let us do in our business, let us call our
servant which is our conscience, to an accoumpte, for our thoughts, words,
and deeds, and search what is spent for our profit, what for our
destruction. What word is evil spent in brawlyng, raylyng, iestyng, and
slander: What thought has provoked the eye to fornication, the heart to
malice, the hand to iniurye and myschiefe of our neighbor. And when our
servant has told us every thing, then let us cease from wasting any
more of our heavenly treasure. And seek by gain too restore that, which by
negligence was lost. For idle and noughtie words let us bring home and
store up holy prayers: for iniurye done to our neighbor, mercy and alms:
for intemperate lyuinge, fasting and abstinencye. For if we spend our good
treasure still in waste, and restore nothing that is good again, when we shall
be brought to extreme miserye, and the time of our marchaundise is paste and
gone, than shall we seek and find no help, no, not so much as one drop of
water to quench the heat of our tongues end. The marcha^tes use to call their
servants to account ayrelye in the morning, Chrysostom. psalm. l.
but our best time is to call our conscience to account in the eueninge. When
thou go to bed and haste no body to trouble the, than bring forth thy
account book, and search diligently, if any thing all the day before be done
amiss, either in word, thought or deed. For so the prophet gives counsel
saiynge: Be angry and sin no more, those things ye speak in your hearts,
psalm. iiii.
be sorye and contrite for them in your beds. In the day time a man has
many lettes, his labors, his offices, the care of his household, children and
familye, and other affairs both private and public which diuerselye do
grieve or occupye a man on the day time. But when he goes to bed and no man
calls upon him nor troubles him, than let him common with his own soul,
and sytte as it were upon judgment upon him self, examininge what good he
has done all the day before, or what evil, and if he find that he has
done good, let him humblye give God thanks whose grace did move him to it,
assist him, and brought it to that good end.

But if he find that he has done evil, let him cease from the evil
deed, blame and accuse him self, with sorrow and compunction beat his own
heart, wash his bed with tears as David did, confess his sin to
almyghtye God against him self, and humblye pray him of pardone and
remission, and than using this nightlye let him peerce and smite through
his soul with the fear of God, and be ashamed to come with one fault twysse
before him, who by an unpenitent heart is provoked to vengeance, as by a
contryte heart he is bowed to mercy, and seeks occasion by all means to
show mercy to all men. This manner of daily confession watered with tears of
a man's own eyes, is through the merytes of our Savior Christ, a sponge to
wype away the fylthynesse of our sins, and a medicyne preseruinge us from
fallinge to sin again. Thus preuentinge his face in confession, we may be
sure of forgiveness. psalm. xciiii. Proverb. xxviii.
For as Solomon says, He that hydeth his sins shall not prosper, but he
that confesses and forsakes them shall obtain mercy. Fear of hell with
hope of mercy woorketh the sorrow of penance, Gregori. in Job. cap. xxviii.
out of which comes forth unfeigned confession, which is a vehement voice
in the ears of GOD, and persuades much to mercy and remission of sin, to
increase in grace, and by continuance in the same to eternal glory. Whereof
God make us all partakers through the merytes of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with the Father and the holy ghost be glory and honor now and ever more.
Amen.

Of Confession to a Priest. Ser. xix.
IN this Sermon (good people) I intend by Gods grace to declare unto you,
wherein the Sacrament of penance consysteth, and what is the matter of it. It
consists in the absolution which by a Catholyke Priest is given to a
penitent sinner in the name of God, Conciliu^ Florentinum.
who is the principal judge and remytter of all sin. And the matter of it is
that humble and true confession which a penitent sinner makes to God before a
Priest Gods minister institute for that purpose to remitte or reteyne sin.
This Sacrament of penance for sins committed after Baptism is necessary to
salvation, which is full remission of the same sins. And it is institute and
ordained by our savior Christ, when after his glorious resurrection, and
before he ascended gave to his Apostles Pryestes, and so to other, power to
absolve and forgive sinners their sins, saying to his Apostles thus: Receive
the holy ghost, The sins of those that you forgive, Joan. xx.
be forgeuen, and the sins of those that you reteyne, be retained, that is
to say, be not forgeuen. In which words our Savior Christ gave power and
authority to al priests both to remitte sin and also to reteyne sin, and
ordained them to b^ judges in his kingdom the Church to hear and determyne
all crimes and offenses which shall be committed against him and his laws.
August de ciuit. lib. xx. cap. ^x.
This power our Savior never gave to Aungelles nor Archaungelles nor to no
worldly Prince, Chrysostom de Sacerdotio* lib. iii.
but only to his Apostelles and those that have in his Church the order of
Pryesthode, which power is very great and excellent, as perteyninge to the
soul of man, and reachinge to heaven, where almightye God ratyfyeth above,
what so ever sentence Pryestes shall give in earth. This power no Priest can
exercise worthelye, without the confession of the sinner him self, which is
the only way for the priest to know and understand what he ought to
forgive and what to reteyne and not forgive, except he should blyndelye and
rashelye behave him self in so great an office, forgeuinge that he knows
not what. For neither ought he to bind those that be innocente, nor to lo^se
those that be obstinate, Hier^. (...) Math. cap. xvi*
but according to his office and commission to exercise the same in bindinge
and loosing after that he has heard the variety of the sins confessed. For
GOD does pardon them only that be truly penitent for their offenses, and
begin, and further purpose to amend their lyuinge. And because the power of
the Priests is two ways, to forgive the sins of some, and to reteyne the
sins of other, therefore our savior Christ gave to them the holy ghost,
that they might effectuallye execute both the functions and also the better
discern the one from the other, and also consideringe that Christ in plain
woorde^ affirms, that no sin is remitted before God in heaven which is
retained and not remitted by his ministers the priests in earth: Therefore the
holy catholyke Church of Christ even from the beginning thereof,
understands by the said words of Christ, that it is necessary by Gods
law, that every man and woman when they have sinned deadlye, should confess
their sins to a Priest, if they may have one, because they can not otherwise
obtain pardone of their sins, but by a Pryestes absolution sacramen^all,
except it be impossible for them to have the same, as when the sinner would
confess and can not speak, or can not get a ghostly father, for in such
cases God accepts a man's good will and unfeigned contrition in steed of the
sacramental confession, where the Sacrament is excluded by urgent necessity
and not by contempt of religion. So that the execution of this heavenly
authority requires judgment and discretion in the Priest to discern what
is to be remitted what not, August. (...).
saying every sin in every man is not to be remytted, whereunto is
necessary the knowledge of the fault, which can not be had of a man that
sees not the secrettes of an others heart, except the party being guilty
declare his own conscience and reuele plainlye his secret offenses, for which
cause the holy Church teaches that the same words that give authority to
Priests to forgive or retain sin, the same also do inioyne and bind al
sinners to confess their sins to Pryestes for the atteyninge of the said
remission. Therefore it is to be believed of all men and women, that confession
of deadly sins is to be made to a priest by Gods law, as necessary to
salvation, without the which the necessary Sacrament of penance can not be
ministered, saying that it is the matter of the same Sacrament, whereby the
offendour is both accuser of himself, and also witness against him self, August.
de vis^t. inf^. lib. ii. cap. iiii.
and yet may not be his own judge, pardoning him self, but ought to confess
his fault not only privily to God to whom nothing is secret, but also
without shame or dysdayne to him whom for that purpose God has vouchsafed to
make his vicare and delegate judge, and to vndergoo his judgment and sentence
to the intent his conscience may be quieted and he fully reconciled to
almighty God.

For men are bounden necessarylye to open their sins to them, Basiliu^.
regul. cclxxxviii.
to whom the dyspensation of Gods mysteries is committed, for so we see that
our fathers did in their penance, saying it is also written in the Gospel
that the Jews confessed their sins to Saint John Baptiste, Mat. iii.
and the people of Ephesus to the Apostles, of whom they were Baptized. Act.
xix.


Wherefore good people I exhort you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that this necessary and wholesome medycyne of your souls be not lightlye
regarded of you, but whosoever has his conscience laden with the heavy burden
of sin,, or wounded with the darte of the Devils tentation, or infected with
the poisoned co^tagion of deadly sin, let him run without delay to this
present remedy which our Savior Christ has ordained and offers to al men,
let him go to the Phisiciane whom god has appointed for his soul, and has
fully authorysed and instructed what to do to the healynge of the same, and
let him humble and submyt him self not only under the mighty hand of God,
but also to a mortal man being Gods vicare and steward of his mysteryes,
not regardinge the man for the worthynesse of him self, but for the dignity
of his place and administration, never accomptinge him to be vile whom GOD
has vouchesafed to make his vycare. And to him, or rather to GOD before him,
let him open his wound, show his lepre, and humblye confess his sin,
wherewith he has offended almyghtye GOD, and with an humble and contryte
heart require remyssyon of his sin, geuinge full confidence to the words of
Christ, and beleuynge that to be remytted with God in heaven, whatsoever the
Priest of what state so ever he be by exercysing of gods commission, remitteth
to him in earth, knoweinge that God is faithful and neither can deceive nor
be deceived but always assisteth the due ministration of his Sacrament,
woorking the same effect inwardelye in the soul of the true penitent, that
the words of the Pryeste do outwardelye to his ear sygnyfye, which is
remyssion of all his sins. Let not shame stop this humble confession but
let every man rather be ashamed to sin than to confess his sin. For as
the wise man says, Bernard ad milites templ. cap xii. Eccl. iiii.
there be two manner of shames, one that brings to sin, an other that
brings to grace and glory. The good shame is when a man is ashamed that he
does or has sinned, and although no other creature were pryuye to it, yet
he with reverence fears the sight of GOD that always sees him. This kind
of shame dryueth away confusion and reproach and woorketh grace and glory, in
that either he does forbear to sin, or else by penance punysheth, and by
confession banisheth his sin committed, where as his glory is the witness of
his own conscience.

The noughtye shame is when a man is ashamed to confess his fault, this kind
of shame dryueth away grace and glory, and woorketh eternal confusion,
which like a lock or bar stops the door of his mouth and will not
let the poison of the heart to be cast out, till the soul be dead and
drowned in the botome of sin.

Wherefore this is certain and sure, (...) confess*
he that for shame contemns and refuses to confess his sins here, where
remedy may easily and presentlye be had: He shall be compelled to confess
them there, where greatest shame shall be in the presence of Christ, his
Angels and the hoole world* and endless pain shall ensue.

This is the subtyl craft of our ghostly enemy the devil. Hol^ot in. (...).
Sapi. L^ct. cxliii
Who uses this noughty shame as an instrument of all myschiefe, in that he
persuades a man to cast away shame and to be impudent and careless of his
lyuinge, and so to fear neither GOD nor man, but boldeye to sin and
impudentlye to boaste and defend the same. And on the other side when the same
sinner is smytten with the fear of hell, and is compuncte in heart and by
Gods grace moved to wholesome penance and confession: than the devil uses
the same instrument again, restoringe that he took away before, that is to
say, shame, not to sin, but to confess his sin, and so keeps him still
fast bounden and locked in the cheines of mortal sin that the keys of
heaven committed by Christ in Saint Peter to the Church of God can not open
that lock and loose the prisoner, because shame keeps him from confession,
without the which the keys ca^ not be used to the deliuerye of the prisoner.
By this we may understand that the confession of sins is the wytnes of a
conscience that fears GOD, for he that fears the judgment of God is not
ashamed to confess his sin, and he that is ashamed fears not. For perfyt
fear loses all shame: the sufferinge and auoydinge whereof is a certain
pain and punishment for the sin because by this means the pride of a
sinners heart which God resists is broken and pulled down and by humility
is made mete to receive the grace of God. And also that perniciouse security
which a sinner regards not so long as he has glory in him self and
pleasure in his carnal lyuinge, is by knelinge down and submittinge him self
to Gods minister taken away, whiles that he layinge his own life with all
the abomination thereof before his own eyes learneth to know him self and
how vile he has made him self in the sight of God, and is so affected as he
would wyshe to be, if he were even than at point to depart out of this
world, which is a bridle and a great stay for him to refreyne from sin, and
to avoid the same in time to come*

For which cause let every man confess his own sin, Cypri. de lapsis.
whiles he is yette living and remayninge in this world, whiles his
confession may be admitted, and satysfaction and remission which is given
here by the Priest, is accepted before God. If any infection of deadly sin
or infidelity has entered into his heart, Clemens. Epist. i. cap. ^xii*
let him not be ashamed to confess it to him that has cure and charge of his
soul, to the inten^e it might be cured by the word of GOD and wholesome
counsel, so that by perfect faith and good works he might escape the pains
of eternal fire, and come to the reward of eternal life. Hier^. in cap. ^.
Eccle*
But if he that is stynged with the serpent the Devil, hold his peace, and
will not do penance and confess his wound to his brother and master that
has cure upon him, than can his master that has a tongue to heal him
profitte him nothing, for how can the surgion minister an apt and wholesome
medycine, if the sick man will not open and show his wound unto him?
B^silius regul^* (...).
For the same way is observed in the confession of sins, which is used in
the wounds of a man's body. Like as the soores of the body be not opened to
every one but to such as can skyll to heal them: even so ought the
confession of sins to be made to them that can heal them which after
what sort it is done ye have heard it declared from the mouth of our
Sauyoure Christ, who promised to allow and accept as forgeuen what so ever
his minister in his name shall forgive, and also denies it to be remitted,
which by his minister is retained and not remitted. Do what a man can, and
search as much as he will, and he shall find after Baptism no other table or
boorde to save him self from shyppewracke of sin, and drowninge in damnation
and to be brought unto the sure ground of grace and the state of salvation,
but only by this Sacrament of penance which is ministered by a Pryeste to
him that is truly penitente, and faythfullye confesses his sin and humblye
requires absolution for the same. And although the contrition of an humble
heart may be so great that the sentence of GOD in heaven may go before the
sentence of Gods minister in earth: yet that true co^trition always
includes a full purpose and determination to obtain remission at the priests
hand by confessing his sins as soon as he may have opportunity. For else he
can not have true contrition before God, that proudly contemns gods
ordinance, and never intends to require the same of gods minister. Thus wha^
a sinner forsakes his sin, and comes to confession unfeignedly as he ought
to do: than does almighty God mercifully blotte out his sin, and forgeueth
all the punishment which he deserved to suffer in hell for breakinge of gods
eternal law, and sets him again in the state of salvation, and than the
sinner fealeth his conscience discharged of the heavy burden of sin and may
be glad and quyete in his conscience knowing surely by the most sure and
merciful promise of almighty god, that he has of his goodness pardoned and
forgeuen him al his sins, and does bear him again his gracyous favor, and
loves him as much as he did before, and that he has given him also new grace
and spiritual strength, and made him able to receive his own son our
Savior, God and man in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and helps him
continuallye in this life to pass through the dangers of the same toward the
kingdom of heaven, to the which God bring us that made us, to whom be all
glory. Amen.

what sinner ought to do in making his Confession. Ser. xx.
AFter that ye have learned (good people) the necessity of Confession how
every sinner is bounden to confess his sins to a Priest by gods law for
the atteininge of absolution and remission of sin: now it follows to be
declared what a sinner ought to do in making his confession. First a sinner
ought before he come to confession to make an account with himself of his
life, and to call to his remembrance how many deadly sins he has committed
since the time of his last confession, wherein such diligence must be used,
as the necessytye and dygnitie of the work of GOD which is absolution does
require, being willinge and ready to do all things that be necessary for
the recovery of grace and health of his soul, Aug. de ver^ and fa^^a penit.
cap. xv.
which a sick man would do for auoydinge the death of his body. And this
the sinner ought to do for two causes, the one that he might thereby take
special repentance for every offense that he did, for as much as he did
disobeye, and offend almightye God, and had some special pleasure in every
one, and therefore he ought to call his sins to his mind, and for remedy of
the same to take some dyspleasure and repentance for every one of them. The
other cause is that he might have his sins ready and the better in his
mind for to show them unto his ghostly father when he comes to confession.
The which king David did well perceive that sinners be bounden to do, and
therefore when he had sinned he said thus. I will study to remember my sin,
psalm. xxx^ii
because I will confess it. And the example of the prodigal son in the
Gospel teaches us also so to do, Luc. x^*
who returninge to his father considered how evil he had lived, and he
called than to his mind what he would confess and say to his father when he
should come to him. Thus when a sins has diligently examined his own
conscience, and called to his remembrance how often and wherein he has
offended his Lord God, taking special repentance and contrition for every
offense: than he ought to come to his ghostlye father with great desire and
humility, not as to a man to hear some worldly and profitable counsel,
but as to the messenger or vycare of our Savior Christ representinge his
person, ii. Cor. v*
whose embassage he uses for making peace and reconciliation between the
sinner and GOD, Aug. de visit^ infi^^no cap* v.
to the intent he might hear of him the word of GOD which is the word
of absolution for his sins by paste, and also be instructed by the word of
GOD how to live well hereafter and avoid sin. And where as the effect of
Gods Sacraments do not depend upon the virtue or worthiness of the priest the
minister, but upon the commandment and ordinance of GOD who by his spirit
does assiste the due ministration of the same: therefore a penitent sinner
ought rather to regard the virtue and power of GOD that woorketh by his
mynyster, than the state of the person be he hye or low, a just or an
unjust man, so long as he is a member of Gods universal Church, and by
toleration suffered to minister in the same, and he ought to give full credyte
to the words of absolution, that than his sins be clerelye remytted, if his
heart be than disposed and mete to receive the same remissyon, and if he put
no stop to Gods grace, as they do that lack faith and true contrityon.
And so the penitent sinner coming to a Pryeste and humbly submytting him self
to him as representing the person of Christ, ought to rehearse hollye,
symplye, and faithfully all the deadly sins which than after diligent
serchinge of his life do burden and vex his conscience. For although the
holy Church does not burden a sinner to confess every venial sin, which
is impossible or very hard to do, for who does know all his faults, Psalm.
xviii.
and also saying that venial sins do not take away charity, nor do not
exclude a man from the kyngedome of heaven, without the which this frail and
mortal life, can not be passed over: yet if a man fall oftentimes into such
small sins, they ought not to be neglected but avoided betymes, because
contempt in all things aggrauateth the crime, and specially in procuring the
remedy, Math. xii.
and also a man shall give an account in the day of judgment of every idle
word which he shall speak. But all mortal sins such as be transgressions
of gods commandments, and bring a man in state of damnation, so many as come
to his remembrance after diligent search and inquisition, the sinner ought to
confess: And not only such as he knows certainly to be mortal sins, but
also such as he doubts of and knows not certeinely whether they be mortal
sins or no, because what so ever thing is not of faith, Romans xiiii
is sin, and he that does or allows to be done any thing whereof his
conscience reprehendeth or condemns him, does therein against his conscience
and sins deadly and ought to confess it and learn of his ghostly father
(to whom judgment is given to discern between lepre and not lepre, Chrysostom.
de sacerd. lib. iii.
sin and not sin) how to know and avoid the same afterward. Furthermore it
is to be considered that god does not forgive one mortal sin, and reteineth
an other vnforgeuen, Aug. de vera and fa^^a pen^t. cap. ix. Luc. viii. Luc. vii.
but always when he forgeueth, he forgeueth all together, the which he showed
in expellinge al and the holle legion of devils out of the man of Ge^rasen. And
he showed the same again when he pardoned Marye Magdalene, for he forgave her
all her sins, and the scripture calls that man happy whose sin God has
not imputed but covered, Psalm. xxxi*
and if there were any sin remaining imputed unto him and not forgeuen, he
should not be compted as happy, but as an e^emye to god. Now seeing the father
^ath given al power to the son, and the son has given the same power to
the Priests of his church, whose judgment both in byndinge and losinge in
earth is confirmed and ratifyed by God in heaven: Chrysostom. de sacerd. lib.
iii. Joan. xx.
therefore the remission which the priests give to penitent sinners, ought to
be like and agreeable to the remission which is given by God, that is to say, a
full remission, not forgeuinge one mortal sin without an other, but either
forgeuing al at once, or none at all. And because (as ye were taught before)
the priest can not worthelye exercise this authority of forgeuinge or
reteyninge sin, except the sinner open his conscience, and confess his
sins him self, both because he can not otherwise know what is to be
remytted, what is not, Bernard. ad milites ^empli. cap. xii.
and also because he may not rashely remit that he knows not and is not
confessed unto him: therefore the sinner is bounden plainelye and fullye to
confess all his sins and every pertyculare sin which by diligente
searching of his conscience comes than to his remembrance. For the
conceyling or hyding of any one mortal sin which he remembers, is the cause
why all the other which he confesses be not forgeuen: For he than in hydinge
of that mortal sin in confession did sin deadly and there dissimble with
almighty GOD to whose eyes all things be naked and open. Chrysostom. ad populu^
Antioch. hom. xli.xlvi.
A general confession whereby a man calls him self a sinner, is not
sufficient, but a special confession and rehersall of every mortal sin that
we remember is required, yt by knowinge the number and quantity of our
offenses, we may likewise know the greatness of Gods mercyful goodness in
remitting of them. He that is not penitent will call him self a sinner, and
every just man will confess him self to be a sinner, for he that says he
has no sin is a liar deceiving him self, i. Joan. i.
and also makes God a liar and has not truth in him. But this general
calling and confessing him self a sinner is not the matter of this Sacrament
of penance, Conciliu^ Florenti.
because it is not a faithful declaration of all the crimes which he
remembers, but a certain crafty coloring and cloking of his crimes which by
a confuse and general confession he dissembleth both before God and man, as
though he were but as all other me^ be. Which general confession if it lack
contrition, Thomas Aquinas iiii. d. xxi. q. ii.
is a proud presumption and a gloriyng that he has done evil, if it be joined
with contrition, than although it be not sacramental forgeuinge deadly sins
by virtue of the keys committed by Christ to his Church, yet by virtue of the
co^trition, humility and prayer joined with it, it profits to the remission
of venial and daily sins and prepares the sinners heart to the atteyninge
of further grace. Wherefore like as contrition ought to be without ypocrysye
before God not of one or two sins but of all: even so confession Sacramental
before Gods minister ought to be holle and perfyt, seeing the death of the
soul by sin ca^ not be taken away by parts: but holly altogether, when grace
and life is by absolution restored and given. And after perfect knowledge of
the holle state and life of the sinner, the Pryeste who has cure and charge
of his soul, may the better in counselling, comforting, and absoluing
dyscharge his duetye toward almighty God again. And furthermore, that I
have said concerning the confession of all a man's sins, is also to be
understand of the circumstances of the same sins, such as do aggrauate the
crime and make it more heinous, and increase the contempt of GOD in committinge
them. As a sin often times done and used is more grievous than that is but
once done. And the sin of a prince or priest is more tha^ the same kind of
sin in a subject or lay man. And sacrilege, which is robbinge of Churches
or unlawful taking away of that belongs to the church, is greater crime than
other robberye or theft. And he that by a maliciouse and noughty mind and
with long study tempts and provoke him self or any other to adultery or
like sin against his neighbor, sins more tha^ he which does the same
crime by frailetye, suggestion or occasion of other. These and such other
circumstances ought a sinner to express also in his confession. That his
humility and shamefastenesse in confessinge his fault, may agree and be like
to his pride and impudency in committing the same fault, always taking head
that he confess but his own faults, and do not therewith bewray the faults
or persons of other, and that also, with out to much curiosity and scruple of
conscience, and only for this intent that his sin and the greatness thereof
might appear, and the doubts of his conscience be taken away.

For to extenuate and make little in words that crime which is very great in
deed, Bernardus in Cantica sermon. xvi.
is likewise to diminishe the glory of God that should pardone it, which is
the way not to get pardone at Gods hand, but to loose it, who does not gladly
give a benefit, which is not thankfully accepted and esteemed accordingly as
it is. This is the most common and subtle craft that the devil uses with all
sinners. At the beginning he does cover and hyde the sin he moves the^ unto,
and makes it seem nothing or very little, to the intent the sinner may take
boldness to do it, this boldness brings in use and custom to sin, which
by continuance is turned into nature, so that then any exhortation or
admonition can little preuail, but whether so ever the flesh and the devil
leads him, thither he runs headlynges, only looking at the pleasure
present, nothing regarding the pain to come, but at the last end when the
fearful hour of death draws nere, than the devil does not extenuate but
amplyfye the sin, than does he beat into the sinners head and lay before his
eyes the greatness of his sin and the long time he used it, and the contempt
of God in doing it, and all the other circumstaunces that do aggrauate and make
it horrible, only to lead him further into desperation. From the which
earthquake of desperation, the bottomless pytte of all euyls I beseech God save
us all. And as we fear and abhor the end, so I pray you let us avoid and
cut of the cause, which was when we did diminish our sin, and esteem it but
little, whereby we grew in boldness to do it, and fell into further extremity. If
we stop at the beginning and know our sin, and confess it simplye as it
is, without any cloking or diminishing of it of our part, we shall provoke God
to cover it, to turn his face from it, and to wash it clean away. There be
many men that do not in words diminish their sin, Bernardus in Cantica sermon.
xvi. Gregor. in Job. capi. xxx.xxxi. Aug. de co^ti. cap. v.
but plainly excuse it, which does not mitigate Gods anger, but provoke it
further, because they do not therein confess their faults, but defend them,
rather excusing than accusing them selves, whereby their sins be not taken
away, but more increased. A proud heart that pleases it self, would not
appear guilty, and disdayneth to be corrected and convinced when it offends,
not abydyng to accuse it self by devout humility, but seking to excuse it
self by intolerable pride, which must needs fall and come to ruin. To
refrain this pride, holy David humbly required of almighty God that it would
please him to put a watch and a door before his mouth, Psalm. cxl.
that he do not decline his heart to words of malice, that is to say, to
excuse his sins. For what is more malicious and wicked then those words be,
whereby a noughtye man denies himself to be evil, although his own conscience
does conuicte him of the same evil which he is not able but by malice to
gaynesaye, and so does arm his tongue to kill and destroy his own soul.
Luke xviii.
Such an one was the proud Pharisie in the gospel, who displeased God not so
much, for boasting himself of his good deeds, as for excusing his noughty deed,
saying that he was not like other men. And cursed Cain also after that he had
killed his brother Abel, being asked of God where his brother was, Gene. iiii.
who asked him that question not for ignorance, but mercifully to give him
occasion to confess his sin and obtain mercy: answered again that he
could not tell, and further cloking and excusing his sin, said: am I the keeper
of my brother? For the which excusing which was an other sin beside his
murder, he was pronounced that he should be accursed upon earth, and from that
sin he fell further into desperation, saying that his sin was greater then
he might deserve and obtain forgeuenes. Wherefore I pray you for Gods love,
to lay away all manner of excuses, when ye come to confession, knowing that ye
speak to God who sees the secrets of every man's heart, to whose eyes all
things be open and naked. Aug. de co^tine^. ca. v.
If a man were the judge, who might be deceived, to purge the fault with some
craft, and to excuse it, might seem to be profitable for a time: but where God
is the judge that can not be deceived, a man may not falsely excuse or defend
his sin, but truly and plainly confess his sin. There be some men also,
that where they can not, nor do not deny the fact, yet they will lay the
fault and blame upon some other thing or person from them selves, as upon
youth, ignorance, sorrow, or evil counsel, or the tentation of the devil, or
the inordinate desire of their bodies, or upon destinye, as though by the
mouyng and powers of the stars and heavens above, they were compelled and
enforced to do evil, and some pestilent and abominable heretics there be, that
for excusing of them selves, do accuse almighty God, and impute their
mischeuous deeds to gods predestination, and would persuade that God who is the
fountain of all goodness, were the author of al mischief, not only suffering
men to do evil by their own wyls, but also enforcing their wills to the same
evil, and working the same evil in them. Which words (good people) be not
the words of malice only, whereof I spoke before, but rather the words of
blasphemy, and therefore I will not now spend this little time in confuting
their pestilent and deuilish sayings. For it is better to abhor them, the^
to confute them. Only at this time know you (good people) that these and al
other such like excuses and sayings be false. For every Christen man and
woman has so great strength in his soul, Bernardus de lib. arbitrio.
and has his will so in his own power, that neither the devil nor the flesh,
nor evil counsel, nor any other thing can cause a man to do any sin, except
he will himself grant or co^se^t unto it. And it is always in the persons
free choice that is tempted by the devil or by the flesh, or by evil counsel,
or any other thing, to consent unto the evil, or to refuse it and not to
consent unto it. For if a man will not consent to do sin, there can no
creature cause him or compel him to do any, and therefore when a man has done
any sin, he can not in any wise justly excuse him self for the doing of it,
for he himself was the very causer and doer, and might have left it undone if
he had list. And so you may see (good people) that he which lays any excuse
for his sin in confession, does wrongfully excuse himself, and accuses
other falsely, in saying that they were the causes why he sinned, and in so
doing beside his former offenses he commits a new sin, and thereby
stops the influence of Gods grace, and is void of all remission.
Furthermore ye shall understand, that there be some persons that although they
playnelye and truly confess their faults, yet they will otherwise excuse the
same, by justifying their noughtye doings in comparison of other that did
worse, as he that oppresses his subjects or tenauntes, or will take more
than his duty is for his labors or pains, and than in excusing of hmselfe,
says, that other that were before him in like authority or office were more
extreme men, or took more for their labors then he. And also sellers of
wares that deceive the simple buyers, will say that they were deceived them
selves, and must needs utter the same again for as much as they can.

Therefore let every man take good head that he do not excuse his own fault,
because he can tell of other that have done worse, but rather let him accuse
him self that he has not done so well as other that have done better,
setting the virtue of good men as an example before his eyes to follow, and not
the vice of evil men. Last of all a sinner ought to put away all indiscreet
and false accusing of him self, that is to say, he may not accuse him self
of moo sins then he has done, neither in special nor in general. In special,
as when a man has red in books the division of sin, how many parts and
branches it has, and then according to such books will confess him self
to be an offendour in the same, rehersing every branch particularlye, in so
doing he lies upon him self by confessing mo sins then ever he did, and in
that synneth against God, and therefore this manner of confession is naught, and
ought of every man to be refused. Likewise a sinner ought not to accuse
himself wrongfully in general, as saying that he has been the most
shamefullest liver and the greatest sinner that ever was, or that can be, or
any other like sayings, for they be naught and false. What knows he how great
sinners has been or may be, and therefore men must put away such indiscreet
sayings, and speak soberly, truly and faithfully to almighty God in their
confessions, and then let them not doub^e but steadfastly trust of absolution
and pardone for all their sins. Judas that betrayed our Savior Christ, and
Cain that killed his brother Abel confessed their sin openly, Bernardus super
can. sermon. xvi.
but did not trust surely of mercy* and therefore their unfaithful confession
did nothing profit them, but he that auoydeth and observes all those things
which as I have now declared unto you, ought to be avoided and observed in
their sacramental confession, no dout of it he shall be joyful and glad in his
heart, and perceive him self eased of a great heavy burden, and the more he
remembers the merciful goodness of almightye God in pardonynge him his
manyfold offenses, the more thanks he will give him, and the more will he
study and labor to honor him, and to live iustlye from that time forward,
still increasyng in grace and ryghtwysnesse, by the aid and help of our
Savior Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be al honor and
glory. Amen.

()

Certain Instructions whereby a man may consider his life and make his
confession the better. Ser. xxi.
AS I would wish that every person which comes to confession, should
diligently search his holle life, and examine his acts and deeds before he
come, that his confession might be made in order, whereby the minister should
not be compelled to appose and examine the penitent, which in some cases may
chance to do more harm then good, by putting that in the penitentes head by
his questions, which he never thought of, nor had experience of before: Even
so (good people) I think it expedient at this time, not to set forth a general
form of confession how every man should confess him self, which (standing
the variety of men's lives and offices) can not agree to every person, but I
think it profitable to rehearse unto you certain things wherein our savior
Christ has and does show unto us his merciful goodness and kindenes, for the
which we are always bounden to thank him, and also wherein we sinners have
showed again to him our great unkindness, for the which we are bounden to do
penance and to make amends, the often and diligent remembering whereof, will be
a great help for every man to know the state of his life, and to make his
confession the better.

First I would exhort every man and woman to thank God highly for his mercyful
kindness showed unto him in his creation, in his redemption and in his
regeneration. In his creation appears gods kindness, in that he might have
made him a mean creature sensible or insensible, which he did not, but rather
of his goodness made him one of the most excellent creatures of al other under
heaven, to his own image and similitude and to be inheritour of the kingdom of
heaven, and also made al other creatures to help him and to se^ue him here in
this present life, to the intent he might the better serve god. Also a man is
bounden to thank god for the benefit of his redemption, in that Christ by his
painful passion redeemed him from the possession of the devil, and made him
mete by the merits of the same passion to be brought to the state of
salvation, and the fruition of eternal life And also for the benefit of
regeneration, that is to say, when he was chrystened and received the holy
Sacrament of Baptism. For although Christ had redeemed him with his most
precious blood, yet might he have remained still an infidele, as many do, and
so should have been damned, if Christ had not called him and caused him to be
chrystened, by which baptism he made him actually an inheritour unto
everlasting life. And here also a man is bounden to thank God for that he
has not only set him in the hye way to heaven, but also has sent one of
his blessed angels to be with him here and to keep him, to help him, to
admonish him and to defend him against his mighty and most vigilant enemy. On
the other side a man ought to consider and confess his great unkindness, how
that afterward when he came to the years of discretion he did not obey God
nor love, laud, nor honor him according to his most bounden duty and
promise made at his baptism, but brake his most holy commandments and so
despised and dishonored god, for the which he ought to require his most
merciful forgeuenes. And this a man may do perticularely perusing all the x.
commandments, considering in every one and in every branch where and how
he has offended.

Secondly a man ought to thank god highlye for his great kindness, in geuinge
unto him the special gifts of his soul, of his body, and of his worldly
goods. The gifts of his soul be free will, remembrance, and reason lightened
with faith, by which he may clearly perceive that gods commandments be very
just and good, and very easy to fulfill and keep, and that he shall have gods
gracious favor and be saved by keeping of the^. And also he may see, yt to live
according to gods law is the most laudable, joyful and most pleasant life
that any man can have in this world, because God has commanded nothing but
that is very laudable and good, and again he has forbidden nothing but that
is evil and greatly against reason, and yet to the intent a man should avoid and
farsake any such evil, God has forbidden it under pain of damnation. Likewise
a man may consider the special gifts of his body, as right shappe, beauty,
good proportion, strength and such other, and also the external gifts of this
world, as riches, lands or patrimony, estimation, authority and such other,
and yet over and besides al these how it has pleased almyghtie God to promise
him a reward in heaven for occupying and bestowinge these gifts well. And here
on the other side, a man ought to acknowledge and confess his great unkindness
unto almghity God, for that he has bestowed the rehearsed gifts noughtilye,
unto Gods dishonor. Because he has often times with his reason understand
and with his memory remembered what God has commanded and the goodness of it,
and yet he has refused and would not do his commandments, when he ought
and might have done them. Likewise he has understand and remembered what God
has forbidden, and the evil and noughtines of it, and that he should loose
Gods gracious favor, and come in danger of damnation if he did it, and yet
has done that evil deed willinglye. Also let him consider how he has occupied
his remembrance and wit in study and casting where and how he might do evil,
and how he has misspent diverse times, and ways the gifts of his body, and
also the gifts of the world by gready and insatiable desires in procuring and
getting the^ by wrong, injury, oppression, usury, ambition and other unlawful
means, and in unmerciful keeping of the^ by mistruste of Gods goodness, and not
helpinge his neadye neighbors, and also in ryotous and unthrifty spending of
them for mainteininge of his fleshely lust, worldly vanity, and pride of life,
wherein he has showed great unkindness, and ought to be inwardly sorye, and to
beseke God of his merciful pardone and forgiveness.

Thirdly a man ought to thank God hyghlye for his merciful kindness showed
unto him in his reconciliation, that is to say, always when he came to shrifte
and confessed his sins. For although it be so that a man has broken his
promise made to almighty god at the font stone, and has misused and misspent
Gods foresayed gifts, and so greatly offended him that he had deserved justly
to have been cast into the pytte of hell: yet almightye God, as a good Lord
of his abundant mercy is evermore content to pardone and forgive him when he
confesses with a co^trite and humble heart his offenses unto his ghostly father
gods delegate judge and commissioner. For than is he there mercyfully absolved,
and all his trespaces be clearly forgeuen. And this merciful kindness is god
co^te^t to show, not once or twisse, but at al times, and as often as he
comes to confession, and does also bear him again his gracious favor, and
gives him grace to live well and to do good works and meritorious deeds for
his salvation. In this appears the excedyng goodness of almighty god, in
ordeining this most wholesome and present remedy of penance, whereby every
sinner may be delivered always from ye pains of hell, and be set again in
gods favor and state of salvation, for the which every man is most bounden to
render thanks to the vttermoste of his power. And on the other side he is
likewise bounden to acknowledge and with sorrow to confess his manifold
unkindness in that behalf, for as much as he has diverse times after his
shrifte and reconciliation, turned from God, and grievously sinned again, and
so has greatly offended by breakinge his promise which he made when he was
shriuen, for the which he ought to be sorry, and to beseech almighty God of his
merciful pardon and forgeuenes.

Fourthlye, a man ought to thank God for his great kindenes showed unto him,
in preserving him from many sins which he might have done, and also in
letting him from doing of diverse which he was in mind to have done, and would
have done them. For every man may consider and remember with him self, that he
might oftentimes have sinned when he did not, which I think he should have
done, if he had not been preserved and kept from doing of them by Gods
special goodness. Also seldom it chau^ceth but that a man may understand how
he has been in mind and will to have sinned diverse times, and yet he has
been let and could not fulfill his evil purpose and desire, as sometime he
has been let by shame, sometime by fear, and sometime otherwise, which
lets (no doubt of it) God did cause him to have, for he is so merciful that he
will not suffer sinners always to sin so greatly, nor to run so deepelye
into the hands of the devil and damnation, as they should do, if they might
evermore without stop or let do so much evil and sin in deed, as they be
willing to do in their hearts. And here a sinner may grant and confess, that
he has not considered this great kyndenes of God showed unto him in these
two rehearsed points, but has showed great unkindness again, because that
when he has remembered the opportunity and the meet time and occasion that he
had to sin in time past, and might have done diverse sins without let or
stop, yet he has not given to God due praise and thanks for his preservation
from sin, but rather he has repented him and been sorry that he had not done
such evil deeds as he might have done. Likewise when he has remembered, how
he has been let, and could not do such evil as he was in mind and willing
to do, he has not than given God thanks because he was let, but rather he
has been discontent and sorry that he was let, for the which things he ought
now to be sorye, and humbly beseech GOD of his merciful forgeuenes.

Fifthly, a sinner ought to give God most hie thanks for his syngulare kindness
showed unto him many times when he has been and lain in deadly sin, for that
almighty God (notwithstanding this manner of rebellion and obstinacy of the
sinner in remaining in sin, and not repenting him) yet did of his great
goodness and mercy come unto the sinners soul, and there did stand and
knock, that the sinner should have letten him in, that is to say, God gave
him remorse of conscience, the which did grudge against the sin that he has
done and was in, and by that grudge of conscience he perceived or might have
perceived, that if he would not leave and forsake his sin, he should be
dampened. And if he did forsake and turn to God, and intend to live well and
iustlye, and to keep his commandments, that than God would pardone him, and
enter into his soul, and there continue and take it at his departing hence
into a better life in heaven.

This merciful offer God did always make to the sinner, upon the foresaid
condition, if he would forsake his sins, and keep his law. And to the
intent he should so do, God gave him grudge in his conscience against his
sin, that he should leave it, and hate it, and take his most merciful
offer. And if he did not or would not hear GOD by this knocking, that is to
say, if he did not forsake his sin by the remorse of his conscience, yet God
would not utterly depart and go his way, but stand still and knock again,
that is to wit, GOD caused him to have good counsel, sometime of learned
men, and sometime of his other neighbors and familiare friends, and sometime
in hearing of Godly Sermons, by the which he was exhorted to forsake vice
and sin, and so to let God come into his soul. And if he did not or
would not hear him at this second knockyng, that is, if he would not do
after, and follow such good counsel as God caused him to have: yet he would
not leave him so, but did knock yet once again, that is to say: God did
suffer him to fall in some worldly trouble or adversity, or into some bodily
disease that he should then remember him and his offenses, and forsake them,
and to call to God for mercy, and so to open the door of his soul and let him
in. Thus God in his coming and knockyng, has showed to man great and
merciful kindness, and yet man has been very unkind and greatly offended
again. For often times he would not hear God, nor let him come in, but
rather with pleasure and desire which he had in sin, he stopped his ears,
and would not suffer his conscience to grudge, nor show him his offenses, nor
he would not do after good counsel and exhortacions, nor would not esteem the
adversity that came unto him as a messenger, and the knocking of Gods hand,
but rather fast barred the door of his soul with froward and obstinate
purpose to continue and tarry still in sin, and so did keep God out. But when
the devil came and knocked, and did move him but outwardly to let in pride,
envy, and malice, he was then contented to open the door of his soul, and to
let them and many moo other vices come in. And when the world came and
knocked, and moved him to get and gather goods, not regarding how, and to keep
them couetously, then he opened the door, which is the consent of his free
will, and consented to let covetousness come in. Also when the sensual appetite
and inordinate desire of his body came, and moved him to fulfill his pleasure,
as to refuse labor, and to give him ease and rest, and to nourish him in sloth
and idleness, and to feed him dilicately, and to put away chastity, and to
follow lechery and all uncleanness: to these he set the door wide open* and at
the first motion consented to fulfill their desires. And finally a sinner has
done all this in Gods sight and presence, without regard of his goodness,
without reverence of his majesty, without fear of his justice, and has
refused his merciful offers, and would not suffer him to come in, but kept
him out of his soul, for the which he ought now to be sorry, and to beseech
God, being a most merciful Lord, of pardon and forgeuenes, and not only that,
but also to renounce and forsake in his heart, all manner of vice and sin, and
to be in will and mind to confess these and al other his offenses, and to
serve God faithfully from hence forward in keeping his commandments, and to
beseech him to give him grace that he never forsake nor fall from this good
purpose that he is now in, but evermore during his life, to love, laud, and
honor god, according to his profession, promise and ability.

Here (good people) I might have spoken more largely in the rehersing of Gods
merciful kindness to us, and of our noughty unkindness again to him, but for
this short time I judged this to be metest for the most part of men, seeing that
after this sort we have commonly all offended, some more, so me less, and
that every man here remembering t hese points that I have declared now unto
you, as by the examinacion of his conscience he shall find himself culpable,
so he may frame his confession, adding or diminishinge as he sees cause, not
that I intend hereby to prescribe a form of confession, but only to give
certain admonitions how a man might the better make his confession, exhorting
every man, beside these admonitions, diligently to learn the commandments
of God, and to search to know every thing that is thereby commanded or
forbidden, and that by comparinge his acts and deeds with Gods law, which is
the rule of his life, as his conscience well examined will bring his doings
and sayings to his remembrance, and so coming in knowledge of his offenses,
he may make his confession perfitelye, first inwardly to almighty God, and
than Sacrame^tally to Gods ministre, and thereby receive pardon and absolution
of all his sins and grace to abstain from the same afterward, and that all
we may do so, let us pray diligently to almighty God the father, to whom with
the son and the holy ghost be all glory and praise. Amen.

Of confession to a man's neighbor, whom he has offended. Sermon. xxii.
YE have learned (good people) what remedy our Savior Christ has ordained
and left in his holy Church against the poison and infection of sin, and
how that the Sacrament of Penance is that only remedy whereby remission is
gotten ordinarylye for every deadly sin that is done of a Christian man after
baptism, which Sacrament of Penance consists in the absolution that is
given by a Catholic Priest to a sinner, being truly and unfeignedly contryte
in his heart, and plainly and holly confessing his sins with his mouth,
submyttynge himself to the judgment and disciplyne of the church by wholesome
satisfaction, which in an other Sermon shall be declared unto you by Gods help.

He that is thus affected, and uses this Sacrament after this manner, like as
he ought stedfastlye without any doubting to believe the effect of every
Sacrament, (which by the virtue of Christ's passion, and the operation of the
holy Ghost, does evermore work in the worthy receyuour, that grace it
signyfieth,) so he may be assured that he has received remyssyon of all
his sins, (even as the words of absolution do purporte) and that he is
reconciled and restored again to the favor of almyghtie God, if there be no
impediment and stop remayninge in his heart whereby the grace of GOD can take
no place there, so long as that stop is not removed. And where as the lack
of true contricion, and the hydynge or excusing of a man's sins, be the
special stoppes of this grace of remission: yet there be other stoppes, which
although they be generally contained within these, yet it shall be very
profitable for your edyfienge that they be particularelye opened and declared,
to the intent you may the better know them, and the sooner avoid them.

i. Joan. iiij. ii. Cor. xiii.
And principally, because God is charity, and the God of peace and not of
discension, and does not vouchsafe to pour his grace into that heart where
hatred, enmity, and breach of peace remains, therefore no man can be
reconciled to God, whom he has by his sin offended, that is not reconciled
to his brother or neighbor, whom by some iniurye, either in word or deed
he has likewise offended. And as a sinner is bounden to confess his sin to
GOD for absolution: So a sinner if he have offended his neighbor, is likewise
bounden to confess his fault to his neighbor, to the intent all displeasure
and variaunce might be taken away between them, and they by brotherlye love
made apt vessels to receive the grace of God, and remission of sin.

And although this brotherly confession be not Sacramental* that is to say,
the proper matter of this Sacrament of Penance, as the other confession
which is made to a Priest is: yet it is expedient and very necessary to the
atteyning of the effect of the other confession, which is remission of
sinnne, and does prepare a man's heart, and makes it the more meet to receive
the same.

So long as we live in this frail body as in earthen vessels, we can not
always be free, Bernardus ser. de diuersis.
but some time we shall offend and be offended, and as the offendour ought
humbly to ask forgeuenes, so the other party that is offended, ought easily
and gentelye to remit and forgive the wrongs or injuries that be done unto
him, that the members of Christ be always in peace, and most ready to
keep humility and charity, the one in asking forgiveness, the other in
freely forgeuynge. Of the first speaks our Savior Christ in the Gospel,
saying: If thou offer thy offeringe before the Aultare, Math. v.
and there shalt remember that thy brother has something against thee,
leave thine offeringe there before the Aultare, and first go and be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thine offering.

In these words we may perceive the great mercy and unspeakable love of
almyghtye GOD toward man, Chryso. in Mat. hom. xvi.
who lets gooe his own honor, for the zeal he has to nouryshe charity
between neighbor and neighbor. What can be more louynglye spoken, than to
say, let my service be left undone, that thy charity be kept and fulfilled.

The reco^ciliation of one brother to another, is a sweet sacrifice to me, and
therefore he said not, after thou have offered, but before thou do offer,
not commaundinge him altogether to make no Sacrifice or offering, but to
prefer the reconcilynge of his brother before his offering, declaryng by
this that he honors charity above all things, and accompteth it to be the
most acceptable Sacrifice of all other inward Sacrifices, without the which
he accepts no other Sacrifice, and also declarynge the necessity of this
reconciliation, which in no wise may be omitted and left undone, saying no
other Sacrifice, neither outward nor inward in the heart of man can be
perfect so long as the enemitie and displeasure between him and his neighbor
is not ended and dissolved.

And therefore our Savior Christ in these words speaks marvelous
preciselye, both to affraye a man, and also to comfort him again. For when
he had said, leave thine offeringe, he rested not there, but added, before the
Aultare, and to fear him more he said, goo: and more than that, he said,
goo first, and than (to comfort him again) come and offer thine offering:
sygnifienge by all these words, that the Aultare of God does not receive
them that be at discord and variaunce with their neighbors.

This ought to be a necessary lesson to all Priests, to take heed they
come not to Gods Aultare, and there to offer for the ignorancies and sins of
the people, the price of our redemption, the Sacrifice of the new Testamente,
which is the very body and blood of our Savior Christ, in the remembrance
of his passion, being at debate and in variau^ce with their neighbors.

It ought to be a lesson also in lay men which be no Priests, that they
study to be reconcyled to them whom they have offended. Psalm. l.cxl.xlix.
When they intend to offer to GOD their offrynges, which be the Sacrifice of
a contrite heart, the Sacrifices of prayer, of alms, and of thanks geuyng.
For the Scripture of God calls these kind of works Sacrifices made to
almighty God. Heb. xiii.
For which cause when a man is about to offer his prayer to God, and shall
remember the offense he has dooen to his brother, it were better to differ
his prayer, and first to gooe and reconcile his brother, and than consequently
to offer his prayer in peace and brotherly love. For the which peace and love
Christ did al things that he did here in earth, to knitte us al together in
unity, that before were divided by enemitie.

And where as our Savior says not, reconcyle thy brother to thee, but be
thou reconcyled to thy brother, he might seem rather to speak of him that
is offended and suffers wrong, than of him that does the wrong. And
although it be sufficient for him that suffered wrong to forgive him freely in
his heart, even as he would have God to forgive him, yet it should declare the
perfection of his charity, if he did gooe to his adversary and not only
did forgive him that wrong which he had done, but also with gentle speech
did mytigate his anger, and persuaded him ever after to bear toward him a
good affection. Now if the perfection of charity does require that the
sufferer should go and reconcile him that did him the wrong: how much more
is it necessary for him that of a malicious stomach does the wrong, to go
and humble him self to his neighbor, whom he has hurt in word or deed,
and to confess his fault unto him, submitting him self to make what amends
shall be thought reasonable, and so to be fully reconciled and made friends
again? For which cause Saint James exhorts all Christen men and women,
Jacob. v.
one to confess their ffences to an other, and to pray each for other, that
so they might be saved.

How great a fault it is to do injury to his neighbor, every manne may
well perceive that understands the law of GOD, which commands a man upon
pain of dampnation, to love his neighbor as him self, yea, and to love his
enemy also, Romans v.
if any such be, and to overcome evil with goodness. Setting us the doing
of our savior Christ for an example for us to follow.

Who by his death reconciled us to God the father when we were his enemies.
Hereby a man may perceive the greatness of his fault, when he does injury,
because than he hurts him whom he should love, he breaks Gods law, he
co^temneth the example of our savior Christ* he shows himself the follower
of wicked Cain, Saul and the devil, he stops the influence of Gods grace
into his soul, he mortifieth and marreth all his other good deeds, if he have
done any, and finally kills his own soul, and sets it in the dreadful
state of eternal damnation.

The remedy to avoid all this heap of evils, is humbly without malice or
excuse to confess his fault to his neighbor offended, and to pacify him to
whom he gave great cause to be angry, and to make recompense so far as he
may: If he have offended him in thought, let him reconcile him in thought,
Chrysostom. ho. xi. in Mat. op. imper.
if he have offended him in words, let him make him amends in words, if he
has done wrong in deeds, let him make a recompense in deeds: look as he
has committed the fault, the same way let him make the amends, without
which reconciliation neither his prayer, nor his alms, nor his fasting, nor
any other good work or sacrifice is meritorious or acceptable in the sight of
God, as lackyng the root of charity, which in Christ gives life to all
other good works, as branches proceeding out of it. If he whom thou have
offended be far away absent, and thou can not than go to him with the
feet of thy body, then go to him with the feet of thy soul, with thine
humble and loving affection, and in the sight of God, to whom thou art about to
make thine offeringe require forgiveness, and than revoke thine intencio^ to
thine offering again. No worldly thoughts ought to let this brotherly
confession, as to think that thou shall thus be despised of other worldly men,
or that it is against thing honor or worship to submit thy self to thy
inferior, or that it should be shame for thee so to do. These corrupt
affections of the world and the flesh, be the cheynes of the devil, to keep
a man's soul still in bondage of sin, and the lets of Gods grace, which should
set him at liberty. We that in our Baptism have promised and vowed to
renounce the devil and his works, and all his pompes and pride, why should
we be moved any thing therewith against Gods commandment, and our own
souls health* seeing we know that GOD dispiseth a proud heart, and does not
despise an humble heart, let us therefore regard the just judgment of God,
and despise the corrupt judgment of the world. It is not against a man's honor
or worship to be the servant of GOD, but all dishonor and shame is it to
be the servant and vile slave of sin. If God commanding us to prefer the
reconciling of our brother before his oblacion, did neglecte his own true
honor, for the commodity of man: why should not we in doing of Gods
commandment neglecte the false and transitory honor of the world, for the
service of GOD, Chrysostom. hom. xi. i^ Mat. op. imperf*
and the salvation of our own souls? Look what God does more love, let us
prefer that in our doings, he loves better the concord and agreement of
his people, than their offeringes, because their offerynges can not increase
his riches, yet their charity can increase his glory. For which cause we
ought most of al to regard, that God most loves, and not to be ashamed to do
well to our brother, lest Gods son be ashamed of us before his father.

And this ought we to do without delay, as Saint Paul teaches, saying:
Ephe. iiii. Chrysostom. hom. xvi. in Math.
Let not the Sun set upon your anger, nor give not place to the devil, who
is most busye in the night time, taking occasion when a man is alone to
kyndle his anger more, and to move the man to abuse that headye affection
which is void of all counsel, to further mischief, as to false accusacions,
murder, and such other enormities as proceed from anger.

Thus briefly ye see what he that any way has offended his neighbor, is
bounden to do, which is to gooe to him, and to confess his fault, and to do
that lies in him, to reconcile his neighbor. No heart is so hard and stiff,
but with humble submission it will be mollyfied and made soft, as the wise
man says: A soft speech breaks bones, Prou. xxv* xv.
and an humble answer dissol^eth anger, so that it lies in our power to quench
or to kindle the ^^ger of him that is offended. On the other sy^e, he that is
offended and has taken and suffered injury at his neighbors hand, ought not
only to forgive him heartily, and freely that did the wrong, but also to pray
for him as Saint James says: Jacob. v.
Confess your selves one to an other, and pray each for other, that ye may be
saved. And this is also an other let and stop, that the grace which is
ordinarily given by the sacrament of penance, can take no place in the heart of
him that will not be reconciled and forgive his neighbor, as he would God should
forgive him.

Chrysostom. ho. in epist. ad Philemon.
Therefore (good people) if any of you have suffered wrong at your neighbors
hand, think and consider with him self how often he has offended other men,
and God also the Lord of al men, and so shall he be more ready and disposed to
forgive again. Let him labor to imitate our savior Christ, Math. vi
whose servant he professes to be, who taught all his disciples in their
prayers to forgive such as were debtors and offenders to them, if they would
have god to forgive unto them their offenses likewise. Willing us to show our
selves to our neighbors even in such sort as we would God should be toward
us. Chrysostom. ho. xxxviii. in Joan.
For the man of whom our savior speaks in the parable that would not forgive
his fellow servant his small debte of one hundredth pence, Mat. xviii.
did in that unmerciful behavior much hurt him self, and brought himself
in debt and danger of ten thousand talentes, which his Lord had forgeuen
him before. Whereby we be taught that when we do not forgive other, than we
stand in our own light, and procure that God shall not forgive us. It lies
in our power to prescribe as it were a law to God of forgeuing or not
forgeuynge sin. If we revenge or forgive the wrongs that be dooen against
us, even so will God revenge or forgive that we have done against him. For as
the wise man says: He that will revenge him self, Eccl. xxviii
shall find vengeance at Gods hand again, and shall retain his own sins.
Forgive thy neighbor that hurts thee, and tha^ thy sins at thy prayer
shall be loosed. The man that keeps his anger against his neighbor, can he
ask a medicine of God? Collos. iii.
Therefore let every man forgive one another, if he have any quarrel against
him, like as our Lord has forgeuen us, and let no rancour or malice, nor no
footesteppe of hatred remayn. The greater the injury is that is done, the
greater merit and the more praise is to ^ontemne it. It is more glorious for a
Christen man to overcome himself and his furious passion of anger, than to
overcome his enemy, and so to do himself more harm than his enemy.

Against this wild beast of Ire, Chrysostom. hom. iiii. in Ioannem.
we ought to use as a sharp bridle the fear of Gods judgment to come, and
when we be provoked thereto, to ask of our selves, whether it were better to
be ouercommed of anger, tha^ to overcome it, and to consider that when we be
ouercommed of it, we blame our selves, and be ashamed, although no man accuse
us, and be greatly sorye for it. But when we have ouercommed it like a
conqueror, we are glad and much rejoice. For the greatest victory against
anger, is when we patiently bear our injuries, and do not cruellye revenge
them. If they be worthy much blame that do injury to us, why do we make our
selves as evil as they be in doing the like to them again? rather let us
study to be like God, who commands us to love our enemies, and to do good
to them that hate us, ^
and to pray for them that sclaunder and persecute us, that we might be the
children of our father that is in heaven, that causes the sun his creature
to shine over good and evil, and rayneth both over just men and unjust.

God our most merciful father has so hollye pardoned us, and so
liberallye forgeuen us all injuries done against him, Bernar. ser. iii. de
fragmentis miarum.
that he neither condempneth us, nor puts us to shame, nor imputes them to
us, whom he has once received to mercy. But contrary, some men there be that
forgive their iniuryes, that although they will not revenge them, yet they will
vpbrayde them withal, and cast them in their teeth. Other some there be,
that although they speak nothing of them, yet they keep rancour in their
mind, ready to break out when occasion shall be given again. These men have
not fully forgeuen their neighbors offenses, and in so doing be not the
children of God like to their father in heaven, who fully and freelye forgeueth
al injuries, and neither vpbraydeth nor remembers them any more again, so
that where sin in sinners did abound, there grace in penitentes does more
abound.

Therefore when we forgive, Basili. reg. breu. Interrog. clxxv.
let us do it freely and holly, and from the heart, without pretended
simulation, which we may know whether we have done so or no, when we
perceive our selves to be verelye and hartelye sorry, when our neighbor whom
we have forgeuen, falls into any mysfortune, or is hurt or harmed by any
occasion, and also when we perceive our selves to be heartily glad for his
commodity and preferment, and to labor and procure the same, as much as
lies in us. This is that mutual compassion that all Christen men, being
members of one body, ought to have one to an other, in such things as be
godly and proceed from charity, Hebr. xii.
always followinge peace and holiness of life, without the which no man shall
see God. For they shall be called the sons of God that be makers of peace.
Math. v.


Some men be peaceable that give and render good for good, and study to hurt
no body, Berna. ser. de conte^ptu mundi. cap. xxvi.
so much as lies in them. Other some be pacie^t that do not render evil
for evil, and yet be able to bear with them that do them wrong. Other some
be peace makers that give and render good for evil, and be always ready to
profit such as hurt them.

The first kind of men keep peace, the second maynteyne peace, and the
third make peace, and win the souls of other, and therefore are compted
happy and worthy to be called the children of God, that do the work of Gods
son, that after they be reconciled them selves, labor with all their power
to reconcyle other to their heavenly father. Aug. Enchirid. cap. lxxiii.
Many kinds of alms there be, and works of mercy, both corporal and also
spiritual. But among the^ al there is never one greater, than freely even from
the heart, to remit that an other man has offended against us. It is nothing
in a manner to love him that loves us, and does us no harm, for Infideles and
all other men of nature will so do, but to love our enemies, and to will to
do good to the^, that wyshe and do evil to us, as much as they can, is the
greatest perfection of a christen man. And although the number of men for the
most part does not come to that degree of perfection to love and do good to
their enemies, whereunto every Christen man ought with prayer and diligence to
labor and wrestle with himself to come: yet he can not be a good man that
will not freely and heartily forgive his enemy, that cease to be his enemy,
and is sorry for that he has done, and humbly asks him forgeuenes. For his
sins be holden still and not remytted of God, Bernar. ser. i. de verbis
apost. regnum dei no^ est esca and potus.
that will not forgive his penitent neighbor, that he has done against him.
Therefore seeing in many things we offend al, and the Angels of God be not yet
commed that shall take away al offenses out of the world, it is not possible
for peace to be kept euerywher in this world and God to be pleased, except he
that in any thing does offend his neighbor, lay away his pride and submit
himself, and he that is offended, lay away his obstinacy, and be content to
be entreated, for by these two means, Gods peace shall be kept, without the
which gods mercy can not be gotten, and our offringes can not be accepted.
But having and using them: rightwisnes, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, shall
remain with us, and the kingdom of God shall be within us, and we daily in
grace and fear, shall work our own salvation through Christ our Lord, to
whom with the father, and the holy ghost be all glory for evermore. Amen.

()

Of Satisfaction. Sermon. xxiii.
Having declared unto you heretofore (good people) the first two parts of
penance which be Contrition and Confession: Now order requires that I
should declare at this time the third part, which is Satisfaction.

And first of all it is to be known that when a Christen man or woman has by
consent of mind, or by word or deed done any thing that is deadly sin,
tha^ has he set him self in the state of dampnation, and is bounden to suffer
everlasting pain in hell: because the reward or hyer of sin is eternal
death, under which pain, Romans vi.
God in the beginning, and always did forbid sin. Likewise when a sinner
changes his mind, forsakynge his sin, and takes true repentance for the
same, and comes to confession to a Priest (if he may confess and have a
Priest) after that sort and intent as is declared before: than almighty God
does mercyfully forgive him all the pains and punishment that he had deserved,
and should have had in hell for his offenses, and sets the sinner again in
the state of salvation. And this does almyghtye God evermore, after the
penitentes confession ordinarylye, although he take not so much and so great
repentance for his sin, as he had pleasure in it, nor although he be not so
long sorry, as he lay and continued in sin before. For God has not commanded
that sinners shall take as much repentance, and be as long sorye for their
sins, as they took pleasure and continued in their sin. For if he had done
so* the penitent sinner could not have been sure that he had had mercy and
forgiveness after his confession, but should rather have been always in doubt
and fear of forgeuenes, because he could not always certainly know that he
had taken so much and so long repentance, as he had pleasure and tarried in
his sin: which fear and doubt of forgeuenes, no sinner coming unfeignedly
to this sacrament, may have at any time, but when so ever a sinner does
forsake his sins and takes repentance for it, be it little or much, and so
comes to confession: than he knows and is in surety that he has
forgeuenes, and is set again in the state of salvation. And although it be
true that any quantity of Contrition is sufficient to have forgiveness of the
pains of hell due for sin, yet the more he takes, the better he does. And
this forgeuenes of sin, and eternal pain due for sin, comes by the
virtue of Christ's passion, who has made satisfaction upon the cross, and
redeemed us by his death from all iniquity, Titus. ii.
and is the sacrifice propiciatorye for the sins of the holle world, i.
Joan. ij.
and has borne our sins in his body upon the tree, i. Pet. ii.
by whose wounds we are made safe.

Therefore this is to be surely believed, that only our Savior Christ by
his painful passion upon the cross, is that satisfaction which deserves
remission of our sins, and the abolyshyng of eternal death and dampnation,
which remission and delivery no man is able to deserve by any thing that he
can do, but only the goodness and humanity of GOD our Savior in Christ,
Titus. ii.iii.
not by the works of rightwisnes, which we have done, but by his own mercy
has wroughte and brought to pass. God of his great mercy to all true
penitentes, August. in Psalm. l.lviii.
forgeueth sin, and yet of his justice and truth, he leaves not the sins
of them whom he forgeueth, unpunished. But all sins of all men and women he
punishes either eternally in hell, Job. xxiiii.
or temporally for a time, that as in forgeuing, appears his mercy, so in
correcting or auenging might appear his justice. For which cause,
considering that God by the merits of Christ forgeueth to all that be
truly penitent and confessed all their sins, and also the pains of hell
due for the same: and yet leaves no sin unpunished although it be remitted,
we may thereby certainly know that every sinner, although he has received
absolution and remission, either has suffered or remains yet still bounden
to suffer certain temporal pain, according to the nature and quantity of
his former fault, for that he presumed to do against Gods law, and brake
his promise and profession in baptism. And this temporal pain is our debte
which we are bounden to pay to God. For as we are debtors to almyghtie God
for his manifold benefytes bestowed upon us, and so are bounden always to
thank him, to honor him, and to offer to him the sacrifice of praise: so are
we debtors to him also for our manifold sins done against him, and so are
we bounden to satisfye the justice of God, by suffering pain for the same,
both which debtes when we could not, and were not able to pay our selves,
Christ our Lord being the mediatoure between God and man by his paynful death,
has paid it for us, and has ca^celled the obligation of our debt and fully
satisfied God for the sin of the world, and has taken away eternal death
due for the same, and so has made us now able by him, and in him, both to
offer that sacrifice of praise, which for all his benefits we were bounden to
make, and also to satisfy the justice of God for that te^porall pain which
remains for us to suffer, after that the giltines of our sins, and the
pains of hell be remitted through the satisfaction made upon the cross, the
benefit whereof is applied to us by true faith and contrition, not that we be
able of our selves by our works or suffering to make woorthye satisfaction
for the same, as Christ has done, but that we are made able by Christ, and in
him to do or suffer that wherewith God is contented and satisfied and
accepts as a satisfaction.

By this ye shall understand (good people) that the satisfaction of penance,
which I have to declare unto you at this time, is punyshement or affliction
which a sinner takes upon him to suffer, by the assignement of his ghostlye
father, after the remission of his sins, to the intent he might thereby cut
away the cause and sequel of his sins which remain, and also either
clearly redeem, or at lest mitigate the te^porall pains due for the same
sins, by doing of such penal works as be contrary to the sins
committed.

This doctrine of Satisfaction stands upon these two grounds. First, that
when the sin is remitted, and the sinner received into grace and favor with
GOD again, yet oftentimes there remains temporal pain to be suffered for
the same sin, either in this world or in the next. And secondlye that this
temporal pain may be mitigated or redeemed and taken away by penitential
satisfaction and the worthy fruits of penance. To this doctrine bears
witness the trade and process of the holle Scriptures. When the people of
Israel in the wilderness grudged against Moses and Aaron, Number. iiiii.
and would have gone back into Egypt again, and so provoked God to vengeance,
Moses prayed for the people very fervently, at whose prayer God did forgive
the people their sin, and yet not with standing that forgeuenes he said that
he would punish the^ after this sort, that never one of the^ that came out of
Egypt and had not obeyed him in the wilderness, should see or enter into the
land which he promised the^. Whereby we learn that after the sin remitted,
many times there remains a punishment temporal to be suffered for the same.
ii. Reg. xii.
Also king David when he had taken contrition, and confessed the sin that he
did with Barsabee, and for the killing of her husband Urias, the Prophet
Nathan showed him that God had forgeuen him his sin, and that he should not
dye and be dampened for it, but yet he should have great and long temporal
punishment for those offenses, and so he had, both in the death of his
children, and also in the persecution of his son Absalon, and in diverse other
things which the Prophet told him. And yet when the Prophet had said that
his young son begotten by Barsabee should dye, trustyng that his humble
penance should change Gods sentence in punishinge of him by the death of his
son, he fell to fasting, weeping, praying, watching, and lying upon the
ground, by the space of seven days, and although he did not than obtain
the release of that punishment which was appointed by Gods immutable
decree: yet in an other like offense he obtained the mitigation of his
temporal pain.

For when David for the sin of nombryng the people, had taken contrition, ii.
Regum xxiiii.
and humbled himself before God, confessinge his fault, the Prophet by the
message of God, for punyshme^t of his sin after remission, gave him choice,
whether he would have seven years hunger, or three months war without
victory, or three days pestilence, and when he did chose pestilence, which
might as soon fall upon him the offendour, as upon the people, he did so
punyshe and afflicte him self, that God in respect of his penance, was
satisfied and content with the plage of one day, and did remit the rest. Even
so David in his psalms speaking of Moses and Aaron says, Psalm. xcviii.
that God did hear them, and was merciful unto them, and yet punyshed and
revenged all their inventions and sin. And the Apostle Saint Paul teaches
us that for the sin of abusinge the blessed body and blood of our Lord in the
sacrament of the Aultare, i. Cor. xi.
many were punished with weakness, sickness, and corporal death, and tells us
also there the remedy how to avoid these pains, Chrysostom. in Epist. i. Cor.
xi.
which is, if we would judge, condemn and punish our selves we should
escape the punyshement of God, for when we be judged and punyshed of God, we be
but corrected, whose chastisement is rather to be called an admonition, than a
condemnation, rather a fatherly medicine, than a final punishment and
destruction. And therefore every sinner ought to exercise more severity
against him self, August. hom. l.
that judging himself, he be not judged of God, the contemning whereof is a
mean to be eternally condemned with the wicked world.

It suffiseth not for a man to change his manners to the better, and to begin
a new life, and forsake the old, except also he make satisfaction to God for
those sins he has done by the sorrow of Penance, by the mourning and
Sacrifice of an humble and contrite heart, and by alms. Whereby appears that
the penance of a christen man sinning deadly after baptism, Concilium
Tridentinu^ Sess. v. cap. xiiii.
conteyneth satisfaction by fasting, alms, prayer, and other godly exercises
of spiritual life, not for the eternal pain of hell, which with the sin is
remitted in the using of the sacrament of penance, or else if the sacrament can
not be had, in the desire of full purpose to use it, when it may be had, but for
temporal pain which (as the scriptures teach) is not holly always remitted
to them that take the grace of God in vain.

True contrition and sorrow for sin taken for the love of God whom he has
offended causes a sinner likewise to take this satisfaction and punishment
upon him, assigned by the minister of God, by the virtue of the keys committed
to the Church, or sometimes voluntarelye taken upon him of his own good will,
ii. Cor. vii.
as Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, that the sorrow which is taken for
Gods sake, works steadfast penance for salvation, and on the other side, the
sorrow of the world works death: For even this sorrow which you have taken for
Gods sake (says Saint Paul to the Corinthians) how much carefulnes has it
wroughte in you that ye do not offend again hereafter? Ambrosiu^
And also it has wrought such a confession of your faulie as ye offer to
make satisfaction and amends for the same, and it has wrought in you anger
and indignation against your fault, and fear of the terrible judgment of God
for your fault, and desire to be reconcyled again to God and the church, and
zeal to be diligent in doing good hereafter, and punishment whereby ye do
afflict and punysh your selves for your offense by past, to the intent ye
might escape the correction of God that hangs over your heads.

All these be the effects of true Contrition, which cease not to wash the
wounds of sin more and more after forgeuenes (as David did) and as natural
things be healed by their contraries, Psalm. l.
so it labors to have the wounds of sin fully and perfitely healed, by
doing contrary good works to the former sins, that by them the root of
sin might be clean grubbed out, and the rust that remains, be clearly
scoured, and the pride of man's heart pulled down and humbled, and the pronitie
and disposition to sin, brydled and refrayned, which things be done when we
do as Saint Paul counsels us, Romans vi.
saying: Like as ye have given the parts and members of your body and soul
to serve uncleanness and iniquity to further iniquity, so give and apply the
same parts a and members of your body and soul to serve rightwysnes, for your
sa^ctification. That is to say, take as much pain to purge and wash away
the dregs and fylthynes of your sins gathered by your noughtye lyuinge, as
ye took pleasure before, to defile and infect your souls by your said noughty
living. And as ye be now just and sanctified by remission of your sins, and
the presence of Gods grace and his holy spirit in your souls: so labor also
to be yet just and sanctified by purgynge the sequel, the scarres, and the
deformity which remain in your souls after your sins be remitted, the
paynfull affliction of your selves, and by doing the worthy fruits of
penance, Mat. iii.
esteming and pondering the measure of your correction, according to the
quantity of your fault.

And where as penance is two ways taken, Hugo vic. de Sacra. lib. ii. part.
xiiii. cap. ii.
the one to be inward, standing in the contrition of the heart, the other
outward, standing in the affliction of the flesh, when thou do condemn and
reprove thy sin, than thou have penance, and when thou do by satisfaction
following, punish and correct thy sin, than thou have the fruit of
penance, and when thy affliction and pain is no less incorrectynge of thy
sin, then thy pleasure was in doing of the same, tha^ thou haste done the
worthy fruytes of penance, as thus: If thou haste stolen other men's goods,
Chryso. in Mat. hom. x Gregor. hom. xx.
beside the ceasing from the sin, and restitutio^ of the same goods, now
begin to give thine own, if thou have used fornication a long time, forbear
the lawful use of thy marriage so long time: if thou haste done iniurye to any
man in word or deed, make amends with humble and good words again, and
them that hurt thee, labor to reconcile them with kyndenesse and benefits.

It is not sufficient for a man's health, to pull only the darte out of his
wound, but also to lay some plaster and medicine to the wound. Recompense
thy delitious fare and drunkenness, with fasting and drinking of water: if
thou have seen a woman with an unchaste eye, forbear to see a woman again, and
learn after a wound to take more heed.

Aug. Enchiri. cap. lxx.
Thus a sinners life ought not only to be changed into the better, but also
God must be entreated and made merciful by alms and other peynefull works,
for his sins by past. The principal works of satisfaction be fasting,
prayer, Math. vi.
and alms, which be specially commended in the gospel of Christ. Under
fasting be contained all bodily peynes and labors, as watching, lyeng upon
the ground, wearynge of heyr or sackclothe, and other such like. Under alms
be contained all the other works of mercy, as well corporal as spiritual,
whereof some other time God willing ye shall be instructed. And under prayer
be contained the prayers of other, as of Priests, poor men, and poor
scholars, such as by our alms and liberality be procured to pray for us, as
it is said in the old law: that the Priest shall pray for him and for his
sin, Leuit. iiii.
and it shall be forgeuen him. So that fasting is a medicine to heal perfitly
those sins which we have done by concupiscence and desire of the flesh
against our selves and our own bodies. And alms is likewise a medicine to
heal perfitely those sins which we committed by concupiscence of the eyes,
which is covetousness, deceyte, oppression, and unjust dealyng again our
neighbors. And last of all the pride of life, the contempt of godlynes, and
presumption of mind, which be sins immediatelye against God, be healed
perfitely by instant, humble, and devout prayers. And the holy scriptures do
plainly show how that sinners may here in this life satisfy and content
almighty God for temporal pain with these three works, as the book of
Danyell shows, where the Prophet Daniel exhorts the king Nabuchodonosor to
redeem his sins with alms, that is to say, the seven years of pain which
he should suffer for his sins. Toby. iiii.
And old Toby taught his son that alms delivers from sin, in which two
places by the word (sin) is understood the temporal pain due for sin.
For by the merits of our savior Christ, which be applied to us in the
Sacraments of Baptism and Penance, the giltynes of our sin, and the
eternal pains of hell be taken away, and our afflictions whereby we suffer
with Christ, and are made like to the Image of Christ, taking their virtue of
Christ's passion, and wrought in us by his grace and holy spirit, not of their
own worthynes, but by Gods merciful acceptance, are means ordained of God
to satisfy him, and to turn away his anger and displeasure for our sins,
and to purchase his further grace. And that fasting and prayer be of the same
effect for this purpose that alms is, is plain by the exaumple of the
Ninevites, who after the preaching and threatening of Jonas the Prophet, being
contrite and sorye for their offenses, Ion^. iii.
did satisfy and redeem the pain and punishment which they should have
had, with fasting in ashes and sackeclothe and fervent prayer, and by that
mean revoked the sentence of God which was spoken by the mouth of Jonas. But
the scripture always for the most part joins these three together, Esaias.
xviii
because fasting without mercy to a man's neighbor, and the lifting up of his
mind to God by prayer, is unfruitful and little regarded of God. And alms
joined with surfeting and the gredy cares of the world, and lacking the
fellowship of fasting and prayer, is not meritorious. And the prayer of him that
will not bridle the desires of his flesh by abstinence, and shuts his
mercy and compassion from his neighbor, that needs, is not heard of GOD.
But these three joined in a faithful man together, be of great virtue and
reach to heaven, and there do turn away the face of God from his sins, and
do purchase gods grace for such things as he has need of, as Toby says:
prayer with fasting and alms is good, Toby. iiii.
and better then to store up treasures of gold in his cofers.

A man may also make satisfaction for his sins with repentance and sorrow
for his sin, so that God will forgive him all the temporal pain which he
deserved to have had, as God forgave Saint Peter the said pain for his great
repentance and bitter weeping, Luke xxii.
and likewise Marye Magdalene, whose great sorrow is expressed in the Gospel.
And because the minister of God knows not how much repentance and
contrition the sinner has taken, nor how much he ought to take for due
satisfaction, therefore his office is to enjoin the penitent certain works of
penance for to make satisfaction, and such as the party may easily and shortly
do, for avoiding of grudge if it were to hard, and also for avoiding of
forgetfulness if it were to long, and then to counsel and exhort the penitent
to do more penance and good deeds of his own good will in further satisfaction
for his sins al ready done, and for stopping of the entrye of the devils
suggestions to sin to come, and for exercising of him self in virtuous
occupations contrary to his sins before. Wherefore (good people) I beseech
you to care and provide for your souls, Bernar. de persec. fanstinen. cap xxx.
which Christ has preferred before his own blood, in that he has given the
one to redeem the other: fear to fall into the hands of God, and contemn
not his judgments, the certain knowledge of the pains due for our sins is
only reserved to God and to our Lord Jesus Christ, to who^ the father has
given al judgment, whereof we may not be curious in serching, but dilligent in
avoiding by the worthy fruits of penance, which be acceptable to god, for two
causes, both for that they be good works of their own nature commended and
commanded of god, and also for that they be enjoined us to do by the
authority of the keys of the kingdom of heaven given to the church, and are
better accepted of god for our obedience to him and his holy Church. Let not
the streytnes of penance fear us, nor the conscience of our sins keep us
back, for in many good men where sin has most abou^ded, there has grace
more abounded. The suffringes and pains of this time, be not equal to that
fault which is remitted, to that pain which we have deserved, nor yet to that
glory which is reserved for us. As nothing is impossible to them that believe,
so nothing is hard or painful to them that love, where devotion drives them
to begin, and grace helps them to make an end, both in doing the fruits of
penance for their sins past, and also in doing the fruits of virtue, for
increase of rightwisenes present, till God deliver us from all pains and
dangers of sin, and give unto us the kingdom which he has prepared for us
from the beginning of the world, through Christ our Lord, to whom with the
father and the holy ghost be all honor and glory. Amen.

How a man should after penance auoy de sin and live well. Sermon. xxiiii.
IT is better (good people) to avoid sin, the^ to amend sin, Bernar. de
Interi. domo. cap. xxxvii.
as it is more wholesome and pleasant for a man with good diet to preserve his
health, then after sickness with danger and grief to recover his health. And
it is a great deal worse to fall down again after he be fullye recovered, then
it was to fall first in the beginning. For which cause after a man be restored
again to the health of his soul by the medicine of penance, he ought to be a
great deal more careful and vigilant, lest he fall again to his old sickness,
and by that means come the sooner in danger of eternal death, and he ought
evermore to remember the lesson of our Savior Christ which he gave to the man
sick of the palsy, whom he made holle, which is this: Ioa^. ^.
behold thou art made holle, go thy ways and now sin no more, least some
worse thing chance to thee. To this end how a man should avoid sin and live
well, the most part of all the scripture is written, and the most part of al
sermons be made, and of no matter may be more said, but I intend God willing
at this time only to note unto you three or four general points, which if a
man do remember and observe, he shall the better and with more ease avoid
sin and keep himself in grace and good life. First I would he should do,
as a man does that has been sick of a great surfeit and in peril of death,
who when he is restored to his health again, he will diligently take heed and
refuse those meats that brought him into his sickness, and be forbidden him to
eat upon by his Phisician, and he will remember to feed upon such meats
only as the Phisician prescribes him, and will preserve his health: even so
every man and woman must do and keep like order and diet after their
confession, for to keep their souls still in health, they must remember that
Christ our Phisician has made them holle by the soueraign medicine of
penance, and has forbidden them all manner of sin whereupon they surfeted,
and therefore they must utterly refuse and forsake, and in no wise eat of
that evil meat, by willing and consentinge to any sin again. Now for
the better auoydyng of this, a man must do three things: first consider the
noughtines of sin, and then when any comes to his mind uncalled for, let
him put it away by and by, and thirdly he must keep his five senses well, and
fly from the company of evil person^ and occasions of sin.

First let him consider that sin is so vile of it self, that every man does
hate and abhor the name of it, for a man loves not nor would not be called
proud, malicious, covetous, a thief, a lecher* or sclaunderer and such like.
And than if men did consider the very deeds of sins, they shouled see that
they were much worse, more shameful, more against reason, and so me^ should
hate the deeds of sins more then they do their names. For this is the nature
of sin, Chrysostom. hom. ii. in i. Tess. i.
before it be done it has some pleasure, but after the deed the pleasure
cease, and heaviness comes in his place, and for the time of the doing of
sin, it makes him no man but a beast, whereby he loses his honestye, his
good name, his riches, his beauty, his health, his strength, his wit, his
reason, and is made a fool, a mad man, an instrument of the devil, and a
very devil for the time: his soul like a dead carien lies in his body as
in a grave, which when the mouth is open, sends forth an evil savor or
smell, and infecteth with poisoned words and example the air round about, and
all those that have conversation with him, and so is he made odious to him
self, in that he defiles his own body, and is the cause of the sickness and
corruption of the same, and is also odious to his neighbors who^ he hurts
many ways, and is also most odious to God whom he dishonors by his noughtye
lyuinge, and diminishes his glory, and causes his name to be evil spoken of
among the Heathen, and thus when a man lies impudently in sin, his enemies
laughe at him, his friends pity him, all other men abhor him, beside that he
loses Gods most gracious favor in whose sight he always stands, and can
not excuse him self by secretnesse, neither in deed nor in thought, and if he
dye in this damnable state of deadly sin, his own conscience shall then accuse
him before GOD, and his remembrance shall bear witness against him, and
declare how, when, where, and how often he sinned, and shall open his hol^e
vile and beastly life so playnelye before God his judge, that he shall not be
able to speak for him self one word, nor yet to ask mercy, ^ath. xxii
if it were demanded of him why he did those sinful deeds, but he shall hold
his peace, and see that he is worthy to be damned and cast into the prison of
hell, there to remain in everlasting pains. If men or women did diligently
consider the noughtynes of these things which God has forbidden, and how
greatly they be against reason, and than would surely believe that they should
thereby loose Gods favor, and set them selves in state of dampnation, and be
verily dampened to infinite and everlasting pain if they dyed so, which is most
true: than doubtless they would hate all the ways of iniquity, Psa. cxviii.
and fly from it as from a serpent, and as the very cause of all these
mischiefs that follow, and feed their minds no more with that damnable meat
of sin, but refuse it and forsake it, as a poison infecting and killing them
both in body and soul.

The second thing to avoid sin is this, when any sin comes into a
man's mind and remembrance uncalled for, by the suggestion of the devil or the
motion of his flesh, let him ever more put it away by and by with hatred. And
let a man remember this lesson well, for it is a singular mean and very
necessary to defend and keep his soul and will from the consent and desire
to sin. For like as a flesh fly if it be not beaten away as soon as it
comes* will leave filthye blowinges in the flesh, which will be woormes and
destroy it: even so will sin when it comes unto a man's mind, cause and
make evil thoughts and desires in man's heart, if it be not put away by and by
at the first coming. For if a man will think upon sin, and reuolue it in
his mind, except he do consider it with hatred, then will it ingendre in his
will some pleasure, and it will move him to imagine and think evil, and it will
heat him and set his heart on fire, and blind his reason, and provoke him
sore and greatly to consent to do that sin, and at length it will bring his
will to agree, and to desire and fully determine to do it, and so then it
destroys and kylleth his soul, that is to say, then has he lost the title
which he had to everlasting life, and has set him self in the terrible and
dreadful state of dampnation, and has deserved to have everlasting pains in
hell. The more and the longer a man suffers his mind to be occupied in
thinking upon sin, the more desirous shall he be to do it, and the more
pain and labor shall he have to put it out of his mind again when he would.
Happy is he (says the Prophet) that will hold him self from vice, psa. cx^^v^
and will break the heads of the little ones, I mean the first motions of
sin upon the stone which is Christ, by withstanding them by faith and prayer.
And surely nothing is so evil, so hurtefull, and so dangerous to a man's
soul, as to suffer his mind and remembrance to be occupied and to think
upon sin, and therefore when any sinful thoughts come into his mind, let him
make a sharp rod of hatred and abhorring of it, and beat it away by and by,
and then let him occupy and set his mind upon his other lawful business, or
let him do some thing upon the which he must needs stedfastlye think, or let
him go to some honest company and common upon some good matter, but best of al
it is to fall to prayer, and with that swoorde of the spirit to shift of and
drive away the fyerye darts of the devil, calling for the aid of the said
holy spirit to help his infirmity, and thus may a man beat away the flesh
fly of sin, that he shall not rest and leave behind him any filthy
blowinges of evil thoughts and motions, and so may he keep his soul clean
from the woormes of deadlye and dampnable desires and consentes.

Moreover to avoid sin, a man must also eschew the outward occasion of it*
For if the cause remain, commonly the effect will follow, as thus: first let him
keep well his five senses, and specially his sight, his hearing, and his
feeling from things unlawful and forbidden, that is to say, let him not behold
and cast his eye with inward pleasure upon such things as may lightly and
commonly move a man to think upon sin, nor apply and give ear with gladness
to hear evil tales, or filthye and dishonest communication, but when he sees
or hears such evil, then let him by and by take away his sight and hearing
from it, with displeasure, and hate the seeing and hearing of it. Chrysostom. ho. in
Psalm. l. ii. Reg. xi.
King David did behold curiously the beauty of his soldiers wife, and
sodeinly he was smitten in the heart with the dart of adulterye, and if this
holy Prophet David, that had so much grace of the holy spirit, of whom God
said he had found a man even as he would wyshe, if he by the occasion of his
eye, received poison into his heart: how much shall an other man come in
danger by the like occasion, that neither has so much knowledge what he
should do, nor yet so much grace to do that he knows* And where as the
Prophet says, death has entered in by our windows, Hiere. ix.
we may understand by that, that sin enters into the heart of man by his
eyes, and ears, and other senses, which be as it were the wyndowes of his
soul. If the wyndowes be not shut, or else a diligent watch set upon them,
surely sin and death will crepe in, although the man have very great
knowledge and grace. Like as if a candle be put in the straw, the straw will
burn, even so our weak and sinful nature is soon set on fire with the
burninge darts of the deuyls tentation, if they be suffered to come nere, and
their ways and entries be not stopped. Also beside the diligent keeping of his
five senses, a man must flee and forsake the company of evil and lewd
persons, and of those that show evil example, or give occasion to vice. Eccle.
xiii.
For he that touches pitch shall file his hands with the same, and he that
keeps company with a proud man, shall begin to be proud. As Saint Paul says:
i. Cor. v.
Do you not know that a little sower leven does make sower the holle batche of
dowe: even so the vice or evil example of one does infecte a great many, and
draws other that be weak, to follow him in the like vice. Depart thou
(says the wiseman) from a wicked man, Eccles. vii.
and keep no company with him, and so shall vice and wickedness depart from thee.

The fourth thing for a man to avoid sin, is to remember his last end in
all his works, Eccles. vii.
and deeds, and so he shall not sin for evermore. It is good for a man to
think upon the beginning of his life, ^ernardus ser. de Primordi. m^d^. and
no^issi.
to consider the mids and to remember the last end. The beginning brings
shame, the mids brings sorrow, the end brings fear. If a man think from
whence he came, he shall be ashamed, if he consider in what case he is, he
shall lament, if he remember whyther he shall goo, Psalm. xlviii
he shall be afraid. Man first of all when he was in honor, made to the
Image of God, and to be pertaker with Angels of the kingdom of heaven, not
regardinge his dignity, contempning the commandment of God his maker, and
following his own sensual appetite, was compared to unreasonable beasts, and
changed the similitude of God, with the similitude of beasts, and the honor
of his first image being taken away, by carnal desires and beastly living, was
made like a beast. If a man therefore remember his old nobility, how he was
made Lord over the works of God, a fellow of Angels, a Citizen of Paradyse,
and one of Gods household: and being by his own fault cast into inward
darkness of error and ignorance, banished from pleasant Paradise, made
fellow with brute beasts, and a stranger or rather enemy to God: may not he
considering this his beginning and his great fall into such vile beastlynes be
worthily ashamed? After this if man consider where and in what state he is,
Ecclesi. i.
he shall perceive that being in this transitory world, he is in the vale of
miserye where nothing is under the sun but vanity, labor and affliction of
spirit, where nothing is verily and constantly pleasant, but only by
change, by passing from one thing to an other, where the remedy of one
labor, is the beginning of an other, where the less evil seems a great
good, where the increase of knowledge is the increase of grief, where man in
banishment dwells in wilderness, walks in darkness, in danger of falling
down the hill, and eating his bread in the sweat of his face.

May not a man considering whyther he is now brought, be right sorry, and
lament that the time of his travail and dwelling here is prolonged? but the
best remedy to avoid sin, is always to have in remembrance his last end,
In the last end there be three things, the death of the body, the judgment
of God, and the torments of hell. What is more horrible than death, what is
more terrible then the judgment of God, and what is more intolerable than the
pains of hell? What shall a man fear, if he tremble not at the remembrance of
these three? yet if he have lost shame for his vile beginning, and if he feel
no sorrow for his present miserye, at least let him take fear for the dreadful
things to come. For if he now spend his life in the works of the flesh, in
death he shall be dyuorced and separated from his body and all the pleasures
thereof: in the judgment he shall be presented before him, into whose hands
to fall is most horrible, and be examined of him to whom nothing is unknown:
in hell if he be found guilty, he shall suffer torment without hope of relese,
without measure of quantity, and without end of time. Has not this man good
cause to live always in fear* and with fear and trembling to labor about
his own salvation? this fear which is the beginning of wisdom has more
strength to withstand sin, then either shame or sorrow. For shame is taken
away by the multitude of sinners, where the fellowship of so many evil lyuers
pulls shame out of his heart. And sorrow takes comfort of the vain
pleasures of this present world, and so is weakened and made unable to
withstand sin. But fear that proceeds from a sure and certain faith of
things to come, takes no comfort of the world, seeing that in death he
shall carye no worldly good with him, and in judgment he shall neither be able
to deceive nor to withstand Christ his judge, Bernar. in psalm. qui habitar ser.
vi
and in hell he shall have no comfort nor redemption, but perpetual woo. The
fruit of this fear is, that it brings before the eyes of our souls,
sometimes the sins that we have done, to the intent we should be wyllyng
and ready to suffer the scourge (as the prophet said of himself) confessing
our iniquitye, Psa. xxxvii
and thinking for our sin, sometimes the everlasting pains which we have
deserved, to the intent we should think all that we suffer here, to be delites
and pleasures, in comparison of the torments which we have escaped: sometimes
the heavenly rewards for which we labor and hope, to the intent we should
esteem the afflictions of this present life, not to be equal and worthy the
glory that shall be showed to us, sometimes the passions which Christ has
suffered for us, that considering what his maiesti has vouchsafed to suffer for
us unprofitable servants, we should be ashamed to draw back and suffer so
little for our selves and our own salvation. And to make an end, he that (as I
have declared unto you) considers the noughtynesse and vileness of his
sin, and endeuoreth himself to put out of mind the first motions of
sin which the devil suggesteth, and watches diligently the wyndowes of his
five senses, and as much as he may fly the company of evil persons and the
occasions of sin, and has the last end of his life always in his
remembrance with fear, being also careful to walk warelye and woorthelye in
the sight of GOD, considering as occasion shall serve, the sins which he
has done, the eternal pains which he has deserved, the heavenly rewards
which he hops for, and the passions which Christ has suffered for him,
with such intent as I have before rehearsed: no doubt of it, but that man
which thus does, shall avoid sin, shall live well, shall increase in grace,
shall continue in rightwisnes, and by the mercyful goodness of God shall atteyne
everlasting life through the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, to who^ with
the father and the holy ghost be al honor and glory world without end. Amen.

Of the Sacrament of Order. Sermon. xxv.
TWo things (good people) be necessary by the salvation of man, both by
grace of this world, and by glory of the next world. The inward gifts of
faith, charity, and hope, and the outward Sacraments of Baptism, Penance,
and the other like.

God that is our Savior, and the principal cause of our salvation, by geuyng
unto us these inward gifts, does dispose and prepare the heart of man, and
makes it meet to receive grace and remission of sin: and also by the
receyuyng of his holy Sacraments, he induces and brings into the heart of
man the said grace and remission, as it were water through a conduite, or
corporal health by a good and profitable medicine. By these two instruments
almighty God does form and make his holy church, and brings us to the
knowledge of God and his son Christ, that were before in darkness and the
shadow of death, making us of old men and the heirs of hell and dampnation,
to be new men, and the heirs with Christ in the kingdom of heaven. And
thus when we be by these instruments incorporate and made members of Christ's
mystical body the Church, he does also by discipline, rule us his church,
and preserves us in unity, and multiplieth his manyfold graces in us, to the
atteinyng of everlasting life.

The inward gifts be wrought in us that be of age, by the preachinge of Gods
holy word, for faith comes by the hearing of the word of God, Romans x.
which faith being tried by patience in tribulation, woorketh hope that never
fails, because the charity of God is poured into our hearts by the holy
ghost which is given unto us. Romans v.
And how shall men preach Gods word except they be sent, for the office of
preaching may not be of any man usurped by presumption, Romans x*
but ought to be faithfullye used and practiced by Gods commission, of them
that be for that purpose sent by God and his Church to convert or instruct
his people.

For as in the body every part or member is not the mouth: so in the
church every man may not be a preacher, and to the intent that the Gospel of
Christ and his holy word might be purely set forth without corruption, and
that the ministers of the devil, transformyng them selves into the Apostles
of Christ, ii. Cor. xi.
as the devil their father is wont oftentimes to do, should not deceive Gods
people with every wind of untrue doctrine: Therefore has Christ given unto
his church, not every man, but certain men to be Apostles, Ephe. iiii.
Prophets and Preachers, who using as it were an embassage from Christ,
should by his true word edifye his Church, and gather his people in unity
of faith.

Likewise the grace that heals our souls, and preserves them in
rightwisnesse, is not ordynarylye given, but by the outward and sensible
ministration of the holy Sacraments, which be not always effectual,
geuynge that grace they signify, but when they be in due form ministered of
such persons only as have authority from God to do the same, Hebr. v.
for no man takes honor to himself, but he that is called of God as Aaron
was.

What is so excellent as to consecrate the sacraments of God? and what is so
pernicious, Arnobi. in Psa. cxxxix
as if he consecrate them that has received no degree of Priesthood, as
appears by such plages as light upon Dathan and Chore, Number. xvi. i. Par.
xxvi.
and also upon king Ozias for vsurpinge the office of the Priests by their
own authority, uncalled of God thereto. For only their ministration does
GOD assiste, as he has promised, to whom he has given power to minister the
visible Sacraments.

Wherefore as the Sacraments be necessary to man's salvation, so it is
necessary for certain men to be ordained and authorysed of God to minister
the same Sacraments faithfully and effectually to man's salvation.

Likewise when Christ's Church by the ministration of his holy word and
Sacraments, is gathered and collected out of all the profane people of the
world into one body, to the intent that all confusion and dysorder should
be banyshed out of the Church of God, and that it might be by streyte
disciplyne ruled and kept in order, ii. Cor. x.
and all disobedience corrected to the edifying of the same church, as it were
a great army set in good array of battaill, Canti. vi.
by order terrible to their enemies, so that hell gates can not prevail
against it: Therefore has our Savior Christ ordained in his church certain
men to be rulers and judges in all causes which perteyne to the salvation of
man's soul, to who^ all other persons of what state so ever they be, owe
obedience, subjection, reverence, and temporal relief, as to their spiritual
governors and fathers, who take cure and charge of them, and shall make an
account to God of their souls.

By this little that I have now said, ye may learn (good people) that the
public ministration of the Gospel of Christ stands in three points: in
the preaching of Gods word, in the ministration of the holy Sacraments, and
in exercisyng of discipline and jurisdiction: which three shall (by Gods
promise and the assistaunce of his holy spirit) continually be observed in
the catholic church to the worlds end, for the edifienge and buildyng of the
same Church in grace and virtue, and for weedynge out and banyshing of all
error and ungodly living.

And also ye may learn, that where no man may usurp and take upon him of his
own authoritte to entermedle or to minister that which pertains to Chist,
without sufficient commission from him: Therefore has Christ ordained this
Sacrament of Order, wherein grace or spiritual power is given to certain
Christen men, by the outward sign of imposition of the Bishops hands upon
them, to exercise effectually the public ministration of the Church, whereby
what so ever they do in the Church according to the institution of Christ
and the Church, is ratified, accepted, and allowed of almighty God.

Of this grace or power given in the Sacrament of Order writes Saint Paul to
Tymothye, whom he had ordered and consecrate a Priest, saying thus: Do not
neglecte the grace which thou have in thee, i. Tim. iiii.
which is given to thee through prophecy, or the inspiration of God by
imposition of hands of the order of Priesthood. And also in an other place he
exhorts Timothye to stir up the grace of God, ii. Tim. iii.
which was given to him by the imposition of his hands. And because this
spiritual power and authority which is given to certain men, for the
edifieng of Christ's church, is not hollye given to every one of them, but to
some more, to other some less by degrees, whereby one man, as his office and
function is greater, so is he exalted in dignity above an other, which
diversity in degrees, causes great comeliness and beautye to be in Christ's
Church, by reason of such order as every inferior member keeps to his
superior, doing his duty in his own place, and not vsurpyng to do above
his calling.

Therefore this Sacrament, whereby such degrees of authority and power be
given to men is called Order, which order of ministers makes the Church to
be builded as a City without confusion, Psalm. cxxi. Can. vi.
and to be terrible to her enemies as the fore front of an army set in good
arave, and is the very knot of the known Catholic Church, containing both
good and evil in it, whereby it is preserved without scisme, so long as that
order is kept without breach, which was institute by Christ, used by his
Apostles, and from them brought to us by continual succession.

Cypri. de simpli. prelatorum.
This visible Order, taking his beginnynge from the authority given to one
man, is extended throughout the hoolle world in the church, into a great
number and multitude of inferior ministrations, as it were many branches
proceedinge from one tree, or many ryuers from one fountain, which all
together take inwardly their increase from the fountain of al grace, and the
only suprime head of our one church Jesus Christ our Lord.

For if Christ had not only secretly by inspiration, but also by his sensible
commandment and sacrament, sent his Apostles into the world, saying: Joan. xx.
as my father has sent me, so I send you, giving them authority likewise
visibly to send other: the church of Christ should never have been without
Scismes and divisions made by them, that runnynge by their own authority
unsent, would have borne men in hand that they were inuisibly sent and
anointed of GOD, which was nothing so, and so would have drawn Gods people
into sects and false doctrine. For which cause Saint Paul and Barnabas being
inuisiblye sent of the holy Ghost, Acts. xiii.
yet it was the will and pleasure of the same holy Ghost, that they should by
a visible Sacrament of imposition of hands, be visiblie sent in the authority
of Apostles, to the ministration of the church, and such as now say them
selves they be sent inuisiblye of God, ought not to be believed or received,
except they be as Saint Paul and Barnabas were visibly ordered and anointed
in the Church by Catholyke Bishops, such as have their succession from the
Apostles.

Furthermore in this Sacrament of Order is given to them that be lawfully
ordered the ecclesiastical power of the Church, which is a power given, not
by the laws of men or of nature, but only by Christ above nature, and after
a special sort, to his Apostles and disciples and their lawful successors to
the worlds end, for the edifiynge of the church militant, according to the
laws of the Gospel, for the atteynyng of eternal life. And this power is
called in scripture by the name of the keys of the kingdom of heaven. As a
keye does open the door to a man, and brings him into the house: so this
ecclesiastical power being used with knowledge and discretion by a lawefull
minister, opens the door of man's heart to the knowledge of GOD, and so in
process opens to him the kingdom of heaven.

For it contains the ministration of all things which be necessary for us
sinners to be directed, furthered, and promoted to the atteining of the said
kingdom. As to bind and loose, to remytte and reteyne sin, and al other
things that be requisite to the preservation of Christ's Church in unity of
faith and charity, to the intent it might be partaker of the glory of God.
These keys our Savior Christ did give to his Church in Saint Peter, or
rather to Saint Peter for the Church, saying to him: To thee shall I give the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, Math. xvi.
and what so ever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be also bounden in the
heavens, and what so ever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be also loosed in
the heavens. And to the other his Apostles and Disciples assembled together he
said: whose sins you shall remitte, be remitted unto them, Joan. xx.
and whose sins you retain, be retained. And to declare that this power is
not invented by man, nor yet given by the authority of any Prince or
Communaltie, our Savior said in the geuyng of it to his disciples, take and
receive you the holy ghost. Whereby we understand that the power to bind or
loose, or to remytte sin, or fynallye to govern the Church, is the work
only of the holy Ghost woorking by his Ministers that which is for the
salvation of his Church.

And where as the blessed Sacrament of the Aultare is the hiest and greatest
Sacrament of al other, because holle Christ both god and man, is contained in
it: Therefore is Priesthood the highest order, wherein is given grace and power
over Christ's natural body and blood, to consecrate it by the virtue of God
assistyng his word, Basilius in Liturgia.
and to make it present in the blessed Sacrament of the Aultare, by the
change of the substaunces of Bread and Wine, and also to offer it, being the
very Sacrifice of the new Testament to God the father, for the sins and
ignoraunces of his people, and to deliver and minister it to such as by their
faith and clennes of life be worthy to receive it. i. Cor. xi.
So this power over Christ's natuall body, our Savior him self gave to his
Disciples in his last Supper, where after that he had consecrate, offered,
and delivered his own body to his Disciples, he said to them: Do this in
remembrance of me, by which word he made them Priests and gave them
authority and commandment to do as he did than, not once, but
continuallye till his latter coming.

And that the Priest may woorthely and after due manner execute this his chief
office and function, Epiphani. ad Ioanne^. Hieroso^.
there be other inferior orders ordained of God and his holy Church to
assiste the Priest, as Deacon and Subdeacon, whose offices be to receive the
oblations of the people for the use of the Sacrament, to bring them to the
Aultare, to prepare all things necessary for the consecration, to give
consent to the Sacrifice made by the Priest, beside other things which by
holy scripture and the universal tradicion of the church they be authorized to
do. Acts. vi.
A Priest also has power given unto him by this Sacrament of order over
Christ's mistical body the church, for the instruction, the purgation, and the
perfection of the same church and every member thereof. And first concerning
the instruction of it, a Priest has authority to preach Gods word, by Gods
special and visible sending. Where our Savior Christ said to his disciples:
As my father has sent me, Joan. xx.
so likewise I send you. And in an other place he said: go ye into the holle
world and preach the gospel to every creature. Mark. xvi Mat. xxviii
And also go your ways and teach all people, baptising the^ in the name of
the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, teaching them to observe
al things what so ever I have commanded you, and I shall be with you al days
to the end of the world. And as concerning the purgation of Gods people, a
Priest has authority to remyt sin, Mat. xxviii Joan. xx.
as a minister in the name and power of the holy Trinity, both to them that
first enter into the church by ministering to them the Sacrament of Baptism,
and also to the^ that after Baptism have fallen unto sin again, by
ministering to them the Sacrament of Penance. The commandments of God,
whereby every Priest is authorized to baptize and to remitte sins to the
penitent sinners, I have here tofore in this sermon sufficientlye declared. And
as concerning the perfection of the Church of Christ, and every member
thereof, God has given to Priests authority to pray over sick persons,
Jacob. v.
and to anoynte them with oil in his name, to the remission of their sins,
and the salvation of the sick, according to Gods pleasure, and also to join
those persons in Matrimonye, that marye in Christ.

And bishops also, who in the order of priesthood, as the successors of the
Apostles have hier dignity and distinct offices and authority above other
inferior Priests, for the perfection of the people in Christ's Religion, have
power to give the holy Ghost for the confirmation of them that be baptized,
Ac. viii.xix Titus. i. Acts. vi.xiiii.
and by impositio^ of their hands to ordeyne Priests and other ministers of
Gods holy word and Sacraments. And further for purging of Christ's
mystical body the church from all errors, Scismes, disobediencies, and
ungodly living, Bishops have power to use spiritual and ordinary
jurisdiction, Acts. xv.
as to call synodes for reformation and good order to be made in the church, to
visit their diocesanes, that neither by tyranny nor by heresye, nor yet by the
subtle craft of the devil, Acts. xv.xvi. Hier. xxiiii ii. Cor. v. i. Tim. v.
i. Cor. iiii.vi.
the flock of Christ be dispersed or distroyed, to correct by excommunication
and other discipline the public crimes of such as be manifestly accused,
denounced or found guilty and obstinate by dilligent inquisition, to examine and
determine the causes and enormities which arise or may chance in the Church
of Christ, and finallye to do what shall be thought necessary and expedient
for the banishing of vice and error, and the stablishing of virtue, true
faith, and godly unity. For that power which God has given unto them, is
only to build, and not to destroy, which power is honorable, ii. Cor.
x.xiii.
and to be esteemed and obeyed in all Bishops and Priests, be they of good
lyuinge or noughty living. For the life of an evil Priest or Bishop is no
hinderaunce nor prejudice to the effect and virtue of Gods Sacraments, which
they truly minister, no more than the evil life of a Phisician hinders the
virtue and operation of a good medicine. Therefore good people, knowing the
necessity and commodity which comes to us by this Sacrament of Order, for
our instruction, sanctification, and final salvation. Let us give most hie
thanks to almighty God, that has given such power to men, and by
thexecution of that power, and the distinct degrees and several functions of
this sacrament of Order, has avoided all confusion out of his church, that
it might appear beautyfull and glorious in his sight, and let every person
take heed that he neither break nor contemn this ordinance of God, and so
be occasion of corruptinge Gods truth, and disturbyng his peace and unity,
which by this only order is kept and preserved. But in all our prayers let us
humbly make supplication, that God of his merciful goodness would preserve his
church continually in this good order without disturbau^ce, and that every
minister in his degree might study and labor in the law of GOD, to be and
do as his office requires, seeking the buylding of Christ's Church, and not
the only increase of his worldly gain, as becomes the servants of God,
being bounde^ to give an account of that is committed to their charge, to the
laud and praise of Christ, who with the father and the holy ghost lives and
reigns in unity of Godhead for evermore world without end. Amen.

()

In what estimation the Prelates and other ministers in Christ's church ought
to be had of the people. Sermon. xxvi.
FOr as much as the Prelates and ministers of Christ's church (good people)
be ordained of God to be Judges over his people, in such things as
apperteine to the salvation of their souls, and also to be their governors
and rulers in all true Religion, and thyrdlye to be their ghostlye and
spiritual fathers, to beget children to God by the word of Christ, and the
preaching of the Gospel: Therefore considering that almighty God does so
honor them, and does so allow and assiste their ministration, in geuyng to
them being frail and mortal men, such power as no other creature has at
any time received, and all for the building, perfection, and final salvation
of his Church his elect and chosen people: Therefore I say, it is commanded
to all men and women, that be of the flock of Christ, to love and to obey,
and to honor those ministers of Christ in such sort as the nature and
woorthynesse of their office and ministration does require. For so Saint
Paul taught the Thessalonians, i. Tessa. v.
saiynge thus: we beseech you brethren that you would know them that labor
among you, that is to say, in knowledgyng what benefits we have of God by
their labor and service, who also be the rulers and governors over you in
our Lord, and do admonyshe you in all goodness, as it were executing Christ's
office amongst you, that ye would have them in hiest price and estimation by
sincere love and charity, more aboundantlye than other, and that for their
work and office sake, having peace with them without using any disobedience,
contention or disdain toward the^.

By this exhortation of the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, may all men and women
learn what love they ought to bear toward the ministers of almyghtye God,
which ought to be in the best sort, not only for the worthynesse and
virtues of the persons, which is a cause making all men to be loved and
favored the more, but specially for their office and labor sake, and for
such benefits as by their service and ministerye men receive at Gods hand.
For they be not only our neighbors whom for that respect we ought to
love as our selves, but also they be the causes of our spiritual life,
Chrysostom. hom. ii. ad Timo. i.
by them we are made Christen men, by them we have the true knowledge of
God, remission of our sins, participatio^ with Christ in the unity of his
mystical body the Church, into which body we are grafted and made living
members to bring forth the fruit of holiness and good works, by them we have
given unto us the holy ghost, not only to our sanctification, but also to
our boldness and strength. whereby we be made able to withstand our
aduersarye the devil, and to overcome all the assaults and fiery darts of his
crafty tentatio^s, by them we be nourished and fed, not only with the
spiritual food of Gods word, but also with the heavenly and immortal food
of Christ's natural body and blood, whereby we be sanctified both in body and
soul, and receive increase of all Gods former gifts and graces, whereby also
we be united unto Christ in perfect unity, that is to say, both spirituallye
in our souls, and also corporally in our bodies, by the worthy receiving of
his heavenly and natural flesh into the same, and by that pledge remaining
effectuallye in us we be assured and rest in perfect hope of immortality, and
the resurrection of our bodies to everlasting life.

They be also appointed of almighty God as Ambassadors to reconcile us again
to God, when we by transgressio^ of his laws and commandments have offended
his Majesty. By their mouths and ministry GOD receives the vows,
requests, and Sacrifices of his people, whereby his anger and wrath for the
peoples offenses, is mitigated and taken away. They be appointed of almighty
GOD to be watchemen and shepherdes over the flock of Christ, to give warnyng
when the wolf comes to devour the Sheep, and to reduce and bring home
again to the fold, when the flock is dispersed, such as have wandered in
error and wicked living.

For these benefytes and a great number moo which may be easly rehearsed but for
tediousnes, which all we receive of almightye God by the labors and service
of the Prelates and ministers in Christ's Church, we ought to have the^ in
reverence and to esteem them (according to the admonition of Saint Paul) as
the minysters of God and the stewardes or dysposers of Gods mysteries, i. Cor.
iiii.
knowinge that who so hears and obeys them, hears and obeys god, and
who so dyspiseth them, dispiseth GOD, Luc. x.
for the love and reverence which is given to Gods minister, is given to God,
and likewise the contempt of him, is the contempt of God, as almighty god said
him self to Samuel whom the people of Israel refused to rule over the^, in
these words. i. Reg. viii
They have not contemned and rejected the but me. So that generally the honor
or contempt which is used toward Gods ministers, tends and reboundeth
toward God him self. As appears by the punishemente of such contempt as
the Jews used against Moses, which almightye God reputed as done against
him self. Number. xii.


Furthermore beside love, the people owe to the ministers of Christ's Church
obedience, as to their spiritual governors and rulers, to whom Christ our
savior has committed the keys of his kyngedome, by which is understood
ecclesiastical power to exercise discipline and jurisdiction over Gods people
for the edifyenge and buildinge of them in grace and virtue, and for the
correctinge and banishing of all error and ungodly lyuinge.

This power in the ministers of the Church ought every Christen man and woman
to obey under pain of deadlye sin. For saying that all power is of GOD, he
that withstandeth or disobeyeth that power, Romans xiii.
disobeyteh Gods ordinance, and so offends greuouslye almyghtye GOD and his
own conscience, except it be in such cases where the ministers of Gods
church shall make ordinances and give commandment contrary to the express
commandment of almightye God, for in such cases men ought rather to obey God
than man. Act. v.


But all their constitutions specially such as be universally received
through out the catholic Church, and be ordained for the conservation and
increase of good life and true relygyon, and for the beauty of good order in
the Church and serving of GOD, and for quyetnes and disciplyne vniformelye to
be kept among the people, all such ordinances and constitutions no man
may contemptuouslye break and disobey without deadlye sin, except vrgente
and euydente necessytye or some other greater and more weyghtye commodytye do
excuse him, and yet in such necessary and ^rgente cases where he may be
excused for not obseruinge the same, he must beware and take heed that he
neither dispyse nor contempne the authority of the Church, nor yet therein do
offend his neighbor by geuinge him an occasyon likewise to disobey, or to
judge evil of an other.

This obedience to Gods ministers Sayncte Paul does erhorte all men unto,
writing to the Hebrews in this sort: Be you obedient to your spiritual
rulers, Hebre. xiii
and be you subject under their government, because they labor and watch
over you as men that shall give an account for your souls.

That thing which GOD regards most, that is to say, the soul of man, for
whose cause he took our nature upon him, and for it did shed his most
precious blood, in comparyson also whereof he sets in a manner nothing by
all other things within this world, that same has he committed to the charge
of these his mynysters, and will of them require a strait accoumpte at the
last day, whereby appears how much he has honored them in commyttinge so
precious a Jewel to their charge, and also how much all people ought to
esteem, obey, and honor them, that beside the burden of their own propre
acts and deeds will clogge and charge their conscyences with the cure of other
men's souls, which cure to discharge, is very hard and dyffyculte unto
them, both for that men be masters and Lords of their own wylles,
which be free and subject to no foreine compulsyon, and also for that the
perfect state of men's souls can not be known to their Curates, except the
parties them selves do confess and open the same.

And therefore it is Gods will that these his ministers shall be of all sorts
of men obeyed in the executynge of their office committed unto them, both
concerning faith and credyte to be given to their preachinges and
exhortations, so long as they sytte in the chair of Christ, teachinge
wholesome and catholic doctrine, and the imitation of the life of our Savior,
and also concerning the kepinge and fulfyllynge of the ancient and godly
constitutions ordained by the Prelates of the universal Church of Christ for
good order and conformity of good living to be kept throughout in the same.

And specially they ought to be obeyed when they shall by discypline and the
censures of the Church correct the publik crimes of any person which of
contumacye contemninge the admonitions of his neighbors and the Prelates of
the church, refuses to hear and obey the Church. For in such cases of
contempt the ministers of Christ may not wink and suffer the people to
run hedlonges without bridle, from one crime to an other, to the destruction
of them selves and others also, but ought openly to reprove such men, and if
that will not serve, than to draw the spiritual sword of excomunication
which is very terryble and much to be feared of all Christen men, and more
than the corporal sword of Princes and Kings, for so much as the death of
the soul is more to be feared than the death of the body.

For if a man be iustelye excomunicate of his own judge having ordinarye or
lawful jurisdiction over him, he is a member cut away from the body of
Christ's catholyke Church, which so long as he is in that state, is dead, not
able to bring forth good fruit, and worthy nothing but to be cast into
eternal fire and burnt as being than a member of the Church malignant. Joan*
xv.
He is accursed and separate from the company and fellowship not only of
all faithful people in this world, but also of almighty God and his blessed
angels in the kingdom of heaven. He is depryued of the influence of Gods
grace, and the special protection of almightye God, secluded from the
spiritual communion of Christ's Church, as not pertaker of the Sacraments
and of the prayers, good works, and general suffrages of the same, and is to
be taken and esteemed of al good men, Mat. xviii.
as an Ethnicke and publicane, and is also delivered to Satan the devil,
whereby the devil has power by permission over him to afflicte him with all
vexation and affliction corporal, to the intent that by that means, i. Cor. v.
he perceiuinge the enormitie of his living may yield and be reduced to
penance, that his soul may be saved in the day of our Lord.

What christen heart can be so careless of his own salvation, as either by his
wilfulnes to enter, or by his obstinacy to continue in so damnable and
daungerouse a state of lyuinge. Which many men wilfully and headly fall into,
by disobeyinge Gods ministers, and that power which is given unto them by
almighty God for the reformation of his people. And although sometimes men
may flatter them selves when they be excommunicate that they need not to fear
or regard such excommunication, for that they persuade them selves in their
own opinions, either the cause to be unjust, or the process against them to
be unlawful, and therefore shall begin not to regard but to contempne the
said sentence of excommunication pronounced against them: yet in the name of
God I shall advertise you al, good people to beware of this point, and not to
be your own judges in these cases deceyuynge your selves, lest by your so
contemning the keys and authority of the Church, ye run in danger of just
excommunication otherwise, and shall thereby make that cause to be just in
the end, which perchance would have appeared to have been not so weyghty in
the beginning.

Thus good people understanding that the Prelates and ministers of Christ's
Church be ordained of God to be the Phisicianes and surgyans of your souls,
your duty is to love and obeie them not only when they do apply the
sweet medycines of Gods word and his holy Sacraments to the diseases of
your souls: but also when as good Surgeanes they bind the parties that refuse
to be cured, and by the censures of the Church and strayt d^scipline do cut
and search their desperate and incurable wounds, executynge the office of
almighty GOD, that said by his Prophet in this manner: Ezech. xxxiiii.
I shall feade my sheep, and I shall seek and search^ that is lost, I shall
bring home again that is cast away, I shall bind that is broken, I shall
save and keep that is fat and strong, and I shall feade them in judgment.

And like as I have told you of your duties toward them in louinge and
obeying them: so ought you also to honor them as the holy Apostle Saint
Paul teaches, sainge: Those Priests that execute their office, Tim. v.
and rule their people well, be worthy double honor, specially those that
labor in Gods word and doctrine. For the scripture says: Thou shalt not
bind up the mouth of the Ox that treads forth the corn, and he that
labors is worthy his wages or reward.

By which words we understand what is meant by this double honor, not
only to think well upon them, to have them in estimation, to love them, to
reverence and honor god in them for their work and office sake: but also to
succor and relieve them in their corporal lyuinge, to minister unto their
necessary sustenaunce sufficientlye with a frank heart and a good will. For
who does goo a warrefare upon his own charges? i. Cor. ix.
who feeds a flock and does not eat of the milk of the same flock? They
that minister unto the people spiritual things, as the word of God, Romans xv.
his holy Sacraments and such other, ought likewise too receive again of
the people carnal things. For the scholar which is taught and instructed in
the word of GOD and the relygion of Christ, Galat. v.
ought to communycate and to make his master and instructour to be a partener
with him in all good things temporal which God has lent unto him, i. Cor.
ix.
for almighty God has wylled and ordained, that they which serve him in the
preaching and setting forth of his gospel should have their living of the
gospel for the settinge forth of the same. By these reasons and sayings which
I have here rehearsed unto you (good people) out of the doctrine of the blessed
Apostle S. Paul, it appears plainelye, Council. Matiscon. cap* v.
that the payment of tithes, or the tenth part of all manner of fruits, for so
much as pertains to the substance of the^ and the sustentation of Gods
ministers, to the intent they might holly apply them selves to gods ministerye
undivided or without care of the world for their necessary lyuinge, Council.
general. Lateran. cap. liiii. Prouer. iii.
is gods ordinance, not only by the instincte of nature, it being most
agreinge too natural reason, but also by Gods moral law, who being the
Lord, creator, and geuer of al good things, in token of his universal
dominion, as it were by a special title and prerogative has reserved the
tenthe part of the fruits of the earth to him self, and will be honored
with our substance and riches by the free oblation of those tithes to him,
which he has wylled to be given and converted to the use and sustentation
of the ministers of his church. For so writes the wise man: in all thy soul
fear thy Lord God, Eccl. vii.
and sanctyfye his priests, with all thy power, love him that made the, and
forsake not his ministers, honor God with all thy soul, and also honor his
Priests, and purge thy self with the free oblation of that thou have gotten
with the labor of thy hands, give unto them as it is commanded unto the,
their portion of thy chief fruits and tithes. Thus good people as we be
debtors to almighty God for his infynite and manyfold benefytes, so by just
payinge of our tithes to him we acknowledge our imperfection, his majesty and
universal dominion, our need and miserye, his goodness and bountyful
liberality, which is according to our duties, a geuinge of thanks for the
same, and accepted of him as a payment of our debtes for his benefytes through
the merytes of his only son Jesus Christ our Lord.

And this honor in ministringe to the Priests of Christ's Church for their
lyuinge, Malach. iii Exodus xxii. Number. v.xviii. Deuteronomy. xiiii Mat. v.
as I have said before, is not only expressed in the wrytinges of the holy
Prophets, and in the old law of Moses, which was the figure declaryng what
ought to be done in the new testament where ryghtwisnes does and ought more to
abound than it did in the Scrybes and Pharisyes, and yet in this point
concerning the lyuinge of the ministers it was not a bare ceremonye shadowinge
a truth to come, nor yet only judicial perteyninge only to the
government of the cyuyle state of that people of the Jews, which is now
dissolved, but did instruct men how they should behave them selves in that
behalf to God and their neighbor, which ought to take place and be observed
as well now among us in the new Testament as among them in the old: but also
is declared to be due to be paid of Christen people now in the time of the
new testament by the consent of Christ's universal Church, Hierom. in. i.
cap. Malach. August. de rectitud Cath. conuersationis. Council. Lateran. cap.
liii. Deuteronomy. xiiii
as well by the testimonye of the holy Fathers and the universal custom of
the said Church ever since the time that any Realm was holly converted to
the faith of Christ, as by the determinacion of general counsel: The consent
and judgment of whom, our Savior christ has taught to be observed in all
doubts as a sure argument of the undoubted truth, and a sure pyller for
every Christian man to lean unto. And as the withdrawinge or not payinge of
this duty of tithes from God that has reserved the same in token of his
universal dominion, to the intent men should learn to fear him at al times, is
very sacrilege and the contempt of God and his true religion: so is it the
cause of darth, Malach. iii.
and famyn, and many other plages which by Gods just judgment fall upon the
people therefore: like as the honouringe of God and his ministers in this point
and the true paymente of the same, is the cause that God does bliss his
people in sendinge unto them abundance and plentye in all corporal and
spiritual benediction. For which cause I shall most heartily require you to
consider what I have said concerning your duty to God and the ministers of
his Church in loving, obeying, and honoring the^, which I speak not for
their glory or gain worldly, but for your profyt discharging my self in
declaring unto you the will and commandment of God in this behalf, to
the intent ye might avoid his high displeasure for doing the contrary, and on
the other side obtain the abundance of his grace and blessing like obedient
servants and thankful children, whom he shall at the last day reward with
the fruition of his glory through the merytes and mercy of his only son
our Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be all
honor and glory world without end. Amen.

Of the Sacrament of Matrimonye and what grace is given in it. Ser. xxvii.
AFter that almightye GOD our Lord (good people) had created and made the
first man Adam, and had placed him in Paradyse: Genesis ii.
he by and by coupled and joined unto him in marriage a woman created of his
own flesh and bone, whereby appears that matrimonye is the elder and more
ancient than all the other Sacraments, and instituted by God him self before
the fall of man, for good and necessary causes. As for the aid and comfort
of man, both in their common life together, and also for multiplication of
mankind, and the Godly bringinge up of their children, it being prepared and
ordained of almighty God to be a mean and instrument for lawful generation
between them and perpetual continuance of mankind to the worlds end.

For which purpose almightye God when he had joined them in marriage together,
he blessed them with his holy word, saying to them. Increase you and be you
multiplied and fulfill the earth. Genesis i.ix.


Furthermore almyghtye GOD to whom nothing is unknown, but al things, both
past, present, and to come be presently before his eyes, foreseinge that man
would be deceived by the craft of the Devil, and fall from that
rightewisenes which he had created him in, and that as he would by his own
free will disobey God his superior, so his flesh and carnal desire should by
Gods just judgment likewise disobey him: therefore he ordained Matrimony, that
as it should be to man and woman before their fall a mean of that generation
and multiplyeng of Gods people: August. de Genesi ad litera. lib. ix. cap. vii.
so it should be also after their fall a remedy to excuse the unlawful desire
of their sinful flesh.

Last of all, almighty God foreseinge the bondage and damnation of mankind
for his dysobedience to God, and of his infynite mercy purposing to redeem
mankind again from the said bondage and damnation by sendinge his only
begotten son to be made man, and in our flesh to regenerate us, and to
restore us to be the louinge children of God again: therefore to teach us this
his good will and purpose, that we should by faith continually know his godly
counsel concerning our redemption and regeneratyon, he ordained and
instituted this lawful conjunction of man and woman in Matrimonye to be a
sign or Sacrament of the marriage between his only son, the lamb of God
our Savior Christ, and his spouse the holy Church, Whereof Saint Paul wrote
to the Ephesyanes, Ephesians. v*
saying thus: For this cause a man shall forsake his Father and mother and
cleave unto his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. For this Sacrament
is great, I say in Christ and in the church, and for the better understanding
of this thing, ye may consider that GOD in the beginning made two merueylous
coniunctyons in man: One between the soul of man and his flesh, and this
coniunctyon is natural, the other between manne and woman in marriage, and this
conjunction is voluntarye and Sacramental: even so there be two merueilous
co^iunctyons between Christ and the nature of man, the one like the
conjunction between man's soul and his flesh, which is when the word was
made flesh, that is to say, when Gods son in his incarnation did join our
mortal nature to his Godly nature in unity of person. The other is like the
coniunctyon between manne and wife, which is made by voluntarye love, between
Christ and his Church, that is to say, that company or congregation of all
Christen people, redeemed, sanctified, and nouryshed by Christ's precious
blood, And of this conjunction Matrymonye is an holy Sacrament. For as by the
use of Matrymony are borne and brought forth into the world natural
children, so by the virtue of this marriage between Christ and his spouse the
Church, are daily begotten to GOD spyrytuall children. And as GOD made unto
Adam our forefather a wife of a rybbe taken out of his side when he was cast
into a sleep: Genesis ii.
even so by the blood and water that ran forth of Christ's side when he
sleped by death upon the cross, August^ in Psalm. cxxxviii.
was the Church of Christ married unto him and made his spouse to cleave unto
him as one flesh with him for evermore. And as Adam spoke in the spirit of
Prophecy, August. contra Faustum. lib. xii. cap. viii.
that by matrimonye a man should leave his father and mother and adhere and
cleave unto his wife, and that they should be two in one flesh: So our savior
Christ did so leave his father, that being in the form of God thought it no
robberye to be equal with God but abased him self and was made man, and also
left the Synagoge the mother of the Jews which altogether leaned carnally to
the old Testament, and did adhere unto his wife the holy Church to the
intent they might be two in one flesh in the peace of the new testament.

And as a man and his wife have conformity and do agree in one nature of
mankind: so Christ did conform him self to his Church by his humanity. And
as at the public celebratio^ of marriage, the friends of the parties so married
be called together, and a feast is made among them, to declare their common
joy and gratulatyon for the celebratinge of this Sacrament: even so to the
marriage between our savior Christ and his spouse the holy Church, are called
al nations and people, and from every part of the world the friends and
servants of God by lyuelye faith do resort thither with unspeakable
gladness and joy in the holy ghost.

And as there is no worldly love greater tha^ the love between man and wife, who
be one heart and one mind, even so the holy church loves Christ, and Christ
loves his spouse the Church, so that he has given him self to the death for
her, to redeem and wash her from all her spots and wrincles. And as the wife
by duty is subject and obedient to her husband as being her head: so is the
Church to Christ her head and savior.

And as the husband anorneth and decketh his wife, and when case requires
does also chastyse her, to the intent she might continue in her duty and
obedience: even so Christ does beautifye and set forth his wife the Church
with spiritual gifts and ornaments, and some times by trybulation and
adversity does chastise her, as well for to exercise her in rightwisnes as for
correction of her disobedience. This ye may perceive (good people) by these
comparysones how matrimonye between man and wife is a great Sacrament,
resemblinge unto us and beating into our remembrance that heavenly conjunction
which is between Christ our Savior and his spouse the holy church, which is
the greatest grace and benefit that god has given to man, whereupon man's
salvation does holly depend.

And as this grace is but only signified by the Sacrament of Matrimonye, so
God does both signifye and also work effectually other special and singular
graces in them that lawfullye in the faith of Christ receive the same Sacrament
of matrimony. Which thing shall appear, if ye will consider the words of our
savior Christ whereby Matrimonye as a Sacrament of the new Testamente is
stablished and sanctified, where he says in the gospel of Saint Matthew
after this sort: those persons whom God has joined, man may not lose. By
which words is declared unto us, that who so ever be joined in lawful
marriage in the name of God, to the intent to live Godly in the religion of
Christ, in that state of life: they be joined, not vainelye by contract of man
only, but by God himself, who is inuisibly present at the making of that
marriage, and does assist the parties, and is the author and worker of the knot
of matrimony between them. And by the same words also is declared the
strength of the knotte of Matrimony to be such, as ca^ not be broken and
dissolved afterward, but by the natural death of one of the parties so married.
For if God does so couple and join man and wife together, that no man has
power to separate them a sender afterward: than is it certain that he gives
to the parties so married his special grace to live together in godly and
chaste love in this perpetual bond and knot of Matrimony, without breach of
the same, and so to cheryshe and love one an other, as Christ loves his
Church, and shall never be separate and divorced from the same. So that this
indissoluble bond and knot of Matrimonye between the two parties married, which
no man can loose and break, during the lives of both the parties so married, is
that special grace and effect, which is wrought by almighty God in this
sacrament, and is also signified by such mutual words of consent, as the two
parties did contract Matrimony together. Which perpetual bond although it be
made specially for the intent to have children, yet when that cause does cease
by age or barennes, it may in no wise be broken or dissolved. And also
although for fornication of the woman or of the man, there may be made
against the will of the party offending, a divorce or separation from bed and
board between the^ till they may be reconcyled together again by the penance
and submission of the party offendinge, yet the bond and knot of Matrimony
which God has once made, i. Cor. vii.
ca^ in no wise be dissolved, and if in case the one party, the other being
alive, do attempt to marrye again, it does commit fornication.

Aug. de bo no coniugali. ca. vii.
And this cause or condition of Matrimonye between husband and wife, is not
among the Heathen or unchristian people, where Matrimonye is no Sacrament of
Christ's religion, but only in the City of God which is the catholyke church.
Moreover beside this inviolable bond which god knitteth by his grace in this
Sacrament, and by mutual love which he pours into their hearts, and does
nourishe and preserve the same, there is also an other singular grace and
benefit of God always joined thereunto, whereby (as S. Paul says)
Matrimonye is made honorable, and in it the bed or carnal copulation may be
undefiled and without sin. Hebr. xiii.
For where as by Gods institution in this sacrament of Matrimony, there is
power given to man to use his wife for procreation of children: we must
consequently understand that there is also grace given, whereby he may do that
thing conuenie^tly to the contentation and pleasure of God. For they that
worthily in the faith of Christ, and in the fear of God, with a right intent,
for the end to have fruit of their bodies to serve God, contract Matrimony
together, to such I say is given the help of Gods grace against the unlawful
desire and concupiscence of the flesh, that it proceed no further, tha^ the
honesty of marriage does require. So that the carnal act and copulatyon which
otherwise were sinful and dishonest, is by the goodness of Matrimony, lawfullye
contracted (as I have said before) not only excused and defended from sin,
as S. Paul says: if thou have taken a wife, thou have not sinned, i. Cor, vii*
and if a virgyn do marrye, she synneth not: but also is made honest and
meritorious and acceptable to almightye god, who also by his special grace does
aid ye parties so married, to keep steadfastly that faith and promise which
they have made one to an other, by which the man has granted the power and
use of his body only to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband only,
and so to avoid adultery and fornication with any other person during their
lives natural. Which promise to keep is very hard, or in a manner impossible,
without the aid of gods grace given to the^ in this sacrament. For where the
corrupt nature of ma^s flesh and his inordinate concupiscence moves and
inclines him to desire other women beside his own wife, yet by the grace of
matrimony his unlawful desire is restreined, so that he may be content with
his own wife alone and avoid fornication. And where as also man's corrupt
nature seeks rather the satisfyinge of his carnal lust, than the generatyon
of children: yet in this sacrament of Matrimony he receives grace to know his
wife, rather for the intent to have children, than to fulfill his fleshely
desire. And also to communicate with her, all that chance to him good or bad,
and to bring up together their children in the religion and fear of God. And
likewise, where as a man by his corrupt nature, after carnal copulation, is
wont and disposed to think loathsome, and partly to abhor that woman which
he has known carnally, and so refuses her, and seeks an other, yet in
Matrimonye is given grace and aid, not to disdain the company of his wife,
but to remain with her continually, without separation or deuorce.

Al these singular graces and aids almightye God cease not of his mercyful
goodness for his party to give and grant to his faithful people in this
sacrament of Matrimony, if they them selves do not wyllfullye stop at the
beginning, or afterward refuse the same by their ungracious life and wicked
intent. For as God is author and gyuer of all grace and goodness, so he forces
and compels no man to be or to continue good against his will.

Therefore good people, ye may euidentlye perceive the i nfinite and
unspeakable clemencye of almightye God our Savior, that by such a
sacrament has so mercifullye provided for our carnal concupiscence and
desires. He knows very well how frail man's flesh is, and how full of
corruption and wickedness. and therefore mercyfully has ordained lawful
Matrimonye to restreine man's unlawful desire, for which cause married persons
may have boldness and quyetenes of a good conscience, whereby although they have
by the use of Matrimony tribulation of the flesh many ways, yet they be
certeinlye assured that their matrimonial life honestly bego^ne and virtuously
continued, has always the assistau^ce of Gods grace, and is blessed of him,
and therefore profitable and meritorious to the salvation of the parties.
Whereunto Saint Paul bears witness, writing thus to Timothy, i. Tim. ii.
that the wife shall be saved by procreation and bringing forth of children, if
the same do continue in faith and love toward God, and in holiness and
temperance in their deeds.

Finally every man and woman ought most stedfastlye too believe that marriage
is a good thing, Aug. de fide ad Pett. cap. xlii.
and ordained and blessed of almyghtye God, and also that it is a better thing
to live chastely without marriage, to the intent a man or woman might more fully
and freely think upon such things as be godly, and how to please God, and
yet to them that have not vowed chastity, either in virginity or widowhed, we
ought to believe that it is no sin to marry and to take an husband or wife.
And that not only the first marriage is ordained of God, but also that the
second and third marriage is granted as lawful for the infirmity of such as
can not otherwise live continentlye, but to them that have vowed chastity and
continent life to almyghtie God, we ought to think, that according to the
doctrine of Saint Paul, it is dampnable, not only to defile them selves with
the deadly sin of fornication, but also to have a will to marry a wife, or to
take an husband, because he or she that so does, has broken and made void
his first faith and promise, which by his vow he made to almighty God.

Therefore he that shall well consider with him self the goodness of this
sacrament, as I have rehearsed, and the singular and manyfolde graces which
God gives to them that be honestly and for a good intent married in our
savior Christ, shall both edifye his own conscience toward him self, and
increase his chaste love toward his wife, and by that laudable state of living
highly please almighty God toward the atteining of his own salvation, which God
of his great mercy grant to us by the merytes of his dear son our Savior
Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be al honor and glory for
evermore. Amen.

Of the manner how to minister and contract Matrimonye. Ser. xxviii.
IT is to be considered (good people) that although the solemnization of
Matrimonye, and the benediction of the parties married, is made and given in
the face of the Church by a Priest the publik minister of the church: yet the
contract of Matrymonye, wherein this Sacrament consists, may be and is
commonly made by the lay man and woman which be married together. And because
for lack of knowledge how such contractes ought to be duly made, and for
omitting of such things as be necessary to the same, it chances
oftentimes that the parties change their minds, and will not keep that
promise of marryage which seemed to have passed between them before, whereupon
comes and grows between such persons and their friends great grudge and
^atred, and great suit in the law: Therefore I intend at this time by Gods
grace to declare unto you which be the very words whereby this Sacrament
of Matrymonye is contracted, and to open certain cases therevppon dependynge,
too the intent that such contention, as commonly is wont to arise upon the
ignorance or not observing the same, may the better be avoided, and the
parties so contracting, may without scruple or ^uyll conscience for so much
live together in Godly and chaste Matrimonye, to the good will and pleasure of
almighty God.

First, whosoever intends to take upon him this Sacrament of Matrimony, his
duetye is not headyly or rashlye and with blind affection to enter so weyghtye
a matter, but ought with discretion and deliberation to choose unto him or her
such a make and fellow, with whom he or she shall verelye believe and trust to
live godly and vertuouslye, without breach of the bond of Matrimony in any
case duringe their natural lives, and to beware that he enter not marriage with
any such person, as the law of God expressed by the instinct of nature in
every ma^s heart, and the book of Leuiticus, and also the holy and ancient
Canons of the Church do prohibit and forbydde. Which prohibition now
extends to the fourth degree of consanguinitie and affinity, and also
takes place in spiritual kynred, which is between the party that is
baptized or confirmed, and his Godfathers or Godmothers, and their children and
wife or husband, before such baptism or confirmation, and also between the
Godfather or Godmother, and the parents of the child so baptized or confirmed.

Furthermore, he ought to beware and foresee that he or she be in no error of
the person, nor of the condition and quality of the same person, with whom he
or she intends to marrye. And if any scruple or doubt shall appear unto him
or her, concerning the degrees or other impedimentes which may lawfullye
stop the contractinge of such marriage: than his duty is to resort to know
the judgment of his Curate. And in case his Curate has not so profounde
knowledge, as to resolve him in all such doubts, then ought he or she
further to resort to his Ordinarye or Bishop to be resolved, to whom only
the custom of the church of old time, not without great cause did
specially reserve the hearing and judgment in all causes matrimonial.

And further ye shall understand (good people) that the manner to mynyster this
Sacrament of Matrimonye is thus to be used. First let the man ask the woman
if she be content to be his wife, and if she agree thereunto, then let the
woman ask the man likewise if he be content to be her husband, and if he
say yea, so that the mutual consent of them both be known, without the
which no marriage is lawfully made before God, then may the parties proceed
too the words which do express this their mutual and voluntary consent,
which be the formal words of the Sacrament, after this manner.

Let the man taking the woman by the right hand, and naminge her by her name,
as Marye, Jane, or as her name is, say these words: Jane here I take thee to
my wife, and likewise let the woman take the man by the right hand, and name
him by his name, as Thomas, or as his name is, saying thus: Thomas, here I take
thee to my husband. Now, when the two parties which marry together have done
this, and have said these words, then be they ensured and iustlye married
together, and be man and wife before God, and they can not break this marriage
in any wise afterward, as the man can not marry an other woman, nor the woman
an other man, so long as they be both alive. And if the two persons have
sufficient record and witness to testyfye what they have done and said, then
be they manne and wife in the face of the world, and so both before god and
man.

This manner and form of words not only the parties that intend iustelye
to marrye together, but also such other as shall be called to be present at the
insurynge of other, as witnesses of the same, ought diligently to mark and
observe, and to see that the parties which shall be insured, say the fore
rehearsed words, for they be the very words, which join the man and the
woman together, and make them husband and wife.

The neglectinge or omitting of these formal words or the like in effect
and sentence, is oftentimes the cause of great contentyon, and also may cause
that the external judgment of the Church shall varye and dysagree from the
inward judgment of God. For example: If a man obteynynge in words the
woman's consent to marriage, and she his likewise, shall say these words:
Jane, here I give to thee my faith and truth and I promise thee by it that I
will marrye thee to my wife, and she promyseth and says to the man the very
same, yea although each party byndeth him self by an oath of a book too
perform that promise within two months more or less: yet for all this,
these two persons be not insured, and made man and wife by these words,
although they have sufficient records to testify the same, because these
words be not the formal words of the sacrament of Matrimonye, nor make man
and woman husband and wife. Yet these persons that make such promise, be
bounden to marry according unto their promise, under pain of setting them
selves in the state of dampnation: And yet notwythstandynge if the man shall
marrye an other women after this promise, he is than the second woman's
husband, and not the first, though the first he still alive.

And the like case is, if the woman marrye an other man after her promise made
before, she^ is than the second man's wife, and not the first, because the
parties at that present time when the one promised faith and troth to marcye
the other, did not contract Matrimonye by the formal words of the present
time, by which they be knyt together in marriage, but said other words
sygnifyenge promise and time to come, and so afterward changed their minds
contrary to their promise, whereupon follows many times grudge, hatred, and
suit between the parties and their friends, and sometimes also it follows
that the parties so promysing marriage one to an other, do live in fornication
and deadlye sin with the other persons which they married afterward.

And for the further openinge of this matter, ye shall understand (good
people) that if a man and woman do consent in their hearts too be man and
wife, and do will and intend so to make them selves by the words which
they shall express and say one to an other, and than upon this consent and
agreement, the man says unto the woman thus: Jane, I promise thee by my faith
that I will take thee to my wife. And the woman says likewise to the man, or
else some other such words of promise to marrye in time to come, thinkinge and
believing that by those words they be iustelye insured and made man and wife:
Now in this case these two persons be man and wife before God, because they
wylled and intended so to be in their hearts, and also intended so too make
them selves in deed by their words.

And yet they be not man and wife before man, and by the judgment of the
church, though they have sufficient record of that they did and said, because
they did not say the formal words of the present time whereby Matrimony is
co^tracted, without saying of which words (if they can speak) they be not
insured and made husband and wife before man and by the judgment of the
church, what so ever they intended in their hearts, for the church must take
the words iustlye, and judge what they signifye after the common speaking and
understanding of them, and that a man may know, and not after the minds and
intentes that persons may speak, for that can no man know but the speakers
them selves. And therefore in this case when the words of these two persons
so insuringe them selves, be brought before a Judge to be examined: it must
be determined that those two persons be not husband and wife, and yet if
either of them do marry, as the man an other woman, or the woman an other man,
then do they commit adulterye, and live in deadly sin, so long as they be
with those whom they have married. And that is because they made them selves man
and wife before in the sight of God, who saw their wills and hearts, and what
they intended, and did then before him, and therefore that marriage which they
made than, they may never break after. And in case the man shall forsake that
marriage which he made before God, and shall openly join himself in marriage
with an other woman afterward, then shall he sin deadlye, and continue in the
same, so long as he is with that woman whom he last openly married, because
they be not married before god. Yet does not the latter woman sin, to use
the carnal company of that man, because she believes he is her lawful
husband, nor she is not bound to believe the contrary though he tell her the
contrary, and so she may always use him as her husband, if he use her as his
wife. And the like case is if the woman break from the first ensuring, and
marry an other man, then does not he sin to know her as his wife, but she
sins, because she knows that he is not her husband.

But now what remedy for a man which has insured and married him self to a
woman before God, with a full mind and consent in his heart, and yet forsakes
her afterward, and will not solemnize that marriage, but marries an other
openly, how may he save him self from deadly sin and dampnation, seeing
his Prelate by the judgment of the church will compel him to continue with the
second woman who^ he married openly, and will not suffer him to forsake her?
Surely the remedy is very paynfull and dangerous worldly, how be it, it is
better to fall into the hands of man, than into the hands of God. And for so
much as I can learn, the remedy which that man may have is this: he must
leave and forsake the second woman, and go if he can, and so think it good,
where he may escape the pains of the law: And if he be excommunicate,
because he will not be with her, and for going from her then he must suffer
it, and so he must suffer any other punishment that he shall chance to have
therefore, rather then to use carnal company with that woman again, so long
as the other woman is a live, for he knows she is not his wife before God,
and therefore he should do against Gods law, if he should keep her company
as her husband, and rather than to do so and offend almighty God, he must
suffer any manner of pain, that the law of man may cause him to have. And so
must a woman do if she fall into the like case, for this is the remedy, and
there is none other that I know.

And for so much as I have spoken some part of the Prelates doing herein: ye
shall further know, that if a Prelate do by the judgment and censure of the
Church, excommunicate or curse a man or woman for leauinge or forsakynge the
second marriage, he does it justly and lawefullye, because the Church ought
to suppose the best and the most likeliest, that is to say, that he which
marryeth openly, being a Christen man, would not so have done, if he had
married him self to an other woman before god, nor have done so greatly
against his own conscience and Gods law.

And also the Church ought to suppose this second marryage good, because it
can not have a due prooffe of the first Marryage, which the man says he
made before God, but ought to judge and determine the second marriage to be
lawful, and may justly excommunicate him that does forsake it. And moreover the
Church may not believe the man which says that he was married before, and that
this second woman is not his wife. For beside that, be grants that he has
broken the promise and marriage which he made before almighty God, he also
confesses openly before the church that he is untrue in his ^eedes and
words, and not worthy to be trusted and believed, and therefore the church
ought not to allow his saying, nor to believe it as true, concerning the first
marriage, but rather to judge it to be false, and that he says so now because
he loves not this woman, but hates her, or else so he says for some other
evil purpose.

Wherefore I shall exhort in the name of our savior Christ every man or woman
diligently to look upon them selves and their own consciences, and discretly to
consider what they will and intend in their hearts when they make any
contract and promise of marriage openly or secretly. For by their own
consciences and intentes they shall be judged before God, and be condemned if
they do the contrary, although they may with words and excuses do against
it, and defend their so doing here in the face of the world before man. The
surest way that every man and woman may take in making of these co^tractes,
is to marry always in deed here before man, as they did will to do in their
hearts, at the time of their ensuring, what words so ever they said than, for
so may they always discharge their conscience and put away all doubts, and
live justly together husband and wife in the service of almightye God.
Moreover the like doubt or ambyguitie may chance upon the other side, that
is, if a man and woman come together to insure them selves, and do say the
very formal words of the Sacrament before sufficient record, and yet the
man does not consent in his heart to take that woman to his wife but says the
words for fear of displeasing his parents or friends, or else for some other
noughtye purpose, and likewise of the woman. Now these two persons be
husband and wife by the judgment of the Church and before man, and if any of
them would forsake the other and be married again, they may not so do,
though they both grant that they did never consent to be man and wife when
they were insured, no nor though they do both agree to forsake other, and yet
they be not husband and wife nor married before god, and that is because they
did not will and consent in their hearts so to be when they said the words of
matrymonie. And therefore if these two persons do use carnal company
together, then the party which did not consent does commyt fornication and
sins deadly in so doing the duty of marriage, as long as he continues in
the same will and mind that he had when he was insured, be it the man or the
woman. Therefore let every man and woman take good head when they be insured
and speak the words of this sacrament, that they think and will then in
their hearts the same thing, which they do express in their words, or else
let them never speak those words neither for father or friend, or for any
other cause. Now the remedy in this case is easyer than in the other before,
which is this, that the man must change his mind and consent in his heart to
take that woman to his wife as he said before that he did, and the woman
likewise: And this done, then be they man and wife before GOD, and their
matrymoniall knowledge together is no longer sin but lawful and good
afterward. This is the remedy in this case and there is none other.

Many moo cases and difficulties in this Sacrament of Matrimony I might rehearse
which the Church of God has fullye debated and resolved, but I think these
few to be sufficient to the lay man for understanding how marriage ought to
be ministered and contracted. And notwithstanding that the man and woman
consentinge to be man and wife, and saying the words of the Sacrament, be
perfitely married together: yet the marienge of them in the face of the Church
afterward by the ministration of the Priest is not superfluouse, but much
expedient for sondrye causes, first to the intent that this Sacrament should
have that solemnity and reverence which is due to so holy a thing
instituted by our savior Christ him self, for that conjunction which the
Priest as Gods minister does us to understand, that Matrimonye is made by
the assystaunce and working of almightye God.

Secondlye that the persons which be married may receive and have the fruit
of the prayers and suffrages which be said for them in the sacryfyce of the
church, and also may be partakers of the blessinge of God which is made over
them by the priest, whereby we know that the state of living in marriage is
blessed of almighty God.

And thirdlye it is solemnized in the Church, that it might have the more
record and be more allowed and fortyfied by the solemnization, and that all
doubts which might be imagined against it, should be put away. Further I
shall not need to allege unto you at this time, but only shall exhort you to
have always God and his true religion before your eyes, in entringe to this
state of life by matrimonye which can not be dissolved or avoided at the will
and affection of man, but must be kept and observed till death depart the
same. For as we see by experience how upon noughty and affectionate beginninges
there comes seldom good success: so if the beginning of these contractes
in marriage be used with discretion and Godly intent in such form as I have
declared unto you where the heart and word do join together, and the deed
performs that was promised and said before, then shall these manyfold
contentions and breach of charity cease, and the parties love one an other in
chaste love as Christ loved his Church, and shall labor to bring up their
children in the fear of God and knowledge of true religion, which shall be a
great help and furtherance to their salvation by the mercy and merits of our
savior Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be all honor and
praise for evermore. Amen.

(

For what intent and with what affection men and women should marrye. Ser. xxix.
AS in the contracting of marriage (good people) if the right form and
laudable manner therein prescribed by the holy Church be not observed, there
chances often times much contention and hatred afterward upon the same, as
ye have been taught: even so if thintentes of marriage and the causes that move
and provoke men and women to be married be not Godly and honest, the success
of those marriages commonly follow thereafter. For which cause I intend God
wyllinge to declare unto you at this time, which causes be naught and
reproueable, and which be honest and Godly. For if the intent and cause why
men and women do marrye be not good and Godly, than shall not there life be
acceptable to almighty God, nor yet long pleasant unto them selves, as
experience does many times evidently show. A great number of folks do marrye
for one of these two causes and intentes or for both: either to have the lust
and vnclenlye desire of the flesh fulfilled, or else to get worldly goods and
riches thereby. Both these causes if they be chefely and principally intended by
the parties which marry, be very evil and ungodly.

Many young men and women do use to say in rebuke of other that they will not
marrye for riches and goods, but for good love, and yet that good love is
most principallye for to have their sensual appetyte and carnal desire
fulfilled. Which manner of love does never long endure between them that so
marrye, but it decays and goes shortly away. And than such persons begin
to mislyke one an others conditions, and to wax werye one of an other, and
after continuance and increace of that werynesse, it grows to be so
paineful and grievous, that the parties wyshe them selves unmarried again, yea
and many times they wyshe them selves buried, and no merueyle. For an evil tree
such as is carnal concupiscence and fleshely love, can bring forth no good
fruit but such as I have rehearsed.

I need not to show and judge for what intent goodlye young women marrye
poor and miserable persons when they have done amiss. For they be but a small
number, and yet they use more vice under the cloak and cover of marriage, than
they durst do before when they were syngle. Now against these persons which
after such sort and with such intent do enterprise to marry, that they do
exclude God from them selves and from their minds, Tob. vi.
and do apply and give them selves to satisfye their lusts and pleasure, as
horses and moyles do, which have no reason or understanding: against all
such persons (as the Angel Raphaell taught the good young Tobye) the
devil has power to prevail.

And although almightye God of his great mercy does not now suffer the
devil to use his malice against the bodies of such offenders as he used in
the time of Tobye against the seven wicked husbands of Sara the daughter of
Raguell: Tobye. vi.
yet no doubt of it their noughtye eye does make dark their hole body, that
is to say, their wicked and lecherouse intent does corrupt their souls,
whereby they come to the snare of the devil, who spirituallye preuayleth
against them.

Moreover the greater part of the other people does marrye for the other
cause, that is, for goods and riches. And for this purpose man and woman do
not only marrye them selves, but they do also study and labor to marrye
their children and kinsfolks to gleane and get riches. So that now commonly
there is no other virtuous lyuinge, honestye, good conditions, wisdom,
stock, lynnage, personage, beauty, youth nor any thing else so greatly
regarded and considered as is worldly goods and possessions. For if the man
be void of virtue and discretion, and let him have deformity, and be
without personage and so forth, yet if he have great land and goods, there
shall be no fault nor lack found in him, but shall have suitors unto him for
their daughters and kinswome^. And on the other side, if a woman have great
substance and goods and many good Lordships and Manours, although she have
never one or few good conditions or virtues she shall be sure to have suitors to
marry with her, both of great men and other, be she fair or foul, young or
old, beautiful or deformed: but the miserable life and sorrowful pain that
such persons many times have of their marriage, they them selves can tell, and
yet they be not able to express with their tongues, all that they feel and
suffer in their hearts. And then they curse their goods and the day in the
which they were married. Yea and more over we see daily that great men do
sell their children as though they were bonds and slaves, and do nothing
study or labor to marry their sons to good wives, nor their daughters to
good husbands, but their principal care is to sell them where they have most
monye. Likewise the buyers do not care for the good conditions of those they
buy, but look more upon the lands and rentes which those shall have and
enjoy, and therefore oftentimes both the buyers and sellers of such wards and
other, marrye their children to great misery and endless pain. And thus for
goods and riches they be unkind, unnatural, and cruel Fathers unto their
children, and cruel friends unto their kynsfolke, in giving and procuring to
them so painful and sorrowful a life. And many times they distroye their
own families and ancient houses thereby, for that their sons noughtly
brought up, or else their sons in law evil chosen, for lack of grace, and
the rather also for such dysagrement as chances between them and their wives
married principallye for possessions sake, do waste and consume in small time
all that their parents and auncetours with all their wits, long service,
and painful industrye, and labor, have gotten together in many years before.

And here ye shall understand good people, that I do not prohybyte and
forbydde men to look for no manner of goods when they will marrye: For reason
does grant that both men and women should before they marrye well consider,
what craft, occupation, habilitye, and what goods they have them selves to
live with all if they marry. And reason does admytte that they should likewise
look what habylitye and substance they be of, with whom they will marrye,
and wey and cast how such charges as may grow unto them by children and
otherwise when they be married may be borne and sustained.

These things men and women which will marrye ought well to remember and
consider, and therefore I speak not against such considerations and lookinge
for goods, but I say almyghtye GOD and reason does reprove and condemn all
them which do marrye most principallye for goods and riches. For that intent
and purpose is naught and contrary to Gods ordinance in that behalf. And it
is also evident that goods and monye, Lordshippes, rich apparel, delycate
fare and so forth can do no pleasure or profit unto the hearts of married
persons, except they have together faithful love kyndenesse, and joy, one of
an other, and godly and comfortable agreement.

Now that I have showed unto you such causes of marriage as be ungodly, it is
likewise requisyte to declare the other causes which almighty GOD and his
holy word does allow, which be the very same wherefore GOD did institute and
ordeyne this Sacrament of matrimonye, that is to say, the love and desire of
children and posterity, by whom GOD should be more honored, and the hatred of
fornication and unclean life.

The first cause is set forth in the book of Genesis, Genesis i.
where God blessed our first parents and bad them increace and multiplye and
fulfill the earth. Tobye the younger showed that he married only for this
first cause, saying unto almightye GOD thus. O Lord thou know that I take
this woman to my wife, Tob. viii.
not for cause of lecherye or to satisfye and fulfill my carnal lust and desire:
but I take her only to have posterity and children, to the intent that thou
may be always here blessed, lauded, and honored. And for this intent
Christen men should most principallye marrye and bring up their children in
virtuous lyuinge that they may justly live, laud and honor almightye GOD,
and when God sends them children, to teach them to do the same. The
vnchrystened and heathen men do marrye to have children, and to encreace their
people, but not to have almightye GOD lauded and honored, whose honor and
glory good men should specially seek to set forth and encreace both in
them selves and in their children.

The other cause is that men and women might by this Sacrament have a just and
good remedy against the sensual appetyte of the flesh, and to avoid the
sin of fornication, when they feared that they could not live otherwise
chastelye, whereof Saint Paul wrote to the Corynthians thus. It is good for a man not to touch his wife, i. Cor. vii.
yet for auoydinge of fornication, let every man have or use his own wife,
and let every wife have or use her own husband, and let the man pay his
debte to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband. For the wife has
not now power of her own body but her husband, and likewise the husband
has not power of his body but the wife: do not defraude one an other,
except it be for a time by mutual consent, to the intent ye might give and
apply your selves more freely to prayer, and so forth. So that these two
intentes, that is to say, the love to have children, and the hatred or
auoydinge of fornication, as they be the principal causes why this Sacrament
of Matrimony was ordained of God: so they ought to be the principal causes why
men and women should marrye together. For so shall they receive the graces
which God gives in marriage, and shall beautifye his church, and have great
help and furtherance toward their salvation. And contrary they that with
couetouse and lecherouse affections do join them selves in marriage, they
loose the grace of the Sacrament which they might have had, they dishonor
this holy Sacrament in making it a cloak and a defense for their noughty and
vicious intentes, and they bring them selves under the power of the devil,
who than is permitted to prevail against them.

Moreover good people, it is expedient when a man will marry for the causes
before rehearsed, that he diligently remember and consider the law of
Matrimonye. That is to say, how he shall bind him self to love his wife as
his own body, Ephesians. v.
and better than any other man, woman or child, in such sort as Christ
loves his Church, and did give him self to the death for it, to make it holy
and without spotte. And also the man ought not to be bitter and fell against
his wife in using brawlinges, chyding, or fightinge with her. Coloss. iii.
And that he must keep justly matrimonial chastity, and that he must forsake
to dwell with his father and mother and al other persons, for to be and dwell
with his wife, and that he ought also to cherishe, help, and comfort her, as
he would do his own person. For when he marieth, he and his wife be made one
body. And this love and kyndnesse the man must show his wife, not only the
first day, or the first year, or while she is young and has health, but he
must thus love her, and so much do for her always so long as he and she live
together, whatsoever sickness or chance comes to her, or what conditions so
ever she have. For though a man may for certain causes be from the company and
dwelling with his wife against her will, as if he can prove that his wife
has given the use of her body unto an other man and have not kept her
matrimonyall chastity, and so forth in some other cases: yet he can in no wise
break his marriage nor the bond of it and marry an other, Mat. i^*
nor he can not be discharged of the obligation and promise which he made to
love his wife and to do for her as much as for his own body and person,
always when his wife shall have need. These considerations and reme^braunces
ought every Christen man to have when he intends to marry, for what cause so
ever he marry. And likewise also when a woman will marrye, she must diligently
consider after what manner she must live with her husband, how she shall vow
and bind her self under the pain of damnation, to love her husband above
all men, and to worship him, and m^kely and gladly to obey him and fulfill
that he commands and desires her to do in all things which perteyne to
Gods law and the duty of marriage. And she must always keep her matrimonial
chastitye, and help and succor her husband in his ^ede as she would her
own person, and she must do al thing which she did vow and promise when she
was married. For the law of Matrymonye byndeth the woman to every thing
touching the duty of a wife, as it does the man concerning the duty of
an husband.

These things well considered on both the parties, shall be a great help and
prouocatyon that they shall study and labor most principally to join and
couple them selves vnt o persons which have abundance of virtues and good
conditions, more than for any other sinistre affection, saying nothing can
cause or make this matrimonyall love and agreement to be kept and continued
amongst married persons so much, as honest, equal, and like conditions shall do.

And where as the scripture says that a man may have an house and riches of
his parents, but a good and prudent wife is the gift of God: Prou. xix.
he ought before he shall marye most humbly to beg this good gift of
almightye God with long devout and continual prayers, as one special thing
whereupon rests his joy in this world, and by well using of that hope of joy
in the next world. And because marriage is an honorable thing as saint Paul
says: Heb. xiii.
let the^ have no evil affection nor do nothing that might dishonor it, but
before they celebrate ye same marriage let the^ prepare their haries with
fasting and other godly and spiritual exercises, to come worthily to such an
honorable Sacrament, and to do as becomes the children of holy people, and
not like Gentiles and heathen people which know not God, Tobie. viii
nor have no godlynes before their eyes. Last of al I shall exhort and
admonyshe you that be married, to use your marriage in such sort here in this
world, as it be no hynderaunce for you to come to the next world, Gregor.
pastor. cura part. iii. admonit. xxviii.
so to endeavor your self one to please an other, that ye do in no wise
displease GOD your creator, so to seek and do those things that be
temporal, that ye omytte not to seek and labor for those things which be
eternal, so to be glad of your present prosperity, that ye be not careless
without fear of eternal damnation, and so to be sorye for such adversity as
chances here, that ye be not void of sure and perfyte hope of eternal
felicity.

Let not the cares of this world so break and cast down your hearts, but
that the hope of heavenly and eternal joys may comfort and stay them
again. And also let not the flatteringe face of worldly wealth so inueigle
and deceive you, but that the fear of Gods eternal judgment may bridle
you and keep you in awe. For the minds of Godly married persons although they
be not able to forsake the cares of this world, and utterly to contempne
worldly things: yet ought they by their desires and godly affections to
join them selves to things eternal.

These good lessons Saint Paul knitteth v^ in a few words, ^. Cor. vii.
saying thus: The time is short and it remains that they which have wives
be as having no wives. As though he should say in longer process, that the
end of the world and the last judgment of God draws nere, Ambro. in
(...)* ^. Cor. vi^.
and so much the more ought every man to be careful how he shall appear and be
found at that judgment, and that the case of matrimonye is not like now to
us that be in the end of the world, as it was to the old fathers in the
beginning, for among them he was accounted and taken as accursed by the
sentence of the law that did not raise up seade in Israel, that dyed without
issue and children, Eccles. iii. (...)
for that was the time to increase and multiply Gods people, by which people it
was prophesied that the Prince and Savior of the world should be borne, and
for that cause the people of GOD did as much as they could apply them selves
to marriage whereunto they were kindled and moved not by concupiscence, but by
obedience, not for satisfyenge of their carnal lust, but for religion to obey
the law and to have fruit of their bodies: but now since that the fulness of
time is co^med, and the world draws toward an end, the case is altered.
For now says our savior Christ, in way of exhortation, Man. xix. August.
he that can take the gift of chastity and sole life let hem take it, since
which time, many that have that gift use it in deed, and he that will not
use it may not excuse him self that he has it not, and in case he be married
let him live and be as unmarried, having the same affection to continent life,
and the abstinence from the act of Matrimony, as Abraham and the old fathers
had, who than served not the lusts and desires of their flesh, but served the
law, the time of increase, and the ordinance of God, being slow and
forbearing to require, but sometimes content to pay their matrimonial debte,
and let him so take carnal comfort of his wife, that in no wise her love
wythdrawe him from seruinge of God, seeing he ought to love her in God and for
God. And therefore married persons be bounden, if any displeasant thing chance
among them, with patience to bear one an others burden, and so to fulfill the
law of Christ, Gala. v.
which is charity, seking to amend that is done amysse between them, rather
by discrete and loving admonition, than by furious and unkind correction,
which shall be a cause, that either party shall take heed and beware to do any
thing that might displease the other for very love and for fear of loosing the
others favor.

Thus have ye heard good people, for what cause men and women ought to enter
marriage, and partlye how to live in the same, to the pleasure of almighty God,
according to the example of al holy men, and the doctrine of our Savior
Christ, to whom with the father, and the holy ghost be all glory and honor,
world without end. Amen.

()

Of the sacrament of extreme Unction. Sermon. xxx.
Considering good people, that the life of man is but short, and passes away
like a shadow, and that death as it is most certain to come to every man, so
it is uncertain what time, or what hour it shall come, and also considering
that the devil our ghostly enemy, as he cease not all our life time, with
his crafty tentations to lay in wait for us to supplant us and to bring us to
deadly sin, and so to loose the favor of God our most merciful father: so
in the time of our infirmity when death approaches, then I say, is he most
busye and fearce to subvert us, and we also at that time lest able to
withstand him, our mind being the^ much alienated with the pain of our
dissease, and the heaviness of our body, which than draws toward corruption:
Therefore our Savior Christ, our most special helper and comforter in all
dystresses, has provided for us a singular and special good medicine which
is the Sacrament of extreme Unction, the virtue whereof is at that time of our
infirmity to comfort our souls which be wont to wax heavy for the
dyssolution of our bodies, and also to strengthen us with the grace of the
holy ghost, against the violent assaults and tentations of the devil, and
also to replenyshe our heart with gladness against the terror of death, and
finally to forgive us our daily trespasses, wherewith we have displeased his
Majesty, such I mean as this our transitorye life, considering our frayltie
and weakness can not be passed oouer without, and all this also is done with
the assistaunce of such godly and faithful prayers as the Priests of
Christ's Catholyke Church do make to almyghtye God for the sick man at the
ministration of this Sacrament of extreme Unction.

Of which Sacrament Saint Mark speaks in his syxte chapter, Mark. v^.
where it is written that our Savior Christ did send forth his disciples to
preach, prescribynge unto them what manner and form they should observe in
their progress, and then it follows that the disciples going abroad,
preached to the people to do penance, and they did cast forth many
deuylls, and they anointed with oil many sick persons, and they were made
holle, which thing they did not in their own name and power by presumption,
but in the power and name of Christ as he had prescribed and commanded the^
before to do. And because in the words of the Evangelist is set forth plainly
the visible sign of oil, and also the invisible effect of grace, annexed and
following thereupon: therefore the holy and universal church of Christ as the
practice of the same, and the consent of the ancient writers do witness,
understand and believe this sacrament to be then instituted of our Savior
Christ. Which thing the holy Apostle Saint James also delivering that to the
people, which he before had received of Christ, sets forth more at large,
writing thus: If any person be sick among you, let him call the Priests of
the church to be brought in, Jacob. v.
and let the^ pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of our Lord,
and the prayer of faith shall save the sick person, and our Lord shall relieve
him, and lift him up, and if he be in sins, they shall be forgeuen him. By
which words we be assured that God does assyst the ministration of this
Sacrament, and also we learn how it ought to be used in all points.

First he tells to whom it ought to be ministered, that is to say, to Christen
men or women such as have received the Sacrament of Baptism before, and not to
every one of them, but to such as be than visited by the hand of God with some
great sycknes of the body, and be in some peril of death, by reason of the
said syckenes, and not by any other outward violence of war or execution,
and not to young infantes that have no need of it, nor to such, as either for
young age, or for phrenesie lack the use of their reason, but to such as have
knowledge and have dominion over their own wills, and being in venial sin do
require the same either than or before, as it may be presumed by their former
will. So that it is every Christen man's duty to require this Sacrament with
humble request and with perfect hope to atteyn the grace and effect which is
given by the same.

Secondly, saint James expresses to whom it apperteyneth by office and duty
to be minister of this Sacrament, in that he wylleth the sick man to call for
the Priests of the church. For only Priests be appointed to be ministers
thereof, not as in their own name and authority, but in the name and
authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, so that the Priest in that doing does
bear and represent the person of Christ and his holy Church, who beside his
prayers, does minister the outward Sacrament of aueiling, and Christ inwardly
works the invisible grace of the same in the soul of the party aueyled, like
as he uses to do in all other sacraments.

Thyrdly, Saint James expresses both the matter or outward element of this
sacrament, and also the manner how to use it. The matter wherein it is
ministered is oil, which is a thing most convenient to declare the effects and
graces given by the same. The manner how to use it, is by prayer over the sick
person, and by anointing him in such places of his body, as were occasions, or
as it were windows, whereby sin is chiefly committed, as the places of our
five wits or senses. For by the eyes concupiscence, covetousness, and many
other vices enter into the soul: by the ears detraction, false reports, and
thereupon following anger and envy, and such like infect the soul: by the
nose, delitious life, and much other occasion of sin is ministered: by the
mouth both in tastyng, and also in speakinge that is against God and his
neighbor, a man often times does offend by the reins and other parts
thereunto adioyninge, carnal desires and concupiscence of the flesh is
accustomed to corrupt the soul, and finally by the hands and feet is
practysed much vice, the particulers whereof I need not to rehearse. For these
causes the sick person is anointed in the said places, at which time the
Priest and they that do than assist him, with sure faith and confidence in
almighty God, putting away all mystrust and doubt, make their most humble
prayer to his majesty, that it would please the same, through that unction as
a spiritual medicyne and his most merciful goodness to pardon and remit what
so ever the sick person has offended by his sight, or hearing or any other
part of his body above mentioned, with many other godly and wholesome prayers
thereunto annexed and used to be said and frequented in the church of Christ.
And thus to pray over the sick person and to aueyle him, is not the
invention of man, devised by man's wit, but according to Gods ordinance is
done in the name and authority of our Lord, who is the author of this
sacrament, as he is likewise of all the other, by whose assistaunce, and secret
operation this sacrament woorketh his spiritual and inward effect, which
effect Saint James last of al declares, saying: The prayer of faith shall save
the sick, and God shall relieve and lift him up, and if he be in sin, they
shall be forgyuen unto him. Which effect is double or two ways, the one
chief and principal is in purging and making clean the soul from daily and
venial sin, which never fails, if the sick party do not stop the
influence of Gods grace, which he may do by remayninge then in deadlye
sin, neglectinge to procure that to be forgyuen unto him before, by the
sacrament of Penance, or by mistrusting to receive that grace of God which is
signified and promised by that holy unction. Therefore ought every man and
woman being sick, first to confess him self and receive the Sacrament of
Absolution, then to receive the blessed food of immortality in the Sacrament
of the Aultare, for the perfection of Gods influence, and the increase of all
his former graces, and than afterward with sure faith and confidence in God,
require to be aneyled of the Priests of Christ's Church. And in so doing
beside the perfyte purgynge of his soul, he shall (no doubt of it) feel
inwardly great easement against the pains and horror of death, great strength
and comfort of the spirit, whereby like a good warrior and stout Champion of
Christ, he is then made more able to wythstande the vyolent tentations of the
devil, and fynallye great joy and gladness in him self, great stay and
increase of faith and hope toward God, and great desire to be delivered from
the myseryes of this transitorye world, and to be called to the eternal City
of God in the kingdom of heaven.

The other effect is the healyng of the body from corporal diseases, or at
lest the mitigation of the same. Which effect is not principal, and does not
always follow: partly for the smalnes of faith in the sick person (for great
and vehement faith is required to have Gods power to work such corporal
health in men,) partly for that God our most merciful father, according to
his heavenly wisdom, thinks it best for us other wise to dispose of us as he
knows to be most expedient for the salvation of our souls, or the commodity
of his elect people, whose benefit of corporal health, if it had been then
bestowed upon us, perchance the malice of our will would have abused it to the
offense of God, and the danger of dampnation to our souls.

Therefore in all such indifferent things, as be sycknes or health of body,
every Christian man ought to commit and refer it to the good will and pleasure
of almighty God, and to think and esteem that to be best, what so ever God
shall work by us, although it seem to be hurtful to us, or to be contrary
to our desires and petitions, which in all things (as he taught himself)
ought to be directed and submitted to his will and pleasure, who always of his
godly providence disposes all things swetelye and mercyfully. But how so
ever God shall work concerning our corporal health, we ought surely to
trust, that god for his part (if there be no stop in us) fails not to
work inwardlye in our souls the spiritual effects which I have rehearsed
before. And because there be two things which let the soul freelye to have
recourse to God, and to delight altogether in him, the one is that weakness and
feablenes which is left in the soul of man after the wound of deadlye sin,
although the gylte of the same be remytred by true penance, the other is, the
daily heapynge up of many venial sins, into which a man fa^leth by fraylnes
of nature, by sodeyne motions, by imperfection or coldness of charity, by
vehement agonies of sickness, or by negligence in not taking heed to himself,
his acts, and profession: For that cause to remove these two evils, God has
ordained this Sacrament of extreme Unction to be ministered, whereby the
weakness of the soul is strengthened, and all venyall sin remitted, if it be
well and devoutly received. And seeing a man must needs once depart hence, and
end the journey of this troublesome life, for so much as the soul is by the
flesh lode^, drawn back, infected, disquyeted, and weakened: therefore it
has need of a new strength and spiritual medicyne, specially at the
passage hence by death, that it neither fall, give over, or despair, but that
it be relieved, disburdened, pacified, comforted, and made able by the strength
of the holy ghost to abide with God, and by his aid to pass through the
miseries and trauails of this life, and to exchange the short and light
affections of this time, with the eternal and weyghty joys in the kingdom of
heaven. All which graces, as I said before, the soul of the sick person
receives and is endued withal, by the worthy and devout receipt of this holy
sacrament ordained of almighty God for the same purpose. Thus have ye heard
good people the meaning and effect of the doctrine of s. James concerning this
sacrament how it ought to be used, what grace and virtue is given to us
thereby, which to neglect and to defraude or deprive our selves of the
benefits thereof wylfullye: were great folly. For although it be not
absolutelye necessary to salvation, as is Baptism, without the which no man
ordinarylye can be saved, yet if it be despised and of contempt not regarded,
when it may be had, it is a let and stop to salvation. Wherefore I shall
exhort you all in the name of God, that when God by syckenes shall visit any
of you, ye follow the counsel of the holy ghost, uttered and expressed by the
writing of this holy Apostle Saint James, that ye call for the priests of the
Church, I mean the great universal Church of Christ, which is known
through out the world, in the communion whereof as members of the same church,
(to who^ only salvation is promised and prepared) see that ye require the
said Priests or Priest (if there be but one) to pray over you, and to aueyle
you in the name of the blessed Trinity. And do not differ this till the
vehemency of your sickness decay your speech and memory, as it is done
among many which peruersely use the Priests of the church as they use their
corporal phisicians, never sendinge for them, but in the extremes when they
can do them lest good. But seeing Saint James wills the sick person to
call or send for the priest, let him do that before his will, his senses, his
memory and understanding do fail him, when he is able to join with the
priest in prayer, and to protest the faith and trust he has in atteining the
grace and ^ffecte of this sacrament, to the intent he being inwardly armed and
strengthened with the same (in token whereof he is than anointed outwardlye
with the sacramental Oil) might the better withstand the force of the
devil and all his deceitefull tentations, who is than more busye as it were in
the extreme conflict to overthrow the soldier of Christ. And then no doubt of
it, almightye God who is true and faithful of his promise, will work the
effects of grace, whereof S. James here speaks, in that sick person as his
godly wisdom shall see most expedient for the soul health of that person,
specially if he than with humility, meekenes, and gladness of heart, with a
full hope and confidence in Gods mercy, do give and yield up his body and soul
with all the powers of the same unto his Lord god, his creator and redemer,
to be healed and ordered according to his good will by the mean of his holy
sacraments which he has ordained to be to us as spiritual medicines, whereby
the merits of his most blessed death and passion be ordinarylye applied to our
commodity.

And he that shall do thus, may cherefullye and with gladness of mind
depart this wretched world, with assurance and full trust to atteyne first the
promises of grace annexed to the worthy and fruitful receiving of his holy
Sacraments, and in the end to atteyne the crown of glory and life
everlasting, which Christ our Lord has promised to all them that shall love
and long for his coming, which he grant to us all, to whom with the father
and the holy ghost three persons and one God beall glory and honor world
without end. Amen.

(..)

Imprynted at London, by Robert Caly, within the precinct of Christ's
Hospital. The.x. of February. M.D.LVIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


