CERTAIN BOOKS OF VIRGILES Aenaeis turned into English meter by the right
honorable lord, Henry Earl of Surrey.

Apud Ricardum Tottel. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum..1557.

The second book of Virg: Aenaeis:
The gates cast up, we issued out to play,
The Grekish camp desirous to behold,
The places void and the forsaken costs.
Here Pyrthus band, there force Achilles pight:
Here rode their shipyes, there did their battles join.
Astonnied some the scathefull gift beheld,
Behight by vow unto the chaste Minerut:
All wondering at the hugeness of the horse.
And first of all Ti^ostes began advise,
Within the walls to lead and draw the same,
And place it eke amidde the palace court:
Whether of guile, or Troyes fate it would.
Tapys, with some of judgment more discrete,
wild it to drown, or underset with flame
The suspect present of the Greeks deceit,
Or bore and gage the hollow caves uncouth.
So diverse ran the giddy peoples mind.
Lo forme^t of a rout, that followd him,
Rindled laocoon hasted from the tower,
Trieng far of: Owreched citezens,
What so great kind of frenzy freteth you?
Deem ye the Greeks our enemies to be gone?
Or any Grekish gifts can you suppose
Deuoid of guile? Is so Ulysses known?
Either the Greeks ar in this timber hid:
Or this an engine is to anoy our walies,
To view our toures, and over whelme our town.
Here lurkes some craft. Good Troyans, give no trust
Unto this horse, for what so ever it be,
I dred the Greeks, yea when they offer gystes.
And with that word, with all his force a dart
He launced then into that crooked womb:
Which tremling stock, and shoke within the side.
Wherewith the caves began hollowly resound.
And but for ^aites, and forour blind forcast,
The Greeks devise and guile had he discried:
Troy yet had stand, and Priams toures so hie.
Therwyth behold, whereas the Phrigian herdes
Brought to the king, with clamor, all unknown
A yongman, bound his hands behind his back*
What willingly had yelden prisoner,
To frame his guile, and open Troyes gates.
Unto the Greeks: with courage fully bent,
And mind determed either of the rwaine,
To work his feat, or willing yield to death.
Nere him, to ge^e, the Troyan youth began flock,
And sl^aue who most might at the captive scorn.
The Greeks deceit behold, and by one proof
Imagine all the rest.
For in the preasse as he unarmed stood,
With troubled there, and Phrigian routes bes^^,
Alas (quod he) what carth now, or what seas
May me receive? Catif, what restes me now?
For whom in Greece does no a bode remain:
The Trojans eke offended seek to wroke
Their heinous wrath with shedyng of my blood.
With this regrete our hearts from rancor moved,
The brute appeas^e we askte him of his birth,
What news he brought, what hope made him to yield.
Then he (al dred removed) thus began.
O King: I shall, what ever me betide,
Say but the truth: ne first will me deny
A Grecian borne. sor though for time has made
Sinon a wretch, she can not make him false.
If ever came unto your cares the name
Nobled by fame of the sage Palamede,
Whom traitrously the Greeks condemd to dye,
Giltlesse by wrongful dome, for that he did
Dyssuade the wars: whose death they now lament:
Un^erneth him my father bare of wealth
Into his band young, and nere of his blood,
In my prime years unto the war me sent.
While that by fa^e his state in stay did stand,
And when his realm did flourish by advise,
Of glory then we bare some fame and brute.
But sins his death, by false Ulyssez slight
(I speak of things to all men well beknown)
A drery life in doleful plaint I led,
Repining at my gyltlesse friends mischaunce.
Ne could I fool refre^ my tongue from thretes:
That if my chance were ever to return
(...) to Arge, to follow my revenge*
With such sharp words procured I great hate.
Here sprang my harm. Ulysses ever sith
With new ^ound crimes began me to affray:
In common cares false rumors began he sow:
Weapons of wreke his gylty mind began s^ke:
Ne rested ay, till he by Calchas mean.
But whereunto these thanklesse tales in vain
Do I rehearse, and lingre fourth the time?
In like estate if all the Greeks ye price:
It is enough ye here: rid me at ones.
Ulysses (Lord) how he would this reioise?
Yea and either Atride would bye it dear.
This kindled us more egre to enquire,
And to demand the cause: without suspect
Of so great mischef thereby to ensue.
Or of Greeks craft. He then with forged words,
And quiuering li^mes, thus took his tale again.
The Greeks often times e^tended their return,
From Troy town, with long wars all ytired,
For to dislodge: which would god they had done.
But often the winter ^orms of raging seas,
And often the bo^steous winds did them to stay:
And chiefly when of clinched ribs of fur
This horse was made, the storms rored in the air.
Then we in don't to Phoebus temple sent
Euripilus, to wete the prophesye:
From whens he brought these woeful news again:
With blood (O Greeks) and slaughter of a maid
Ye pleased the winds, when first ye came to Troy:
With blood likewise ye must seek your return.
A Grekish soul must offered be therefore,
But when this sound had pearst the peoples ears,
With sodem fere astonished were their minds,
The chilling cold did ouerrunne their bones,
To whom that fate was shapte, whom Phoebus would*
Ulysses then amid the preasse bringes in
Calchas with noise, and wild him to discuss
The Gods intent. Then some began deem to me*
The cruel wrek of him that framde the craft:
Foreseing secretly what would ensue.
In silence then, yshrowding him from sight
B^t days twice ^iue he whisted, and refused
To death by speech to further any wight.
At last, as forced by false Ulyssez cry,
Of purpose he brake fourth, assigning me
To the altar: whereto they granted all:
And that, that erst each one dred to himself,
Returned all unto my wretched death.
And now at hand drew nere the woeful day:
All things preparde wherwyth to offer me,
Salt, corn, fillets my temples for to bind.
I scapte the death (I grant) and brake ye bands,
And lurked in a marrise all the night*
Among the ooze, while they did set their sails:
I fit so be that they in deed so did.
Now restes no hope my native land to see,
My children dear, nor long desired sire:
On whom parchaunce they shall wreke my escape:
Those harmless wights shall for my fault be slain.
Then by the gods, to whom al truth is known:
By faith vnfiled, if any any where
With mortal folk remains: I thee beseech
O King thereby, rue on my trauailgreat:
Pity a wretch that giltlesse suffers wrong.
Life to these teres, with pardon ekewe grant.
And Priam first himself commaundes to loose
His gyues, his bands: and friendly to him said.
Whosoever thou art, learn to forget the Greeks.
Hencefourth be ours, and answer me with truth*
Whereto was wrought the mass of this huge horse?
Whoes the devise? and whereto should it tend?
What holly vow? or engine for the wars?
Then he, instruct with wiles and Grekish craft,
His loosed hands lift upward to the sterrs*
Ye everlasting lamps I testifye,
Whoes power divine may not be violate:
Thaltar, and swerd (quod he) that I have escaped:
Ye sacred bands, I wore as yelden host:
Leful be it for me to break mine oath
To Greeks, lefull to hate their nation,
Lefull be it to sparcle in the air*
Their secrets all, what so they keep in close*
For free am I from Greece, and from their laws.
So be it, Troy, and saved by me from scathe,
Keep faith with me, and stand to thy behest,
If I speak truth, and opening things of weight
For grant of life requite thee large amends.
The Greeks whole hope of undertaken war
In Pallas help consisted evermore.
But since the time that wicked Diomede.
Ulysses eke that forget of all guile,
A^^enturde from the holly sacred fane
For to bereue dame Pallas fatal form,
And slew the watches of the chefest toure,
And then away the holly statue stale,
That were so bold with hands embrued in blood,
The virgin Goddess veites for to defile:
Since that, their hope began fail, their hope to fall
Their power appeir, their Goddess grace wtdraw.
Which with no doutfull signs she did declare.
Scarce was the statue to our tents ybroughte,
But she began stare with spar^led eyes of flame:
Along her li^mes the salt sweat trickled down:
Yea thrice her self (a hideous thing to tell)
In glaunces bright she glittered from the ground,
Holding in hand her ^arge and quiuering spear.
Calchas by sea then bad us have our flight:
Whoes engines might not break the walls of Troy,
Unless at Greece they would renew their lottes,
Restore the god that they by sea had brought
In warped keles. To Arge since they be come,
They pease their godds, and war afresh prepare:
And cross the seas unlooked for eftsoon
They will return. This order Calchas set.
This figure made they for thagreued god,
In Pallas stead, to cleanse their heinous fault.
Which mass he willed to be reared hye
Toward the skies, and ribbed all with oak:
So that your gates, ne wall might it receive,
Ne yet your people might defensed be
By the good zele of old devotion.
For if your hands did Pallas gift defile,
To Priams realm great mischef should befal^:
(Which fate the Gods first on him self return)
But had your own hands brought it in your town,
Asle should pass, and carry offered war
In Greece even to the walls of Pelops town,
And we and ours that destenie endure.
By such like wiles of Sinon the for sworn
His tale with us did purchase credit: some
Trapt by deceit, some forced by his teres,
Whom neither Diomede, nor great Achille,
Nor ten years war, ne a thousand sail could daunt.
Us caitifes then a far more dredful chance
Befell, that trobled our unarmed breasts.
Whiles Laocon, that chosen was by lot
Neptunus priest, did sacrifice a bull
Before the holy Altar, suddenly
From Tenedon behold in circles great
By the calm seas come fletyng adders twain,
Which plied toward the shore (I loathe to tell)
With rered breast lift up above the seas:
Whoes bloody crestes aloft the waves were seen:
The hinder part swa^me hidden in the flood:
Their grisly backs were linked manifold:
With sound of broken waves they gate the strand,
With gloing eyes, tainted with blood and fire:
Whoes waltring tongs did lick their hissing mouths.
We fled away, our face the blood forsook.
But they with gate direct to Lacon ran.
And first of all each serpent does enwrap
The bodies small of his two tender sons:
Whoes wretched li^mes they byt, and fed thereon.
Then raught they him, who had his wepon caught
To rescue them, twice winding him about,
With folded knottes, and circled tails, his wast.
Their scaled backs did compass twice his neck,
With rered heddes aloft, and stretched throtes.
He with his hands straue to unloose the knottes:
Whose sacred fillettes all be sprinkled were
With filth of gory blod, and venim rank.
And to the sterres such dreadful shoutes he sent,
Like to the sound the roaring bull fourth loowes,
Which from the halter wounded does astart,
The swaruing are when he shakes from his neck.
The seryentes twine with hasted traile they glide
To Pallas temple, and her towers of heighte:
Under the ^^^te of which the Goddess stern.
Hidden behind her targertes bosse they crept.
New gripes of dred then pearse our trembling breasts.
They said Lacons deserts had derely bought
His heinous deed, that pierced had with stele
The sacred bulk, and thrown the wicked lance:
The people cried with fondry greeing shoutes,
To bring the horse to Pallas temple bl^ue,
In hope thereby the Goddess wrath tappease
We cleft the walls, and closures of the town.
Whereto all help, and underset the feet
With sliding rolls, and bound his neck with ropes.
This fatal gin thus ouerclambe our walls,
Stuffed with armd men: about the which there ran
Children, and maids, that holly carolles sang.
And well were they whoes hands might touch the cords.
With thretning chere thus slided through our town
The subtle tree, to Pallas temple ward:
O native land, Ilion, and of the Gods
The mansion place. O warrlik walls of Troy.
Fowr times it stopped in thentrie of our gate:
Fowr^imes the harness clattred in the womb.
But we go on, unsound of memory,
And blinded eke by rage persevere still.
This fatal monster in the fane we place
Cassandra then, inspired with Phoebus sprite,
Her prophets lips yet never of us leeued
Disclosed eft, forespeking things to come.
We wretches lo, that last day of our life,
With bows of fest the town, and temples deck.
With this the sky began whirle about the sphere:
The cloudy night began thicken from the sea,
With mantells spread that cloked earth and skies,
And eke the treason of the Grekish guile.
The watchemen lay dispersed, to take their rest,
Whoes werried limes sound sleep had then oppressed:
When well in order comes the Grecian fleet,
From Tenedon toward the costs well known,
By friendly silence of the quiet moon.
When the kings ship put fourth his mark of fire,
Sinon, preserved by froward destiny,
Let fouth the Greeks enclosed in the womb,
The closures eke of pine by stealth vnpind.
Whereby the Greeks restored were to air.
With joy down hasting from the hollow tree.
With cords let down did slide unto the ground
The great captains, Sthenel, and Thesander,
The fierce Ulisses, Athamas and Thoas,
Machaon first, and then King Menolac,
Opeas eke that did the engine forge.
By cords let fall fast began they slide adown:
And straight invade the town yburied then
With wine, and sleep. And first the watch is sla^n,
Then gates unfold to let their fellows in*
They join them selves with the coniured bands.
It was the time, when granted from the godds
The first sleep crepes most sweet in weary folk.
Lo in my dream before mine eyes, me thought,
With rufull chere I saw where Hector stood:
Out of whoes eyes there gushed streams of tears,
Drawn at a cart as he of late had be*
Distained with bloody dust, whoes fect were bowl^^
With the straight cords wherewith they haled him
^y me. what one* that Hector how unlike,
Which erst returned clad with Achilies spoils:
Or when he threw into the Grekish ships
The Crotan flame? So was his beard defiled,
His crisped locks al clustred with his blood:
With all such wounds, as many he received
About the walls of that his native town.
Whom franckly thus, me thought, I spoke unto,
With bitter teres and doleful deadly voice,
O Troyan light, O only hope of thme:
What lettes so long thee staid? or from what costs.
Our most desired Hector, do thou come?
Whom after slaughter of thy many srends,
And trauail of the people, and thy town,
Alweried (lord) how gladly we behold.
What sorry chance has staind thy lively face*
Or why see I these wounds (alas) so wide?
He answeard naught, nor in my vain demaundes
Abode: but from the bottom of his breast
Sighing he said: flee, flee, O Goddess son,
And save thee from the fury of this flame.
Our enmies now ar masters of the walls:
And Troy town now falls from the top.
Suffices that is done for Priams reign.
If force might serve to succor Troy town,
This right hand well might have been her defense.
But Troy now commends to thy charge
Her holy relics, and her privy Gods.
Them join to thee, as fellows of thy fate.
Large walls rere thou for them. For so thou shall,
After time spent in thouerwandred flood.
This said, he brought fourth Uesta in his hands,
Her fillettes eke, and everlasting flame.
In this mean while with diverse plaint the town
Throughout was spread: and louder more and more
The din resouned: with rattling of arms
(Although nime old father Anchisez house
Removed stood, with shadow hid of trees)
I waked: therewith to the honse top I clambe,
And harkning stood I: like as when the flame
Lights in the corn, by drift of boisteous wind:
Or the swift stream, that drives from the hill,
Roots up the feldes, and presses the ripe corn,
And plowed ground, and ouerwhelmes the grove,
The silly herdman all astonnied stands,
From the hye rock while he does here the sound.
Then the Greeks faith, then their deceit appeared
Of Deiphobus the palace large and great
Fell to the ground, all ouerspred with flash.
His next neighbor Ucalegon afire:
The Sygean seas did glister all with flame.
Upsprang the cry of men, and trompettes blast.
Then as distraught I did my armure on:
Ne could I tell yet whereto arms auailde.
But with our feres to throng out from the preasse
Toward the toure our hearts brent with desire:
Wrath pricked us fourth: and unto us it seemed
A semely thing to dye armd in the feld.
Wherewith Panthus, scapte from the Grekish darts,
Ot^^us son, Phoebus pressed, brought in hand
The sacred relics, and the vanquished Gods:
And in his hand his little nephew led.
And thus as phrentik to our gates he ran:
Panthus (quod I) in what estate stand we?
Or for refuge what fortress shall we take?
Scarce spoke I this: when wailing thus he said.
The later day and fate of Troy is come,
The which no plaint or prayer may avail.
Troyans we were, and Troy was sometime,
And of great fame the Teucrian glory erst:
Fierce Joue to Greece has now transposed all.
The Greeks ar Lords over this fired town.
Yonder huge horse, that stands amid our walls,
Sheds armed men. And Sinon victor now,
With scorn of us, does set all things on flame.
And rushed in at our unfolded gates
Are thousands more* than ever came from Greece.
And some with weapons watch the narrow streets,
With bright swerdes drawn to slaughter ready bent.
And scarce the watches of the gate began
Them to defend, and with blind fight resist.
Through Panthus words, and lightning of the Gods,
Amid the flame and arms ran I in preasse:
As fury guided me, and where as I had heard
The cry greatest, that made the air resound.
Into our band then fell old Iphytus,
And Rypheus, that met us by moonelight.
Dymas and Hypanis joining to our side,
With young Chorebus Mygdonius son:
Which in those days at Troy did ariue
Burning with rage of dame Cassandraes love,
In Priams aid and rescue of his town:
Unhappy he that would no credit give
Unto his spouses words of prophecy.
Whom when I saw assembled in such wise,
So desperately the battle to desire:
Then furthermore thus said I unto them.
O ye yongmen of courage stout in vain:
For naught ye strive to save the burning town.
What cruel fortune has betid, ye see.
The Gods out of the temples all ar fled,
Through whoes might long this empire was mainteind:
Their altares eke are left both wast and void.
But if your will be bent with me to prove
That uttermost, that now may us befall:
Then let us dye, and run amid our foes.
To vanquished folk despeir is only hope.
With this the yongmens courage did increase:
And through the dark, like to the raueuing wolves,
Whom raging fury of their empty mawes
Drives from their den, leaving with hungry throtes
Their whelps behind, among our foes we ran,
Upon their swerdes unto apparent death.
Holding always the chief street of the town*
Couerd with the close shadows of the night.
Who can express the slaughter of that night?
Or tell the number of the corpses slain?
Or can in teres bewail them worthily?
The ancient famous city falls down,
That many years did hold such seignorie.
With senseless bodies every street is spread,
Each palace, and sacred porch of the Gods.
Nor yet alone the Troyan blood was shed.
Manhod often times into the vanquished breast
Returns, whereby some victors Greeks ar slain.
Cruel complaints, and terror every where,
And plenty of grisly pictures of death.
And first with us Androgeus there met,
Fellowed with a swarming rout of Greeks:
Deming us, unware, of that feloship:
With friendly words whom thus he called unto.
Have ye my friends: what sloth has tarried you?
Your feers now sack, and spoil the burning Trop,
From the tall ships where ye but newly come.
When he had said, and heard no answer made
To him again whereto he might give trust:
Finding himself chanced amid his foes.
Mazde he withdrew his foot back with his word:
Like him that, wandering in the bushes thick.
Tredes on the adder with his rechlesse foot.
Rered for wrath swelling her speckled neck
Dismayed, geues back a^ suddenly for fere.
Androgeus so feared of that sight stepped back.
And we began rush amid the thickest rout:
When h^re and there we did them overthrow,
Stricken with dred, unskillful of the place.
Our first labor thus lucked well with us.
Chorebus then encouraged by his chance,
Rejoicing said: Hold fourth the way of health
(My feers) that hap, and manhod has us taught.
Change we our shields: the Greeks arms do we on.
Craft, or manhod, with foes what reckes it which.
The stain to us their armure they shall yield.
And with that word Androgeus crested helm,
And the rich arms of his shield did he on:
A Grekish swerd he girded by his side.*
Like gladly Dimas* and Ripheus did.
The whole youth began them clad in the new spoises.
Mingled with Greeks for no good luck to us
We went, and gave many onsets that night.
And many a Greek we sent to Plutoes court.
Other there fled and hasted to their ships.
And to their costs of sauegard ran again.
And some there were, for shameful cowardrie.
Clambe up again^ unto the hugie horse,
And did them hide in his welknowen womb.
Ay me, bootelesse it is for any whight
To hope on ought* against will of the Gods.
Lo where Cassandra, Priams daughter dear,
From Pallas chirch was drawn with sparkled tresse.
Lifting in vain her fia^ing eyes to heaven:
Her eyes: for fast her tender wrestes were bound.
Which sight Chorebus raging could not bear,
Recklesse of death: but thrust amid the throng:
And after we through thickest of the swerdes.
Here were we first ybatred with the darts
Of our own feers, from the hye temples top.
Whereby of us great slaughter did ensue,
Mistaken by our Grekish arms and crestes.
Then flockt the Greeks, moved with wrath, and ire
Of the Uirgin from them so rescued:
The fell A^ax, and either A trides,
And the great band cleped the Tolopes.
As wrestling winds, out of dispersed whirl,
Befight themselves, the west with southern blast,
And gladsom East proud of Auroraes horse,
The woods do whiz: and fomy Nereus,
Raging in fury with threeforked mace
From bottoms depth does weltre up ye seas:
So came the Greeks. And such, as by deceit
We sparkled erst in shadow of the night,
And drove about our town, appeared first.
Our fained shields and wepons then they found,
And by sound our discording voice they knew.
We went to wreck* with number ouerlayd.
And by the hand of Peneleus first
Chorebus fell before the altar dead
Of armed Pallas, and Rypheus eke,
The iustest man among the Trojans all,
And he that best observed equity.
But otherwise it pleased now the Gods.
There Hipanis, and Dimas both were slain,
Through pierced with the weapons of their fee
Nor thee, Panthus, when thou wast ouerthrown,
Pity, nor zele of good devotion,
Nor habit yet of Phoebus hid from scathe.
Ye Troyan ashes, and last flames of mine,
I call in witness, that at your last fall
I fled no stroke of any Grekish swerd:
And if the fates would I had fallen in fight,
That with my hand I did deserve it well.
With this from thense I was recuiled back,
With I phytus, and Pelias alone,
I phytus weke and feeble all for age,
Pelias lamed by Ulissez hand.
To Priams palace cry did call us then.
Here was the fight right hideous to behold.
As though there had no battle ben but there,
Or slaughter made else where throughout the town.
A fight of rage and fury there we saw.
The Greeks toward the palace rushed fast,
And coverd with engines the gates beset.
And rered up ladders against the walls.
Under the windows scaling by their steps,
Fenced with sheldes in their left hands, whereon
They did receive the darts* while their righthands
Griped for hold them batel of the wall.
The Troyans on the the other part rend down
The turrets hye, and eke the palace roof:
With such weapons they shope them to defend,
Seeing al lost, now at the point of death.
The gilt sparres, and the beams then threw they down,
Of old fathers the proud and royal works.
And with drawn swerds some did beset the gates,
Which they did watch and keep in routes full thick.
Our sprites restorde to rescue the kings house.
To help them, and to give the vanquished strength.
A po^^ern with a blind wicket there was,
A common trade to pass through Priams house:
On the backside whereof wast houses stood.
Which way eftsithes, while that our kingdom dured,
Thinfortunate Andromache alone
Resorted to the parents of her make,
With young Astyanax his grandsire to see.
Here passed I up to the highest toure,
From whense the wretched Troyans did throw down
Darts spent in wast. Unto a turret then
We stepped: the which stood in a place aloft,
The top whereof did reach wellnere the sterres,
Where we were wont all Troy to behold,
The Grekish name, and their tents also.
With instruments of iron began we pick,
To seek where we might find the joining shronk
From that high scat: which we razed, and threw down.
Which falling gave fourthwith a rushing sound,
And large in breadth on Grekish routes it light.
But sone an other sort stepped in their stead.
No stone vnthrown, nor yet no dart vncast
Before the gate stood Pyrthus, in the porche,
Rejoicing in his darts, with glittring arms,
Like to the adder with venomous herbs fed,
Whom cold winter all boine hid under ground,
And shining bright when she her slough had slong
Her slipper back does roll with forked tongue,
And raised breast, lift up against the sun.
With that together came great Periphas,
Aut omedon eke that guided had sometime
A chilles horse, now Pyrrhus armure bare.
And eke with him the warlike Scyrian youth
Assay^d the house, and threw flame to the top.
And he an axe before the formest raught:
Wherewith he began the strong gates hew, and break.
From whens he bet the staples out of brass:
He brake the bars, and through the timber pearst
So large a hole, whereby they might discern
The house, the court, and secret chambers eke
Of Priamus, and ancient kings of Troy,
And armed foes in thentrie of the gate.
But the palace within confounded was
With wayling, and with rufull shrikes and cries.
The hollow halles did howl of women's plaint.
The clamor struck up to the golden sterres.
The frayd mothers, wandering through the wide house.
Embracing pillars, did them hold and kiss.
Pyrrhus assaileth with his fathers might,
Whom the closures ne kepers might hold out.
With often pushed ram the gate did shake.
The posts beat down removed from their hooks.
By force they made the way, and thentrie brake.
And now the Greeks let in, the formest slew:
And the large palace with soldiars began to fill.
Not so fercely does ouerflow the feldes
The foming flood, that brekes out of his banks:
Whoes rage of waters bears away what heaps
Stand in his way, the coats, and eke the herdes:
As in thentrie of slaughter furious
I saw Pyrrhus, and either Atrides.
There Hecuba I saw with a hundred more
Of her sons wives, and Priam at the altar,
Sprinkling with blood his flame of sacrifice.
F^^tie bed chambers of his childrens wives,
With loss of so great hope of his offspring,
The pillars eke proudly beset with gold,
And with the spoils of other nations.
Fell to the ground: and whatso that with flame
Untouched was, the Greeks did all possess.
Parcase you would ask what was Priams fate.
When of his taken town he saw the chance,
And the gates of his palace beaten down,
His foes amid his secret chambers eke:
Thold man in vain did on his sholders then,
Trembling for age, his curace long disused:
His bootelesse swerd he girded him about:
And ran amid his foes, ready to dye.
Amid the court under the heaven all bare
A great altar there stood, by which there grew
An old laurel tree bowing thereunto,
Which with his shadow did embrace the Gods.
Here Hecuba, with her young daughters all,
About the altar swarmed were in vain:
Like Doves, that flock together in the storm:
The statues of the Gods embracing fast.
But when she saw Priam had taken there
His armure, like as though he had been young:
What furious thought, my wretched spouse, (quod she)
Did move thee now such wepons for to weld?
Why hastest thou? This time does not require
Such succor, ne yet such defenders now.
No, though Hector my son were here again.
Come hither: this altar shall save us all:
Or we shall dye together. Thus she said.
Wherewith she drew him back to her, and set
The aged man down in the holy seat.
But lo Polites, one of Priams sons,
Escaped from the slaughter of Pyrthus,
Comes fleing through the wepons of his foes,
Searching all wounded the long galleries.
And the void courts: whom Pyrrhus all in rage
Followed fast, to reach a mortal wound:
And now in hand wellnere strikes with his spear.
Who fleing fourth, till he came now in sight
Of his parents, before their face fell down,
Yelding the ghost, with flowing streams of blood.
Priamus then, although he were half ded,
Might not keep in his wrath, nor yet his words:
But cries out: for this thy wicked work,
And boldness eke such thing to enterprise,
If in the heavens any justice be,
That of such things takes any care or keep,
According thanks the Gods may yield to thee,
And send thee eke thy just deserved hyre,
That made me see the slaughter of my child,
And with his blood defile the fathers face.
But he, by whom thou fainst thy self begot,
A chilles was to Priam not so stern.
For lo he, tendering my most humble suit,
The right, and faith, my Hectors bloodlesse corpse
Rendered, for to be laid in sepulture,
And sent me to my kingdom home again.
Thus said the aged man: and therewithal
Forcelesse he cast his weak unwieldy dart.
Which repu^st from the brass, where it gave dint,
Without sound hong vainly in the shieldes bosse.
Quod Pyrrhus, then thou shall this thing report.
On message to Pelide my father go:
Show unto him my cruel deeds, and how
Neoptolem is swarued out of kind.
Now shall thou dye, quod he. And with that word
At the altar him trembling began he draw,
Wallowing through the blodshed of his son:
And his lefthand all clasped in his hear,
With his right arm drew fourth his shining sword.
Which in his side he thrust up to the hilts.
Of Priamus this was the satal fine,
The woeful end that was allotted him.
When he had seen his palace all on fiame,
With ruin of his Troyan turrets eke,
That royal prince of A^ie, which of late
Reignd over so many peoples and realms,
Like a great stock now neth on the shore:
His head and sholders parred ben in twain:
A body now without renome, and same.
Then first in me entered the grisly fear.
Dismayed I was Wherewith came to my mind
The image eke of my dear father, when
I thus beheld the king of equal age
Yield up the sprite with wounds so cruelly.
Then thought I of Creusa left alone:
And of my house in danger of the spoil:
And the estate of young Julus eke.
I looked back to seek what number then
I might discern about me of my feeres.
But weried they had left me all alone.
Some to the ground were lopen from above:
Some in the flame their irked bodies cast.
There was no more but I left of them all:
When that I saw in Uestaes temple sit
Dame Helen, lurking in a secret place:
(Such light the flame did give as I went by,
While here and there I cast mine eyes about)
For she in dred* least that the Trojans should
Revenge on her the ruin of their walls,
And of the Greeks the cruel wrekes also,
The fur^e eke of her forsaken make,
The common bane of Troy, and eke of Greece,
Hareful she sat beside the altars hid.
Then boyld my breast with flame, and burning wrath,
To revenge my town unto such ruin brought.
With worthy peines on her to work my will.
Thought I: Shall she pass to the land of Spart
All safe, and see Mycene her native land,
And like a Duene return with victory
Home to her spouse, her parents, and children,
Followed with a train of Troyan maids,
And served with a band of Phrigian slaves,
And Prtam eke with iron murdered thus,
And Troy town consumed all with flame,
Whoes shore nath ben so ost forbathed in blood?
No no: for though on women the revenge
Unsemely is, such conquest has no fame:
To give an end unto such mischief yet
My just revenge shall merit worthy praise,
And quiet eke my mind, for to be wroke
On her which was the causer of this flame,
And satisfy the under of my feers.
With furious mind while I did argue thus,
My blessed mother then appeard to me,
Whom erst so bright mine eyes had never seen,
And with pure light she glistred in the night,
Disclosing her in form a Goddess like,
As she does seem to such as dwell in heaven.
My right hand then she took, and held it fast,
And with her rosy lips thus did she say.
Son, what fury has thus provoked thee
To such untamed wrath? what ragest thou?
Or where is now become the care of us?
Wilt thou not first go see where thou have left
Anchises thy father fordone with age?
Does Creusa live, and Ascanius thy son?
Whom now the Grekish bands have round beset:
And, were they not defensed by my cure,
Flame had them raught and enmies swerd ere this.
Not Helens beauty hateful unto thee,
Nor blamed Parts yet, but the Gods wrath
Reft you this wealth, and overthrew your town*
Behold (and I shall now the cloud remove,
Which ouercast thy mortal sight does dim,
Whoes moisture does obscure allthinges about:
And fere not thou to do thy mothers will,
Nor her advise refuse thou to perform.)
Here where thou see the turrets over thrown,
Stone bet from stone, smoke rising mixed with dust,
Neptunus there shakes with his mace the walls,
And eke the loose foundations of the same,
And over whelms the whole town from his seat:
And cruel Juno with the formest here
Does keep the gate that Scea cleped is,
Nere wood for wrath, whereas she stands, and calls
In harness bright the Greeks out of their ships.
And in the turrets hye behold where stands
Bright shining Pallas, all in warlike wede,
And with her shield where Gorgons head apperes:
And Jupiter my father distributes
Auayling strength, and courage to the Greeks.
Yet ouermore, against the Troyan power,
He does provoke the rest of all the Gods,
Flee then my son, and give this trauail end.
Ne shall I thee forsake, in sauegard till
I have thee brought unto thy fathers gate.
This did she say: and therewith began she hide
Herself in shadow of the close night.
Then dreadful figures began appear to me,
And great Gods eke agreued with our town.
I saw Troy fall down in burning gledes,
Neptunus town clean razed from the soil:
Like as the elm forgrown in mountains hye,
Round hewn with are, that husbandmen
With thick assaults strive to tear up, does threat*
And hackt beneath trembling does bend his top,
Till yold with strokes, giving the latter crack,
Rent from the height, with ruin it does fall.
With this I went, and gurded by a God
I passed through my foes, and eke the flame:
Their wepons, and the fire eke gave me place.
And when that I was come before the gates,
And ancient building of my fathers house:
My father, whom I hoped to convey
To the next hills, and did him thearto treat,
Refused either to prolong his life,
Or bide exile after the fall of Troy.
All ye (quod he) in whom young blood is fresh,
Whose strength remains entier and in full power,
Take ye your flight.
For if the Gods my life would have proroged,
They had reserved for me this wonning place.
It was enough (alas) and eke to much,
To see the town of Troy thus razed ones,
To have lived after the city taken.
When ye have said, this corpse laid out forsake.
My hand shall seek my death, and pity shall
Mine enmies move, or else hope of my spoil.
As for my grave, I wey the loss but light:
For I my years disdainful to the Gods
Have ^^ngred fourth, unable to all needs,
Sins that the sire of Gods and king of men
Struck me with thonder, and with leuening blast.
Such things he began rehearse, thus firmly bent.
But we besprent with teres, my tender son,
And eke my sweet Creusa, with the rest
Of the household, my father began beseech,
No^ so with him to perish all at ones,
Nor so to yield unto the cruel fate.
Which he refused, and stack to his intent.
Driven I was to harness then again,
Miserably my death for to desire.
For what advise or other hope was left?
Father, thoughtst thou that I may ones remove
(Quod I) a foot, and leave thee here behind?
May such a wrong pass from a fathers mouth?
If Gods will be, that nothing here be saved
Of this great town, and thy mind bent to join
Both thee and thine to ruin of this town:
The way is plame this death for to atteine.
Pyrrhus shall come besprent with Priams blood,
That gored the son before the fathers face,
And slew the father at the altar eke.
O sacred mother was it then for this,
That you me led through flame and wepons sharp,
That I might in my secret chaumber see
Mine enmies: and Ascanius my son,
My father, with Creusa my sweet wife,
Murdered alas the one in thothers blood?
Why servants then, bring me my arms again.
The latter day us vanquished does call.
Render me now to the Greeks sight again:
And let me see the fight begone of new.
We shall not all vnwroken dye this day.
About me then I girt my swerd again,
And eke my shield on my left sholder cast,
And bent me so to rush out of the house.
Lo in my gate my spouse clasping my feet,
Foregainst his father young Julus set.
If thou wilt go (quod she) and spill thy self,
Take us with thee in all that may betide.
But as expert if thou in arms have set
Yet any hope, then first this house defend,
Whearas thy son, and eke thy father dear,
And I sometime thine own dear wife, ar left.
Her shrill loud voice with plaint thus filld the house,
When that a sodein monstrous matuel sell.
For in their sight, and woeful parents arms,
Behold a light out of the butten sprang
That in tip of Julus cap did stand:
With gentle touch whoes harmless flame did shine,
Upon his heat, about his temples spread.
And we afraid trembling for dreadful fere
bet out the fire from his blasing tresse,
And with water began quench the sacred flame.
Anchises glad his eyes lift to the sterres:
With hands his voice to heaven thus he bent.
If by prayer, (alnughty Jupiter),
Inclined thou may be, behold us then
Of ruth: at least if we so much deserve.
Grant eke thine aid sather, confirm this thing.
Scarce had the old man said, when that the heuens
With fodein noise thondred on the left hand.
Out of the sky by the dark night there fell
A blasing sterre, dragging a brand or flame:
Which with much light gliding on the house top
In the forest of Ida hid her beams.
The which full bright cendleing a furrow shone,
By a long tract appointing us the way.
And round about of brimstone rose a fume.
My father vanquist, then beheld the skies,
Spoke to the Gods, and tholly sterre adored
Now, now (quod he) no longer I abide.
Fellow I shall where ye me guide at hand.
O native Gods, your family defend
Preserve your live. this warning comes of you,
And Troy stands in your protection now
Now give I place, and wherso that thou go
Refuse I not my son, to be thy feer.
This did he say: and by that time more clear
The cracking flame was heard throughout the walls,
And more and more the burning heat drew nere.
Why then have done, my father dear, (quod I)
Bestride my neck fourth with, and sit thereon,
And I shall with my sholders thee susteme:
He shall this labor do me any dear.
What so bet^de, come peril, come welfare,
Like to us both and common there shall be.
Young Julus shall be are me company:
And my wife shall follow far of my steps,
Now ye my servants, mark well what I say.
Without the rown ye shall find, on an hill
An old temple there, stands whereas sometime
Worship was don to Ceres the Goddess.
Biside which grows an aged cipresse tree,
Preserved long by our forefathers zele.
Behind which place let us together mete.
And thou father receive into thy hands
The relics all, and the Gods of the land:
The which it were not lawful I should touch,
That come but late from slaughter and bloodshed,
Till I be washed in the running flood.
When I had said these words, my sholders broad,
And laid neck with garments began I spread,
And thereon cast a yellow lions skin,
And thereupon my burden I receive.
Young Julus, clasped in my right hand,
Follows me fast with vnegal pace:
And at my back my wife. Thus did we pass,
By places shadowed most with the night.
And me, whom late the dart which enemies threw,
Nor preasse of Argiue routes could make amazde,
Each whispring wind has power now to fray,
And every sound to move my doutfull mind:
So much I dred my burden, and my feer,
And now we began draw nere unto the gate,
Right well escapte the danger, as me thought:
When that at hand a sound of feet we heard.
My father then, gazing throughout the dark,
Cried on me: flee, son: they are at hand.
With that bright sheldes, and shene armours I saw,
But then I know not what unfriendly God
My trobled wit from me biraft for fere.
For while I can by the most secret streets,
Eschuing still the common haunted track,
From me catif alas bereued was
Creusa then my spouse, I wot not how:
Whether by fate, or missing of the way,
Or that she was by werinesse reteind.
But never sith these eyes might her behold:
Nor did I yet perceive that she was lost:
Ne never backward turned I my mind,
Till we came to the hill, whetas there stood
The old temple dedicate to Ceres.
And when that we were there assembled all,
She was only away deceiving us
Her spouse, her son, and all held compainie.
What God, or man ^^d I not then accuse,
Nere wood for ^re^or what more cruel chance
Did hap to me, in all Troies overthrow?
A scanius to my feeres I then betoke,
With Anchises and eke the Trojan Gods,
And left them hid within a valley deep.
And to the town I began me hye again,
Clad in bright arms, and bent for to renew
Auentures past, to search throughout the town,
And yield my head to perils ones again,
And first the walls and dark entry I sought
Of the same gate, whereat I issued out.
Holding backward the steps where we had come
In the dark night, loking all round about.
In every place the vgsome sightes I saw,
The silence self of night aghast my sprite,
From hense again I past unto our house,
If she by chance had been returned home.
The Greeks were there, and had it all beset
The wasting fire blown up by drift of wind,
Above the rooses the blazing flame sprang up:
The sound whereof with fury pearst the skies
To Priams palace and the Castle then
I made: and there at Junous sanctuair
In the void porches Phoenix, Ultsses eke,
Stern guardens stood watching of the spoil.
The richesse here were set rest from the brent
Temples of Troy: the table of the Gods,
The vessels eke that were of massy gold,
And vestures spoild, were gatherd all in heap:
The children orderly, and mothers pale for fright
Long ranged on a row stood round about.
So bold was I to show my voice that night,
With clepes and cries to fill the streets throughout,
With Creuse name in sorrow, with vain teres,
And often sithes the same for to repete.
The town restless with fury as I sought,
Thunlucky figure of Creusaes ghost,
Of stature more than wont, stood fore eyes.
Abashed then I woxe: therewith my hear
Began start right up: my voice stack in my throat:
When with such words she began my heart remove,
What helps to yield unto such furious rage,
Sweet spouse? quod she. Without will of the gods
This chanced not: ne lefull was for thee,
To lead away Creusa hense with thee.
The king of the hye heaven suffers it not.
A long exile thou art assigned to bear,
Long to furrow large space of stormy seas.
So shall thou reach at last Hesperian land,
Where Lidian Tiber with his gentle streme
Mildly does flow along the frutfull feldes.
There mirthful wealth, there kingdom is for thee,
There a kings child preparde to be thy make.
For thy beloved Creusa stint thy teres.
For now shall I not see the proud abodes
Of Myrinidons, nor yet of Dolopes;
Ne I a Troyan lady, and the wife
Unto the son of Uenus the Goddess,
Shall go a slave to serve the Grekish dames.
Me here the Gods great mother holds.
And now farewell: and keep in fathers breast
The tender love of thy young son and mine.
This having said she left me all in teres,
And minding much to speak: but she was gone;
And suttly fled into the weightlesse air.
Thrice raught* I with mine arms taccoll her neck:
Thrice did my hands vain hold thimage escape:
Like nimble winds, and like the flieng dream.
So night spent out, return I to my feers:
And there wondering I find together swarmd
I new number of mates, mothers, and men,
A rout exiled, a wreched multitude,
From each where flockke together, pressed to paste,
With heart and goods, to whatsoever land
By sliding seas me listed them to lead.
And now rose Lucifer above the ridge
Of iusty I Would, and brought the dawning light.
The Greeks held thentries of the gates beset:
Of help there was no hope. Then gave I place,
Took up my sire, and hasted to the h^ll.
The fowrth book of Virgiles Aenaeis.
BUt now the wounded Queen, with heavy care,
Throughout the veins she norisheth the play,
Surprised with blind flame, and to her mind
Ean eke resort the prowess of the man,
And honor of his race: while in her breast
Imprinted stack his words, and pictures form.
Ne to her limbs care grants quiet rest.
The next morrow, with Phoebus laump, the earth
Alightned clear: and eke the dawning day
The shadows dark began from the poale remove:
When all unsound her sister of like mind
Thus spoke she to: O sister Ann, what dreams
Be these, that me tormented thus afray?
What new guest, is this that to our realm is come?
What one of chere* how stout of heart in arms?
Truly I think (ne vain is my belefe)
Of Goddish race some offspring should he be:
Cowardry notes hearts swarued out of kind.
He driven (Lord) with how hard destiny:
What battles eke atchiued did he recount?
But that my mind is fixed immovably,
Never with wight in wedlock ay to join:
Since my first love me left by death disseuered,
If geniall brands, and bed me lothed not,
To this one gilt perchance yet might I yield.
Anne, for I grant, since wretched Sichees death
My spouse and house with brothers slaughter staind,
This only man has made my senses bend,
And pricked forth the mind, that began to slide,
Now feelingly I taste the steps of mine old flame,
But first I wish, the earth me swalow down:
Or with thunder the mighty Lord me send
To the pale gostes of hell, and darkness deep:
Ere I thee stain, shamefastnes, or thy laws
He that with me first coppled, took away
My love with him enjoy it in his grave.
Thus did she say, and with supprised tears
Ba^^ed her breast. whereto Anne thus replied:
Olister, dearer beloved then the light:
They youth alone in plaint still will thou spill?
Ne children sweet, ^e Uenus gifts wilt know?
Cinders (think thou) mind this? or graued ghostes?
Time of thy doole thy spouse new dead, I grant,
None might thee move: no not the Libian king
Nor yet of Tire Jarbas set so light:
And other princes mo: whom the rich soil
Of afric breeds, in honors triumphant,
Will thou also gainstand thy liked love
Comes not to mind upon whoes land thou dwelst,
On this side, lo the Getule town behold,
A people bold unvanquished in war,
Eke the undaunted Numides compass thee
Also the Sirtes, unfriendly harbroughe:
On the other hand, a desert realm for thrust
The Barceans, whose fury stretches wide.
What shall I touch the wars that move from Tire?
Or yet thy brothers threats?
By gods puruciaunce it blewe, and Junos help,
The Troiaynes ships (I think) to runn this course
Sister, what town shall thou see this become?
Through such allie how shall our kingdom rise?
And by the aid of Troiane arms how great?
How many ways shall Cartages glory grow?
Thou only now beseech the Gods of grace
By sacrifice: which ended, to thy house
Receue him: and forge causes of abode:
Whises winter frettes the seas, and watery Orion,
The ships shaken, unfriendly the season.
Such words enflamed the kindled mind with love,
Loosed al shame, and gave the doubtful hope,
And to the temples first they have and seek,
By sacrifice for grace, with Hogreles of two years
Chosen (as ought) to Ceres, that gave laws,
To Phoebus, Bachus, and to Juno chief,
Which has in care the bands of marriage.
Fair Dido held in her right hand the cup
Which twixt the horns of a white Cow she shed
In presence of the Gods passing before
The aulters fat, which she renewed o^t
With gifts that day, and beasts debowled:
Gasing for counsel on the entrales warm.
Ay me, vnsk^ifull minds of prophesy
Temples, or vows, what boot they in her rage?
A gentle flame the mary does devour:
Whiles in the breast the silent wound keeps life,
Unhappy Dido burns, and in her rage
Throughout the town she wandreth up and down:
Like the stricken Hind with shaft, in Crete
Throughout the woods which chasing with his darts
Aloof, the Shepherd smites at unawares
And leaves vnwist in her the thirling head:
That through the groves, and lands glides in her fight:
Amid whose side the mortal arrow sticks,
Aeneas now about the walls she leads,
The town prepared, and Cartsge wealth to show,
Offering to spea^k, an^d her voice, she whistes,
And when the day began fail, new feasts she makes
The Trotes trauales to hear a new she listes
Enraged al: and stareth in his face
That tells the tale. And when they were al gone:
And the dim move does eft withold the light:
And sliding stars provoked unto sleep:
Alone she mournes within her palace void;
And sets her down on her forsaken bed,
And absent him she hears, when he is gone,
And sees eke: often in her lap she holds
Ascanius, trapt by his fathers form;
So to begile the love cannot be told.
The turrettes now arise not, erst begone,
Neither the youth weldes arms, nor they auauncs
The ports: nor other mete defense for war.
Broken there hang the works and mighty frames
Of walls high raised, threatening the sky.
Whom as soon as Joues dear wife saw infect
With such a plage, ne fame resist the rage:
Saturnes daughter thus burdes Uenus then.
Great praise (quod she) and worthy spoils you win.
You and your son, great Gods of memory,
By both your wiles one woman to deuower.
Yet am not I deceived, that foreknew
Ye dread our walls, and bildinges began suspect
Of high Cartage. But what shall be the end?
Or whereunto now serves such debate?
But rather peace, and bridale bands knit we,
Since thou have speed of that, thy heart desired,
Dido does burn with love, rage fretes her boones
This people now as common to us both,
With equal favor let us govern then,
Lefull be it to serve a Trojan spouse:
And Tirianes yield to thy right hand in dowre.
To whom Uenus replied thus: that knew,
Her words proceeded from a fained mind,
To Libian coasts to turn thempire from Rome,
What wight so fond, such offer to refuse?
Or yet with thee had lever strive in war?
So be it fortune thy tale bring to effect,
But destenies I dout: least Joue nill grant,
That folk of Tire, and such as came from Troie,
Should hold one town: or grant these nations
Mingled to be, or joined ay in leage.
Thou at his wife: lefull it is for the
For to attempt his fancy by request:
Pass on before and follow the I shall?
Queen Juno then thus took her tale again:
This travail be it mine: but by what mean.
(Mark in few words I shall thee learn eftsoon)
This work in hand may now be compassed.
Aneas now, and wretched Dido eke
^o the forest, a hunting mind to wend,
To morn as soon as Titan shall ascend,
And with his beams has ouerspred the world,
And whiles the wings of youth do swarm about.
And whiles they raunge to over set the groves
A cloudie shower mingled with hail I shall
Pour down, and then with thonder shake the skies,
Thassemble scattered the mist shall cloak.
Dido a cave, the Troyan prince the same
Shall enter to: and I will be at hand.
And if thy will stick unto mine: I shall
In wedlock sure knit, and make her his own,
Thus shall the marriage be: to whose request
Without debate Uenus did seem to yield,
And smyled soft, as she that found the wyle,
Then from the seas, the dawning began arise,
The Sun once up, the chosen youth began throng
Out at the gates: the hayes so rarely knit,
The hunting staves with their brod heads of steel
And of Masile the horsemen fourth they brake
Of senting hounds a kenel huge like wise.
And at the threshold of her chaumber door,
The Carthage Lords did on the Queen attend.
The trampling steed with gold and purple trapt,
Chawing the fomte bit, there sercely stood.
Then issued she, awayted with great train,
Clad in a cloak of Tire embradred rich.
Her quyuer hung behind her back, her tresse
Knotted in gold, her purple vesture eke
Burned with gold, the Troyans of her train
Before her go with gladsom Julus.
Aencas eke the goodliest of the route
Makes one of them, and toyneth close the throngs:
Like when Apollo leaves Lycia,
His wintring place, and Xanthus floods likewise:
To viset Delos his mothers mansion:
Repairing eft and furnishing her quire
The Candians, and folks of Dr^opes,
With painted Agathyrsies shoute, and cry:
Enuironing the altars roundabout
When that he walks upon mount Cynthus top:
His sparkled tresse represt with garlandes soft
Of tender leaves, and trussed up in gold:
His quiuering darts clattring behind his back:
So fresh and lusty did Aeneas seem:
Such lordly port in present countenance.
But to the hills, and wild ho^tes when they came:
From the rocks top the driven savage rose,
Lo from the hill above on the other side,
Through the wide lawnds, they began to take their course
The hearts likewise, in troops taking their flight,
Raising the dust, the mountain fast forsake.
The child Julus, blithe of his swift steed
Amids the plain now pricks by them, now these:
And to encounter wishes often in mind
The foming Bore in steed of ferefull beasts,
Or Lion brown might from the hill descend.
In the mean while the skies began rumble sore:
In tail thereof, a mingled show^ with hayle.
The Tyrian folk, and eke the Troyans youth,
And Uenus nephew the cotage? for fear
Sought round about: the floods fell from the hills.
Dido a den, the Troyan prince the same,
Chanced upon. Our mother then the earth,
And Juno that has charge of marriage,
First tokens gave with burning gledes of flame,
And pr^^^e to the wedlock lightning skies:
And the Nymphs yelled from the mountains top.
Ay me, this was the first day of their mirth,
And of their harms the first occasion eke.
Respect of fame no longer her witholdes:
Nor museth now to frame her love by stelth.
Wedlock she calls it: under the pretense
Of which fair name she cloketh now her faut.
Forthwith Fame flich through the great Libian towns:
A mischefe Fame, there is none else so swift:
That moving grows, and flitting gathers force:
First small for dred, sone after climes the skies:
Stays on earth; and hides her head in clouds.
Whom our mother the earth, tempted by wrath
Of Gods, begat: the last sister (they write)
To Caeus, and to Enccladus eke,
Spedie of foot, of wyng likewise as swift,
A monster huge, and dreadful to descriue.
In every plume, that on her body sticks,
(A thing in deed much marvelous to hear)
As many waker eyes lurk underneath,
So many mouths to speak, and listening ears,
By night she flies amid the cloudie sky,
Shriking by the dark shadow of the earth,
Ne does decline to the sweet sleep her eyes.
By day she sits to mark on the house top,
Or turrets hye, and the great towns asraies.
As mindful of ill and lies as blasing truth.
This monster blithe with many a tale began sow
This rumor then into the common ears:
As well things don as that was never wrought:
As that there comen is to Tyrians court
Aeneas one outsprong of Troyan blood
To whom fair Dido would her self be wed.
And that the while the winter long they pass
In foul delight, forgetting charge of reign,
Led against honor with dishonest lust.
This in each mouth, the filthy Goddess spreds,
And takes her course to king Hiarbas straight
Kindling his mind: with tales she feeds his wrath,
Gotten was he by Ammon Jupiter
Upon the ^auisht Nymph of Garamant.
An hundred hugie great temples be built,
In his far stretching realms, to Jupiter.
Altars as many kept with waking flame,
Awatche always upon the Gods to tend.
The floores embrude with yielded blood of beasts,
And threshold spread with garlands of strange hue.
He wood of mind, kindled by bitter brute,
Tofore thaitars, in presence of the Gods,
With reared hands began humbly Joue entreat,
Almighty God whom the Moors nation
Fed at rich tables presents with wine,
See thou these things? or fear we thee in vain
When thou let fly thy thonder from the clouds?
Or do those flames with vain noise us affray?
A woman that wandering in our coasts has bought
A plot for price: where she a city set:
To whom we gave the strong for to manure.
And laws to rule her town: our wedlock lothed,
Has chose Aeneas to command her realm.
That Paris now with his unmanly sor^e,
With mitred hats, with oynted bush and beard:
His rape enioyth: whiles to thy temples we
Our offerings bring, and follow rumors vain,
Whom praing in such sort, and griping eke
The altars fast, the mighty father heard:
And writhed his look toward the royal walls
And lovers eke forgetting their good name,
To Mercury then gave he thus in charge.
Hense son in have, and call to thee the winds.
Slide with thy plumes, and tell the Troyan prince,
That now in Carthage loytreth, rechlesse
Of the towns granted him by desteny:
Swift through the skies, see thou these words convey.
His fair mother behight him not to us
Such one to beme therefore twyse him saved
From Grekish arms: but such a one
As mete might seem great Italy to rule
Dreedfull in arms, charged with seigniorie,
Showing in proof his worthy Teucrian race.
And under laws, the whole world to subdue,
If glory of such things naught him inflame:
Ne that he listes seek honor by some pain:
The towers yet of Rome being his sire
Does he envy to young Ascanius?
What minds he to frame? or on what hope
In enmies land does he make his abode?
Ne his offspring in Italy regardes?
Ne yet the land of Lauin does behold?
Bid him make sail: have here the sum and end
Our message thus report. When Joue had said
Then Mercury began, bend him to obey
His mighty fathers will: and to his heels
His golden wings he knits, which him transport
With a light wind above the earth, and seas.
And then with him his wande he took, whereby
He calls from hell pale gostes: and other some
Thither also he sends comfortless.
Whereby he forces sleeps and them berenes,
And mortal eyes he closes up in death:
By power whereof he drives the winds away.
And passes eke amid the troubled clouds.
Till in his flight he began descrie the top.
And the stepe flanks of rocky Atlas hill:
That with his crown susteines the welkin up:
Whose head forgrowen, with pine, circled always,
With misty clouds, beaten, with wind and storm:
His shoulders spread with snow, and from his chin
The springes descend: hisbeard frosen with yse.
Here Mercury with equal shining wings
First touched, and with body headling bette:
To the water thend took he his descent,
Like to the foul, that endlong costs and strondes
Swarming wi^h fysh, flies sweping by the sea:
Cutting betwixt the winds and Libian lands,
From his graundfather by the motl ers side,
Cillenes child so came, and then alight
Upon the houses with his winged feet.
To fore towers, where he Aeneas saw
Fcundacions cast arering lodges new.
Girt with a sweard of Jasper starry bright:
A shining parel flameed with stately eye
Of Tirian purple hong his shoulders down
The gift and work of wealthy Didoes hand
Stripped throughont with a thin thread of gold,
Thus he encounters him: Oh careless wight
Both of thy realm, and of thine own affairs:
A wifebound man now do thou rear the walls
Of high Cartage, to build a goodly town.
From the bright skies the ruler of the Gods
Sent me to thee, that with his beck commaundes
Both heaven and earth: in have gave me charge
Through the light air: his message thee to say.
what framest thou? or on what hope thy time
In idleness does wast in Afric land?
Of so great things, if naught the fame thee stir,
Ne list by travail honor to pursue:
Ascanus yet, that waxes fast behold,
And the hope of Juius seed thine heir:
To whom the realm of Italy belonges,
And soil of Rome. When Mercury had said:
Amid his tale far of from mortal eyes
Into light air, he vanished out of sight.
Aeneas with that vision stricken down,
Well nere bestraught, vpstart his hear for dread,
Amid his throtal his voice likewise began stick.
For to depart by night he longs now,
And the sweet land to leave, astoined sore
With this adiuse, and message of the Gods.
What may he do, alas? or by what words
Dare he persuade the raging Queen in love?
Or in what sort may he his tale begin?
Now here now there his recklesse mind began run,
And diversely him draws discoursing all.
After long doutes this sentence seemed best:
Mnestheus first, and strong Cloanthus eke
He calls to him, with Sergest: unto whom
He gave in charge his navy secretly
For to prepare, and drive to the sea coast
His people, and their armor to address:
And for the cause of change to feign excuse:
And that he, when good Dido lea^t foreknew,
Or did suspect so great a love could break,
Would wait his time to speak thereof most meet:
The nearest way to hasten his intent.
Gladly his will, and biddings they obey.
Full soon the Queen, this crafty slight began smell,
(Who can deceive a lover in forecast?)
And first foresaw the motions for to come,
Things most assured fearing: unto whom
That wicked fame reported, how to flight
Was armde the fleet all ready to auale.
Then ill bested of counsel rages she:
And whisketh through the town like Bachus nun,
As Thias stirs, the sacred rites begone,
And when the wonted third years sacrifice
Does prick her fourth, hering Bachus name hallowed:
And that the festful night of Citheron
Does call her fourth with noyes of dancing
At length her self bordeth Aeneas thus.
Unfaithful wight to cover such a fault
Coldest thou hope? vnwist to leave my land?
Nor thee our love, nor yet right hand betrothed,
Ne cruel death of Dido may withhold?
But that thou will in winter ships prepare,
And t^^e the seas in broile of whorling winds?
What if the land thou seek, were not strange?
If not vnkno ven? or ancient Troy yet stood?
In rough seas, yet should Troy town be sought?
Shunnest thou me? By these tears, and right hand,
(For naught else have I wretched left my self)
By our spousals and marriage begone,
If I of thee deserved ever well
Or thing of mine were ever to thee leefe:
Rue on this realm, whoes ruin is at hand?
If ought be left that prater may avail,
I thee beseech to do away this mind.
The Libians and tirans of Nomadane
For thee me hate: my Tirians eke for thee
Ar wroth: by thee my shamefastnes eke stained,
And good renoume, whereby up to the stars
Perelesse I clame. To whom will thou me leave.
Ready to dye, my sweet guest? sith this name
Is all as now, that of a spouse remains.
But whereto now should I prolong my death?
What? until my brother Pigmalion
Beat down my walls? or the Getulian king
Hiarbas yet captive lead me away?
Before thy flight a child had I ones borne,
Or seen a young Aeneas in my court
Play up and down, that might present thy face:
All utterly I could not seem forsaken.
Thus said the Queen: he to the Gods advise
Unmoued held his eyes, and in his breast
Represt his care, and strove against his will.
And these few words at last then forth he cast:
Never shall I deny (Queen) thy deserte,
Greater than thou in words may well express:
To think on thee, ne irke me aye it shall
Whiles of my slelfe I shall have memory,
And whiles the spirit these Limbs of mine shall rule*
For present purpose somewhat shall I say.
Never meant I to clok the same by stelth
Sclaunder me not, ne to escape by flight,
Nor I to thee pretended marriage:
Ne hither came to join men such leage.
If desteny at mine own liberty
To lead my life would have have permitted me
After my will my sorrow to redoub:
Troy and the remainder of our folk
Restore I should: and with these escaped hands,
The walls again unto thee vanquished,
And palace high of Priam eke repair.
But now Apollo, called Grineus,
And prophecies of Licia me advise
To sease upon the realm of Italy.
That is my love, my country, and my land.
If Cartage turrettes thee Phenician borne.
And of a Libian town the sight deteine:
To us Trojans why do thou then envy
In Italy to make our risting seat*
Lefull is ^eke for us strange realms to seek.
As often as night does cloak with shadows dar^^
The earth: as often as flaming stars apere:
The troubled ghost of my father Anchises
So often in sleep does fray me, and advise,
The wronged head by me of my dear son,
Whom I defraud of the Hisperian crown,
And lands a lotted him by desteny.
The mess^nger eke of the Gods but late
Sent down from Joue (I swear by either head)
Passing the air, did this to me report.
In bright day light the God my self I saw
Enter these walls, and with these cares him heard.
Leuethen with plaint, to vex both the and me.
Against my will to Italy I go.
Whiles in this sort he did his tale pronounce,
With wa^ward look she began him ay behold,
And roling eyes, that moved to and fro:
With silence look discoursing over al,
And forth in rage, at last thus began she brayde,
Faithless, forsworn, ne Goddess was thy dam,
Nor Dardanus beginner of thy race,
But of hard rocks mount Caucase monstrous
Bred thee, and teates of Tiger gave thee suck.
But what should I dissemble now my there?
Or me reserve to hope of greater things?
Minds he our tears: or ever moved his eyes?
Wept he for ruth? or pitied he our love?
What shall I set before? or where begin?
Juno nor Joue with just eyes this beholds.
Faith is no where in surety to be found.
Did I not him thrown up upon my shore
In need receive, and fonded eke inuest
Of half my realm: his na^^^ lost, repair?
From deaths danger his fellows eke defend?
Ay me, with rage and furies lo I drive.
Apollo now, now Lycian prophesies,
Another while the messenger of Gods
(He says) sent down from mighty Joue himself
The dreadful charge amid the skies has brought.
As though that were the trauil of the Gods,
Or such a care their quietness might move.
I hold thee not, nor yet gainsay thy words,
To Italy pass on by help of winds,
And through the floods go search thy kingdom new.
If ruthful Gods have any power, I trust,
A mid the rocks, thy guerdon thou shall find,
When thou shall clepe full often on Didos name,
With burial brandes I absent shall thee thase,
And when cold death from life these lims deuides,
My ghost each where shall still on thee awaite,
Thou shall abye* and I shall here thereof.
Among the souls below thy brute shall come.
With such like words she cut of half her tale,
With pensive heart abandoning the light:
And from his sight, her self began far remove:
For saking him: that many things in fere
Imagened, and did prepare to say.
Heri wouning lims her damsels began releue,
And to her chamber bare of marble stone:
And laid her on her bed with tapets spread.
But just Aeneas, though he did desire
With comfort swet her sorows to appease,
And with his words to banish all her care,
Wailing her much, with great love overcome:
The Gods will yet he woorketh, and resortes
Unto his name, where the Troyans fast
Fell to their work from the shore to vnstock
High rigged ships: now fleetes the talowed kele,
Their oars with leaves yet grene from wood they bring*
And mastes vnshaue, for have to take then night.
You might have seen them throng out of the town
Like ants, when they do spoil the bing of corn,
For winters dred, which they bear to their den:
When the black swarm creeps over all the fields:
And thwart the grass by strait paths drags their pray,
The great grains then, some on their shoulders trusse,
Some drive the troop, some chastise eke the slow:
That with their travail chafed is each pathe.
Beholding this, what thought might Dido have?
What sighs gave she? when from her towers hye
The large coasts she saw haunted with Troyans works,
And in her sight the seas with din confounded.
O witless love, what thing is that to do
A mortal mind thou can not force thereto?
Forced she is to tears ay to return,
With new requests, to yield her heart to love:
And least she should before her causeless death
Leave any thing untried: O siste^ Anne
Quoth she, behold the whole coast round about,
How they prepare assembled every where.
The streming sails abidn^^ but for wind:
The shipmen crown their ships with vows for joy,
O sister, if so great a sorrow I
Mistrusted had: it were more light to bear.
Yet nathelesse this for me wretched wight,
Anne, shall thou do: for faithles, thee alone
He reverenced, she eke his secrets told:
The metest tune thou knew to board the man:
To my proud foe, thus sister humbly say:
I with the greeks within the port Aulids.
Consured not the Troyans to destroy:
Nor to the walls of Troy yet sent my ^lcete:
Nor cynders of his father Anchises
Disturbed have out of his scpulture.
Why lettes he not my words sink in his ears
So hard to ouertreate: whither whirles he?
This last boon yet grant he to wretched love
Prospectous winds for to depart with case,
Let him abide: the foresaid marriage now,
That he betrayed, I do not him require:
Nor that he should fair Italy forgo.
Neither I would, he should his kingdom leave:
Quiet I ask, and a time of delay,
And respite eke my furye to assuage,
Till my mishap teach me all comfortless,
How for to wayle my grief. This latter grace,
Sister I ^raue, have thou ^emorse of me,
Which if thou shall vouchsafe, with heaps I shall
Leave by my death redoubled unto thee.
Moisted with tears, thus wretched began she plain:
Which Anne reports, and answer bringes again.
Naught tears him move, ne yet to any words
He can be framed with gentle mind to ye^de.
The w^rdes withstand, and God stops his m^ke ears.
Like to the aged boysteous bodied oak,
The which among the alps, the Northern winds,
Blowyng now from this quarter, now from that,
Betwixt them strive to ouerwhelme with blastes,
The whistlyng air among the branches rores,
Which all at once bow to the earth her croppes,
The stock once smit: whiles in the rocks the tree
Sticks fast: and look, how hye to the heaven her top
Reares up, so deep her root spredes down to hell:
So was this Lord now here now there beset
With words, in whose s^oute breast wrought many cares,
But still his mind in one remains, in vain
The tears were shed. Then Dido frayde of fates
Wishes for death, ^^ked to see the skies.
And that she might the rather work her will,
And leave the light (a grisely thing to tell)
Upon the altars burning full of cense
When she set gifts of sacrifice, she saw
The holy water stocks wax black within,
The wine eke shed, change into filthy gore.
This she to none, not to her sister told.
A marble temple in her palace eke,
In memory of her old spouse, there stood,
In great honor and worship, which she held,
With snowwhite clothes decked, and with bows of feast,
Wherout was heard, her husbands voyc, and speech
Cleping for her, when dark night hid the earth,
And often the Owl with rufull song complaind,
From the ^^use top drawing long doleful tunes
And many things forespoke by prophets past
With dreadful warning began her now affray:
And stern Aeneas seemed in her sleep
To chase her still about, distraught in rage:
And still her thought that she was left alone
Uncompanied great vtages to wend.
In desert land her Tyrian folk to seek.
Like Pentheus, that in his madness saw
Swarming in flocks the furies all of hell:
Two Suns remove, and Thebes town show twain.
Or like Orestes Agamemnons son:
In tragedies who represented ape*
Driven about, that from his mother fled
Armed with brands, and eke with serpents black:
That sitting found within the temples porche
The ugly furies his slaughter to revenge.
Yelden to woe, when frenzy had her caught,
Within her self then began she well debate,
Full bent to dye, the time, and eke the mean;
And to her woeful sister thus she said,
In outward chere dissembling her intent,
Presenting hope under a semblant glad:
Sister rejoice, ^cr I have found the way
Him to return, or lose me from his love.
Toward the end of the great Ocean flood
Where as the wandering Sun discendeth hence:
In the extremes of Ethiope is a place,
Where huge Atlas does on his sholders turn
The sphere so rund with flaming stars beset,
Borne of Massyle, I hear should be a Nun
That of thesperian sisters temple old
And of their goodly garden keeper was
That geues unto the Dragon eke his food,
That on the tree preserues the holy fruit
That home moist, and sleping poppey castes,
This woman does auaunt, by force of char^e
What heart she list to set at liberty:
And other some to perce with heavy cares:
In running flood to stop the waters course:
And eke the sterres their meuings to reuerse:
Lassemble eke, the gostes that walk by night,
Under thy feet, thearth thou shall behold
Tremble and rore, the oaks come from the hill.
The Gods and thee, dear sister now I call
In witness, and thy head to me so sweet:
To magike arts against my will I bend.
Right secretly within our inner court.
In open air rear up a stack of wood:
And hang thereon the weapon of this man
The which he left within my chamber stick.
His weeds dispoiled all, and bridal bed,
Wherein alas sister, I found my bane,
Charge thereupon, sor so the Nun commaundes;
To do away, what did to him belong,
Of that false wight that might remembrance bring.
Then whisted she, the pale her face began stain,
N^ could yet Anne believe, her sister meant
To cloak her death by this new sacrifice:
Nor in her breast such fury did conceive,
Neither does she now dred more grievous thing*
Then followed Sichees death: wherefore
She put her will in ure. But then the Nuene
When that the stak of wood was reared up,
Under the air within the inward court
With cloven oak, and billets made of fyrre,
With garlandes, she does ali beset the place,
And with grene bows eke crown the funeral.
And thereupon his wedes and swerd yleft
And on a bed his picture she bestows:
As she that well foreknew what was to come.
The altars stand about, and eke the Nun
With sparkeled tresse, the which three hundred Gods
With a loud voice does thunder out at once:
Erebus the grisely, and Chaos huge,
And eke the threefolde Goddess, Hecate
And three faces of Diana the virgin,
And sprinkcles eke the water counterfeit
Like unto black Auernus lake in hell:
And springyng herbs reapt* up with brazen sithes
Were sought after the right course of the Moon,
The venim black intermingled with milk,
The lump of flesh twene the newborn foales eye^
To reave, that wins from the da^me her love.
She with the mole all in her hands devout
Stood near the auiter, bare of the one soote,
With vesture loose, the bands unlaced all,
Bent for to dye, calls the Gods to record,
And gilty stars eke of her desteny.
And if there were any God that had care
Of lovers hearts not moved with love alike,
Him she requires of justice to remember.
It was then night, the sound and quiet sleep
Had through the earth the weried bodies caught,
The woods, the ragyng seas were feign to rest,
When that the stars had half their course declined,
The feldes whist, beasts, and fowls of diverse hue,
And what so that in the broad lakes remainde,
Or yet among the bushy thickes of bryar,
Laid down to slope by silence of the night
Began sooage their cares, mindlesse of travels past,
Not so the spirit of this Phenician:
Unhappy she that on no sleep could chance,
Nor yet nights rest enter in eye or breast.
Her cares redoble: love does rise and rage again.
And ouerflowes with swellyng storms of wrath.
Thus thinks she then, this roules she in her mind,
What shall I do? shall I now bear the scorn
For to assaye mine old w^ers again?
And humbly yet a Numid spouse require?
Whose marriage I have so often disdayned?
The Troyan navy, and Teucrian vile commaundes
Follow shall I? as though it should nuaile,
That whilom by my help they were releued:
Or for because with kind, and mindful folk
Right well does sit the passed thankful deed?
Who would me suffer? (admit this were my will)
Or me scorned to their proud ships receive?
Oh, woe begone: full little know thou yet,
The broken oaths of Laomedons kind.
What then? alone on merry Mariners
Shall I wait? or board them with my power
Of Tyrians assembled me about*
And such as I with travail brought from Tire,
Drive to the seas, and force them save again?
But rather dye, even as thou have deserved:
And to this woe, with iron give thou end.
And thou sister first vanquished with my tears,
Thou in my rage with all these mischiefs first
Did burden me, and yield me to my foe.
Was it not granted me from spousals free,
Like to wild beasts, to live without offense,
Without taste of such cares* is there no faith,
Reserved to the cinders of Sychee?
Such great complaints brake forth out of her breast:
Whiles Aeneas full minded to depart,
All things prepared, slept in the poupe on high,
To whom in sleep the wonted Godheds form
Began aye appear, returnyng in like shape
As seemed him: and began him thus advise:
Like unto Mercury in voice, and hue,
With yelow bushe, and comely ly^^es of youth.
O Goddess son, in such case can thou sleep?
Ne yet bestraught the dangers do forsee,
That compass thee? nor hearst the fair winds blow*
Dido in mind roules vengeance and desceite,
Dete^md to dye, swelles with unstable ^re,
Will thou not flee whiles thou have time of fight?
Straight shall thou see the seas covered with sails,
The blasyng brondes, the shore all spread with flame,
And if the morrow steal upon thee here:
Come of, have done, set all delay aside.
For full of change these women be always,
This said, in the dark night he began him hide.
Aeneas of this sudden vision
Adred starts up out of his sleep in have,
Calls up his feers: awake get up my men,
Abord your ships, and hoyse up sail with speed,
(A God me wills sent from above again)
To have my flight, and writhen cabels cut.
Oh holy God, what so thou art we shall
Follow thee, and all blithe obey thy will:
Be at our hand, and friendly us assist:
Adresse the sterres with prosperous influence.
And with that word his gliftering sword vnshethes*
With which drawn, he the cabels cut in twain.
The like desire the rest embraced all,
All thing in have they cast, and fourth they whurle,
The shores they leave, with ships the seasar spread,
Cutting the fou^e, by the blew seas they swepe.
Aurora now from Titans purple bed,
With new day light has ouerspred the earth,
When by her windows the Queen the peping day
Espied, and navy with splaid sails depart
The shore, and eke the port of vessels void:
Her comely breast thrice or four times she smote
with her own hand, and tore her golden tresse.
Oh Joue (quoth she) shall he then thus depart
A stranger thus, and scorn our kingdom so?
Shall not my men do on their armure pressed?
And eke pursue them throughout all the town?
Out of the rode sone shall the vessel warpe.
Have on, cast flame, set sail. and welde your owers.
What said I: but where am I: what frenzy
Alters thy mind* unhappy Dido now
Has thee beset a froward destenie.
Then it behooved, when thou did give to him
The scepter. So his faith and his right hand,
That leads with him (they say) his country goods,
That on his back his aged father bore,
His body might I not have caught and rent?
And in the seas drenched him. and his feers?
And from Ascanius his life with Iron reft,
And set him on his fathers board for meat?
Of such debate perchaimee the fortune might
Have been doutfull: would God it were assaied.
Whom should I fear, since I my self must die?
Might I have thrown into that navy brandes,
And filled eke their deckes with flaming fire,
The father, son, and all their nation
Destroyed, and falln my self ded over al.
Sun with thy beams, that mortal works discries,
And thou Juno, that well these trauades know,
Proserpine thou, upon whom folk do use
To houle, and call in forked ways by night,
Infernal furies, ye wreakers of wrong,
And Didos Gods, who stands at point of death,
Receive these words, and eke your heavy power
Withdraw from me, that wicked folk deserve,
And our request accept, we you beseech.
If so that yonder wicked head must needs
Recover port, and fail to land of force
And if Jeues will have so resolved it,
And such end set as no wight can fordoe,
Yet at the least asailed might he be
With arms, and wars of hardy nations,
From the bounds of his kingdom far exiled*
Julus ^^e rashed out of his arms
Driven to call for help, that he may see
The giltlesh corpses of his folk lie dead:
And after hard conditions of peace,
His realm, nor life desired may he brook:
But fall before his time vngraued amid the sands.
This I require, these words with blood I shed.
And Trians, ye his flock and all his race
Pursue with hate, reward our cinders so.
No love nor leage, betwixt our peeples be.
And of our bones, some wreaker may there spring,
With sword and flame that Troia^s may pursue:
And from henceforth when that our power may stretch,
Our costs to them contrary be for aye,
I crave of God, and our streams to their fluddes,
Arms unto arms, and offpring of each race
With mortal war each other may fordoe
This said, her mind she writhed on al sides,
Seking with speed to end her irksome life.
To Sichees nurse Barcen then thus she said
(For hers at home in ashes did remain)
Call unto me (dear nurse) my sister Anne:
Bid her, in have in water of the studde
She sprinckle she body and bring the beasts,
And purging sacrifice, I did her show:
So let her come: and thou thy temples bind
With sacred garlandes: for the sacrifice,
That I to Pluto have begone, my mind
Is to herforme, and give end to these cares:
And Trojan statue throw into the flame.
When she had said, redouble began her nurse
Her steps, forth on an aged woman's trot.
But trembling Dido eger^y now bent
Upon her stern determinacion,
Her bloodshot eyes roling within her head:
Her quiuering chekes flecked with deadly stain,
Both pale and wan to think on death to come,
Into the inward wards of her palace
She rusheth in, and clam up, as distraught,
The burial stack, and drew the Trojan swerd
Her gift sometime, but meant to no such use.
Where when she saw his weed, and w^l known bed,
Weping a while in study began she stay,
Fell on the bed, and thief last words she said.
Sweet spoils, whiles God and destenies it would,
Receue this sprite, and rid me of these cares.
I lived and ran the course, fortune did grant,
And under earth my great ghost now shall wend.
A goodly town I built, and saw my walls:
Happy, alas to happy, if these costs
The Troyan ships had never touched aye.
This said, she laid her mouth close to the bed:
Why then (quoth she) vnwroken shall we die?
But let us die for thus: and in this sort
It likes us to seek the shadows darck.
And from the feas the cruel Troyans eyes
Shall well discern this flame, and take with him
Eke these unlucky tokens of mydeath.
In she had said, her danisell might perceue
Her with these words fall pierced on a sword,
The blade embrued and hands besprent with gor^
The clamor rang unto the palace tappe,
The brute ran throughout al thasto^^ed town,
With waiting great, and women's shril yelling,
The roofes began roar, the air resound with plaint,
As though Cartage, or thau^^ent town of Tire
With prease of entered enemies swarmed full,
Or when the rage of furious flame does take
The temples tops, and mansio^s eke of men.
Her sister Anne, spritelesse for dread to hear
This fearful stir, with nails began tear her face,
She smote her breast, and rushed through the rout:
And her dieng she cleapes thus by her name:
Sister, for this with craft did you me bourd*
The stak, the flame, the altars, bred they this*
What shall I first complain, forsaken wight?
Lothest thou in death thy sisters fellowship?
Thou should have called me to like destiny:
One woe, one sword, one hour might end us both.
This funeral stak built I with these hands,
And with this voice cleped our native Gods,
And cruel so absentest me from thy death:
Destroyed thou have (sister) both thee and me,
Thy people eke, and princes borne of Tire.
Give, here I shall with water wash her wou^des,
And suck with mouth her breath, if ought be left.
This said, unto the high degrees she mounted,
Embrasing fast her sister now half dead,
With wailefull plaint: whom in her lap she laid,
The black swart gore wiping dry with her clothes.
But Dido strives to lift up again
Her heavy eyes, and has no power thereto:
Deep in her breast, that fixed wound does gape.
Thrice leaning on her elbow ganshe raise
Her self, upward: and thrice she ouerthrewe
Upon the bed: ranging with wandering eyes
The skies for light, and wept when she it found.
Almighty Juno having ruth by this
Of her long pains, and eke her lingering death,
From heaven she sent the Goddess Iris down,
The throwing sprit, and ^ointed (...) to loose*
For that neither by lot of destiny,
Nor yet by kindly death she perished:
But wretchedly before her fatal day.
And kindled with a sodein rage offlame:
Proserpine had not from her head bere^t
The golden hear, nor judged her to he^^.
The dewye Iris thus with golden wings,
A thousand hues showing against the sun,
Amid the skies then did she fly^ adowne:
On Didos head, where as she began a light:
This hear (quod she) to Pluto consecrate.
Commanded I reave, and thy spirit unloose.
From this body: and when she thus had said,
With her right hand she cut the hear in twain:
And therewith all the kindly heat began quench?
And into wind the life forthwith resolve.
Finis.
Imprinted at London in fleet street within Temple bar, at the sign of the
hand and star, by Richard Tottell the. xxi. day of June. An. 1557.


