A BRIEF VIEW of the weak Grounds of Popery; As it was propounded to D.
NORRICE, Priest, by T.V. Gent: and returned without answer.

AT LONDN Imprinted by Humfrey Lownes, for Samuel Macham, and Matthew Cook, and
are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Tigers head. 1606.

To my dearest Cousins, A. B. C. D.
MY dearest Cousins: with what zeal and feruencie (both in my prayers, and
other endeavors) I have ever desired we might be of one mind and heart, God,
Act. 6.
and mine own conscience can best testify, and your selves may partly witness
with me. For, as touching the means to this our atonement (namely, conference
with the learned of each others side, and reading their books) you know well, I
(for my part) have never refused it, but evermore gladly embraced, and
diligently sought after it: that so, if truth (whereof great vaunts were made)
had been found on your side, my heart first, and then my hand, might readily
have subscribed thereto. But, when I consider the doctrine of your Rhemists,
Tit. 3. Sect.
(and the answerable practice of their disciples) forbidding you not only to
read our books, but to hold conversation (much more to have conference) with
us, (who must be Heretics because they term us so): yea, when I see they
blush not to affirm, That we are not to be heard; ^f^r. 3. ^ect. 2.
no, not though we speak the truth: I almost despair of your conversion;
seeing the means are prohibited. Now, how much meeter it were, in a case of
such consequence (being no less than the eternal safeguard of your souls) to
leave them, with their errors; and to hearken rather, and conform your faith,
to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, I refer it to any seeing
judgment. For, the universal consent of all the ancient Fathers, allows the
Scriptures for the only Rule of faith; as containing in them, all doctrine
necessary to salvation. And albeit I have sufficiently (among others) cleared
that question in this small Treatise following; yet will I somewhat enlarge the
proof of it in this place; to the end you may better know, That though you
send us (for instruction) to to the Fathers: yet they send us back again to
the Scriptures, as the only and sufficient Rule to direct us. And, in handling
this point, I will not much insist upon divine authority; since I know you
rely chiefly (if not wholly) on the Fathers. Only I will urge these few
testimonies of Scripture: which ought to prevail more with every true
Christian, than all the Fathers, how learned soever. First, our Savior wills
us, to search the Scriptures, for that in them we think to have eternal life.
Io. 5.39. Mark. 1224.
And he taxes the Pharisees of error, because they were ignorant of the
Scriptures. 2. Tim. 3.15, 16, 17.
S. Paul likewise affirms that they are able to make us wise unto salvation;
that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work. And if this
persuade you not, I have no hope that any Father can: for as Christ says, Luke
16.29, 30, 31.
They have Moses and the Prophets, if they will not hear them, neither will
they believe if one rose from the dead. Now, as to the Fathers, though your
side pretend so much to reverence them, yet in this question, they wholly
reject them, and that indeed not without cause; seeing their authority in this
one point, might prove the downfall of your whole Religion: it being confessed
by some great Champions on your side, That many and most of the doctrines
wherein you vary from us, are grounded on Traditions, and not on the
Scriptures: as any that will take the pains to read, may see, in Peter Soto,
against Brentius; in the fifth chapter of Canisius Catechism, and in the In
fine fabulae, 6.
5 book of Lyndans Panoply: yea, Scripto su^ aedito tempore Trid. Council.
Andradius says, That the greatest part of Catholic Religion is left unto
Traditions of the Church not written. ^anopl. li. 1. ^. 22. deme^^ssimae
insa^iae,
And the said Lyndan says, It is most extreme madness to think, that the whole
and entire Body of Evangelical doctrine is to be fetched out of the Apostolic
letters written with ink, and out of that little book of the new Testament.
And therefore so much the more are your leaders and seducers to be taxed, who
persuade their folowers, that the greatest difference between them and us, is
touching the Sense of the Scripture: whereas every man of common sense will
easily judge, that, where there is no Text, there needs no Interpreter. But let
us briefly see what opinion the Fathers were of, in this controversy between
us, and how they have understood that Scripture, which D. B. P. calls the
Protestants Achilles, which he only barks at, without further hurt. ^ B.
book against M ^erkins, cal^ed the 1. ^im. 3. the ^rot. Achil^es. Hom. 9.
Chrysostom upon the same Text says, If any thing be needful for us to
learn, or to be ignorant of, there (meaning in the Scriptures) shall we learn
it: If to reprove falsehood, from thence shall we draw it; if any thing lack to
be corrected or rebuked; which must be had unto exhortation, unto comfort:
there also do we learn it. Likewise Ho. 8. upon the 15. verse he says, The
scriptures do teach both what things are to be done, and what not to be done.
Theodoret upon the same place says, The scripture is inspired of God, Therefore
he teaches the kinds of utility: It is profitable to teach; for, whatsoever
we know not, we learn out of it: To reprove; It reproves our wicked life: To
correct; for it exhorts, that they which have gone astray, return to the
right way: To instruct in righteousness; for it teaches us the kinds of
virtue, that the man of God may be perfect, furnished to all good works. All
these things do attribute and ascribe perfection to the God of all. Primasius
says, Out of the scriptures he that is ignorant is taught; He that is
insolent, is reproved; He that erreth, is corrected; He that can keep no
measure, is instructed to Justice; to every good work, not unto one.
Oecumenius says, after he has rehearsed the particular vtilities, to teach
all true opinions, and good works, to reprove errors and vice, he concludes,
that the man of God may be, not only partaker after a vulgar manner of every
goodworke, but perfect and complete by the doctrine of the scriptures. Not to
some kind of good work, and to some not: But to all and every good work,
says Theophilact. Athanasius says, Atha. contr. gent. Chrysostom. open imperf. in
Mat. Ho. 41. Aug. in John Tract. 44.
The holy scriptures inspired from heaven are sufficient for all instruction of
truth. Chrysostom says, whatsoever is requisite for salvation; all that is
fully laid down in the Scripture. S. Augustine says, There were chosen to be
written, such things as seemed (to the holy Ghost) sufficient for the salvation
of the faithful. And in his second book against Cresconius, the Gra^marian,
he says, That there is an Ecclesiastical Canon ordained, whereunto belong the
books of the Prophets and Apostles: By which books, we judge all other
writings both of the faithful, and of the Infidels. Hier. sup. Agge. cap. 1.
Hierom says, Those things which of their own heads they devise, as though
they came by Apostolic Tradition, without the authority and testimony of the
holy Scriptures, the sword of Gods word strikes. Infinite be the Authorities
of the Fathers, which might be brought to this purpose: but I will conclude the
point with Vincentius Lirinensis (whom D.B.P. in his book against M. Perkins,
Vincent. aduer. Haeres.
believes not to have any such words) who says, The Canon of the Scripture
is perfect and sufficient, and more then sufficient to al things. And again,
Not that (says he) the Canon alone is not sufficient for all things. These
Fathers I hope knew the Scriptures as well as D.B.P. or any other Papist: and
yet notwithstanding al his (and their) objections, the Protestants Achilles (as
he terms it) stands vnimpeacht by any thing that this (or any other)
cauiller has said. And yet notwithstanding these evident places, brought by
the general consent of all the Fathers against the fundame^tal Ground of
Popery: Your Rhemists will tell you, Rhem. Test. 2. These. 2. sect. 18.19.
if you will believe them, that they have (to the contrary) plain Scriptures,
all the fathers, most evident reasons, that we must either believe Traditions,
or nothing at all. And that S. Augustine often writes, That many of the
articles of our Religion, and points of highest importance, are not so much to
be proved by Scriptures, as by Tradition. But if we ask them where S. Austine
wrote this (often), and that (of many articles of Religion and points of
highest importance) it must be returned with Non est inuentus; Not to be found
in S. Austin. But they perceiving the whole weight of their cause to lie in
this, Rhem. Test. fol. 559.
have marshalled nine Fathers in a rank, to prove, that we must either believe
Traditions, or nothing: And yet the very same Fathers have showed, That no
matter of faith, or of any moment to salvation, must be received or believed
without the Scriptures; Cypr. ad Pomp. cont. epist. Stepha. Basil. contr.
Eunomium. lib. 3.
and the Fathers often times by Traditions understand matters contained and
proved out of the scriptures, and that in regard the same was delivered also by
word. And many times by Traditions they understand ceremonies and customs. Now
choose whether you will grant, a flat contradiction in the Fathers; or reconcile
them thus; and conclude with us, Ergo, the Traditions they mean, be no parts
or points of the Christian faith: For we have their plain confession, That all
things necessary to salvation, are comprised in the scriptures: you produce
them to witness, That your Traditions be not comprised in the scriptures. Ergo,
by your own deponents we conclude, That your Traditions be neither necessary
to salvation, nor points of the Catholic faith. Look well to this Issue, They
must either dissent from you, or from themselves. Now if you will compare the
late doctrine of the Romish Church, with these Fathers; it shall be evident,
That they have not only dissented from them, but also uttered open blasphemy
against the sacred Scriptures. First Cardinal Cusanus intituleth his book, De
authoritate ecclesiae and Co^cilij supra and contra scripturam: Of the the
authority of the Church and Counsel above and against the scriptures. Syluester
Prierias, master of the Popes palace, Contr. Luther. co^clusi. de pot. Papae
says, That indulgences are warranted unto us, not by the authority of the
scripture, but by the authority of the Church and Pope of Rome, which is
greater.

Boniface the Archbishop of Mentz, says, That all men so reverence the
Apostolic See of Rome, that they rather desire the ancient institution of
Christian Religion from the Pope, than from the holy scripture. This saying the
Pope has so approved, that he has caused it to be inserted into the Cannon
law. Did. 40. c. Si Papa.


Another says, whosoever rests not on the doctrine of the Roman Church, and
B. of Rome, Syluest. Prier. contr. Luther.
as the infallible rule of God; a qua sacra scriptura roburtrahit and
auctoritatem: from which the sacred scripture draws strength and authority,
he is an heretic. Eckius says, De Ecclesia.
Scriptura nisi ecclesiae auctoritate non est authe^tica: The scripture is not
authe^tical, but by the authority of the church. Cardinal Hosius says, De
expresso verbo Dei.
If any man have the interpretation of the Church of Rome, concerning any place
of scripture, although he neither know, nor understand, whether, and how it
agrees with the words of the scripture, notwithstanding he has ipsissimu^
verbu^ Dei, the very word of God. Cardinal Cusanus says, Nicol. Cusan. ad
Bohem. epi. 7.
It is no marvel though the practice of the Church, expound the scriptures at
one time one way, and at an other time another way: for the understanding or
sense of the scripture runs with the practice: And that sense agreeing with
the practice, is the quickening spirit: Henric. doctor Magister sacripalatij
Romae ad Legatos Bohemicos sub Felice Papa 1447. Ad Bohem. ep. 2.
and therefore the scriptures follow the Church; but contrariwise, the Church
follows not the scriptures. Another says, The Pope may change the holy
Gospel, and may give to the Gospel according to place and time another sense.
To conclude therefore with Cardinal Cusanus, This is the judgment (says he) of
all them that think rightly, that found the authority and understanding of the
Scriptures, in the allowance of the Church: and not contrariwise lay the
foundation of the Church in the authority of the scriptures. I will not mention
others that have blasphemously said, Vid. Chemnit. exa. par. 1. page 47.
That the scriptures without the authority of the Church are no better than
Aesops Fables. Thus you see how the Grounds of our Religion are justified by
the Fathers, against these blasphemies of the Romish Church. And for that I
know it commonly objected, that we refuse in disputation and conference to
handle the grounds of Religion: I have thought good in this small Tract to
examine (though briefly) the Grounds of your Romish Religion, dialogue-wise; to
the end, the truth may be the more lively discerned, by the objections and
answers. Wherein if I have not truly laid down the Grounds of your Religion
for the substance thereof: Or that they have either bin mistaken by me; or, that
(using that breuity I have done) they might be more strongly or effectually
urged on your side; or, that the reasons urged on our behalf, be either falsely
alleged, or not truly handled: I shall take it as a special grace done unto
me; and an argument of a reciprocal love in you, that the faults thereof may
be showed and manifested by some of the great Rabbis of your side: to the end
that the weakness of our cause being laid open, I may be drawn to join with
you in the religion you profess; and may be brought home to that fold, out of
which, and from which I am sure in your judgments I am departed and gone
astray as a lost sheep. T^is is a charitable request, and ought not with any
colors or sleights to be refused by any of those learned Priests in whom you
have interest; since they know of how great merit the winning of souls is.
And they may the rather be encouraged thereto, because these things as they are
collected by me, are but the doings of a mere lay man; and therefore (if at
all) may with greater facility be refuted. But if the same shall be past over
with general terms (as heretofore it has bin in the like) as a thing unworthy
the answering: Or that I am an heretic and obstinate, and not to be dealt
with: the^ may you easily judge, that either your credit is small with those of
your profession: Or your love and charity very little to me, that so earnestly
out of the simplicity of my heart desire an answer: Or else that the weakness
and badnes of your cause, cannot abide the touchstone of truth; notwithstanding
their great and swelling brags, of challenging us to dispute with them, be so
often sounded i^ your ears. And I would to God I might truly say of you, that I
presume of my self, that yo^ would read and ponder these things with in
differencie, and abandon partiality. To the effecting whereof, besides my
prayers, I have no better means than the Apostles doctrine, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21
James. 1. Cor. 2.5. 2. Cor. 13.5 John 4.1. Act. 17.11.
who wills you and us all to examine all things, and to hold fast that which
is good, and not to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of
persons; but to try the spirits whether they be of God therein following the
example of the men o^ Berea, who searched the scriptures daily, whether those
things were so. Thus having some hope you will follow this Council and
commandment coming from so high an authority as the Spirit of God: and also
for my satisfaction (if not for your own) effect this my so charitable and
reasonable a request, as the answering hereof, I shall still continue my prayers,
to open our eyes that we may see the truth, and that we may be made one flock
and one fold of that great Shepherd Christ Jesus, the Bishop of our souls: To
whom, with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor, and praise, now and
for ever. Amen.

Yours, in the Lord, T. V.

The Author to the Reader.
THis small Tract, Christian Reader, was at the first composed out of a
religious zeal, and fervent desire I had to have withdrawn some of my best
friends from that Egyptian darkness of Popish superstition. And this argument
I the rather made choice of, because it was often objected, (though very
untruly) that we durst not handle the Grounds of Religion. After I had
finished the same, I reco^mended it to my best friends as you may see by the
Preface thereof: the which was by them reciprocally received, having no less
love and desire to reclaim me, than I had to win them. To which purpose they
sent it to some one of the learned on their part, by whose sufficiency the
same might be fully refuted; which, I assure my self by many probable
conjectures was Doctor Norris. After I had stayed some thirteen weeks, with
desiee and expectation to see the answer thereof; and having often solicited
the same: about that time I received a Letter (as I take it, from the said
D.N.) importing (among many several reproaches wherewith he had labored to
give satisfaction to them, and to impeach the credit both of me and my book)
that if I would procure two or three of the best learned of our side to auow it
under their hands to be the doctrine of our Church; That then he would take
upon him to prove 14. or 15. several absurdities, and untruths therein, as by
his Letter here likewise set down verbatim, may truly appear. This Letter I
then answered, as it is here likewise inserted. And when I had stayed another
quarter of a year, and heard of no answer made, or intended to be made, I
procured with much importunity, the redeliuery of the book. After which,
because I would leave the said D.N. (as I take it) without all excuse, and also
let my friends see, I would press it to the utmost, I procured two reverend
and learned Ministers, M.D. Sutcliffe, and M. Anthony Wootton, to subscribe the
same book under both their hands, in this form following; viz, The sum and
substance of the doctrine contained in this book is sound, and shall be
maintained, by the grace of God, against the whole pack of Jesuits and
Mass Priests of the Romish Synagogue. After this, upon the late discovery of
those hellish and matchless treasons against our dread Sovereign, and the
whole body of the Realm; having heard, that the said D. N. was apprehended and
committed to Bridewel (where I likewise understood that he was not close
prisoner) I repaired unto him, and showed him this my book, with the
subscriptio^ annexed and before specified, dema^ding of him whether he had seen
the book, and were the author of that Letter. Which he denied, affirming that
he had never seen it till the^: reserving belike (according to their manner of
Equivocating) that he had never seen it till then, subscribed in that manner, or
with some such mental reservation. All which considered (though I am still
persuaded, that he was the Author thereof) I have preferred the publishing of it
(though therein mine own wants and defects for the manner of handling, might by
the judicious and learned be in some sort taxed) rather than to bury it in
silence: for that I hope it may bring some benefit (not unworthy my travel) to
the indifferent Reader, and may happily effect that which thereby I first
intended; when they shall see I am not afraid (in regard of the doctrine
therein) to diuulge it to the whole world. And the rather I am encouraged
hereto; for that the same is not only the doctrine of the best learned writers
of this our age and Nation (as it is by me collected) but also is warra^ted to
be justified by men of so great sufficiency, that I shall not need to fear
shipwreck though the seas swell, and the storm rise never so hie. And so
farewell in Christ.

T. V.

The true Copy of the Letter I received.
I Have perused your Treatise dedicated to your dearest Cousins: which I find
to be a vain bundle of words, without substance, order, learning, or truth:
and if you can procure, that two or three of the best learned of your side,
will auow it under their hands to be the doctrine of your Church (else I know
they will all disclaim from it, having seen the errors and weakness thereof)
I will take upon me to show, that in so short and frivolous a discourse, you
could hardly compile more absurdities than there are couched. I will prove, for
example, that you mistake, and understand not the questions your self would
seem to handle: that you most shamefully belie our Catholic writers:
guilefully allege both Fathers and Scriptures: heap testimonies of ancient
writers, without end or purpose: make objections to your self, and answer
the^ not at all: I will prove that you allege false Councels amongst the
number of true, without any difference or distinction: that you reprove Fathers
writings as counterfeit, which are most approved: count books of Scriptures
Apocrypha, which are Canonical. I will prove, in these few lines, you write
contrary to your self: contrary to your own writers. I will prove that the
book is fraught with most palpable lies, errors, corruptions, and
falsifications: if you will but procure, as I said before, that it may be
countenanced by public authority, with the subscriptio^s of 2. or 3. the most
deepest scholars of your Sect. In the mean time I let it pass with this bare
censure; and entreat you but to read Bellarmine de Pont. and de Council. where
you shall find most of your objections of the errors of Popes and Councels
already refuted.

The true Copy of my Letter in answer hereof.
TO accuse without proof, to say and show no reason (of all which, you in
your Letter may justly be taxed) might truly argue me to want both substance,
order, learning and truth, according to your own phrase. And, to free your
self from the same imputation, have you yielded any other reason against my
book (which you intitie a vain bundle of words) than a boasting bundle of
vain brags? Turpe est doctori, etc. But you would seem to give a reason why
your bare censure (as you rightly have censured your self) should be a
sufficient answer to my book; unless I can procure two or three of the best
learned of our side, to auow it under their hands to be the doctrine of our
Church: Else you know (or else you are a false prophet) they will all
disclaim from it, having seen the errors and weakness thereof. But lest I
seem to tax you with want of learning and truth, with bare words only,
without proof; as you in the height and eminency of your judgment have
censured me: Can there be greater show of ignorance, tha^ to require that to be
auowed to be the doctrine of our Church, which has been already by the
learned of our side published to the whole world in many of their several books
daily exta^t to be seen? And, that I commit not your fault, To speak without
proof: do you but instance any one point of doctrine in all my book; and if I
do not show where the same is justified by the learned of our side; I will
willingly acknowledge that error wherewith I have here charged your self. And
to make it yet more evident: if I should require you to confirm the doctrine
you should deliver by two or three of your best Divines; when the same had been
published already by Bellarmine, Gregorius Valencia, your Rhemists and others:
could any thing convince me of grosser ignorance? It seems (notwithstanding
your vain brag, That that you would prove 15. particularities wherewith you
have charged me and my book) that you are but meanly read in controversies:
otherwise you could not be ignorant, that there is no doctrine in my book that
is not auowed and published, either by Jewel against Harding, or the B. of
Winchester that now is, or by D. Rainolds, D. Whittaker, D. Fulke, D. Spark,
with many others. And albeit I could not have confirmed thus much by these
clear testimonies: yet if you had Christianly and charitably weighed with what
mind my request was made in my Preface to my Kinsmen (wherein I had entreated in
these very words, That if I had not truly laid down the Grounds of your
Religion for the substance; or, if they had been mistaken by me; or, using
that breuity I had done, they might more strongly have been urged; or, if the
reasons I had urged, had been falsely alleged; or not truly handled etc. That
I would have taken it as a special grace done unto me, etc. to have had the
faults thereof manifested and showed, that I might have been drawn to have
been of the same profession with them, etc.) you would never have insisted upon
such a subscription of the deepest scholars of our Sect, thereby to have
cauilled and shifted off the answer of my book; how unlearned soever it had
been, either for the method, or matter. But you imagined, your words were so
powerful; that it was sufficient for your followers, that you had only given
your censure, without showing any further reason. Besides (my request being so
charitable and reasonable) it seems you have small care of winning of souls:
otherwise I persuade my self (if you had been assured of your own
sufficiency to have answered the book) you would never have insisted upon so
frivolous a request: Nor have preferred the vaineglory of having a learned
adversary, before the hope you might (not without good probability) have
conceived in reducing many by my conversion (or rather indeed peruersion) to
have been of your profession. I profess, for my part, I cannot see any other
ground of your Letter directed to me, than to enlarge your own ostentation and
glory to your followers. For, to undertake that you would prove this, and
this, and not to have returned the book, whereunto you required the
subscription; what can be inferred thereof, but that you would win time to
delay and shift off the answer? But if you will proceed according to my
request in the Preface of my book, and prove as much as by your Letter you
have presumed, without seeking some new shift to delay the time further: I will
engage my self, that the same shall be replied to, by one every way equal to
your self in all knowledge and literature: who (notwithstanding the advantage
you promise to your self, of the absurdities committed by me) shall defend the
cause I manage, and subscribe the same defense with his own hand: Otherwise,
you shall gain thus much by your travel, that I will willingly submit my self
to be a member of your Church. If you refuse these reasonable conditions, I
must use your own old phrase, and tell you, that I must needs think your
cause so weak, that it cannot be maintained. I omit to charge you with
inciuility, in giving me the Lie: For that I cannot but pity your ignorance
that cannot, as it seems (though all were false I had said, speaking by
relation) distinguish between a lie and untruth. And whereas you refer me,
in the conclusion of your Letter, to Bellarmin de Pont. and de Concilijs, where
you say, I shall find most of my objections of the errors of Popes and Councels
refuted: So can I whenever you shall instance any such particular refutation
(which may ease you of some pains, if it be so sufficiently performed) refer
you to some of the authors of our side, where the same reasons have been with
no less sufficiency handled and replied to: assuring my self; That neither
any of you have, or can, make any objections against the doctrine, we profess,
that has not been already objected, and likewise by us answered. And if any
will show me the contrary, I will be beholding to him, neither will I shut mine
eyes against the truth. If this which I have said may any whit prevail with
you to make show of that great learning whereof in your Letter you have
boasted, by your liberal undertaking to prove so many particulars (which
hitherto as great Clerks, as your self have failed in) I shall be ready and
willing to perform whatsoever I have herein promised. Otherwise I pray you
return the book, as you received it; and you shall see, that some such course
shall be taken, as shall make you blush to have censured so rashly.

Your friend, in Christianity and Charity, T. V.

A brief view of the weakness of the Grounds of Popish Religion, as is
evident by these several Objections and Answers following.
Protestant. 1 WHereupon do you ground your Religion?


Papist. Upon the word of God interpreted by the Church, which cannot err.


Protestant. 2 What do you understand by the Word of God?


Papist. The Scriptures and Traditions.


Protestant. 3 What do you understand by the Church?


Papist. Stapl. princi. doct. l. 7, ca. 10. l. 11, ca. 5 Hervaeus de potest.
pap. and R. Cupers Petrus de Palude de potest. papae, A^. 4.
The Church is sometimes taken for the ancient Fathers; sometimes for general
Councels; Sometimes we prefer the head of the Church, the Pope, before both.


Protestant. 4 Well: that we may proceed orderly in the handling of these
particulars: Do you receive all the books of the Old and New Testaments,
with equal authority?


Papist. No; but following the Tradition of the Church, we distinguish between
the Canonical and the Apocrypha.


Protestant. 5 Which are the Books which you call Apocrypha?


Papist. We hold as Apocrypha; The prayer of Manasses; the third and fourth
book of Esdras: Also, others that are not usual in your English Bibles: as an
Appendix to the book of Job; The 151. Psalm; A preface to the Lamentations of
Jeremy; The third and fourth book of Maccabees.


Protestant. 6 Well, we agree with you in the reiection of these Books: And we
likewise consent with you, That all the books of the New Testament, as they
stand, are to be received of all for Canonical Scripture: What are then the
Books that are in question between us?


Papist. There be 7. Chapters of Hester, certain Stories annexed to Daniel;
as, Of Bell and the Dragon, Of Susanna, Of the three children; Also the Epistle
of Baruch, joined to Jeremy; Then the books of Tobie; Iudeth; The Wisdom of
Solomon; Ecclesiasticus; Two books of the Maccabees: These we repute as
Canonical, both by the testimony of the Fathers, and by the authority of the
Church.


Protestant. 7 Well, Since I shall have cause hereafter to speak of the
Church, I will but briefly give a touch to the reason of the refusal of these
Books. All Canonical Scriptures in the old Testament, were written by the
Prophets: We have a sure word of the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1.19
says Saint Peter. And Saint Paul calls them The Scriptures of the Prophets.
Romans 16.2^
But none of those Books before named, of Tobias, of Iudeth, and the rest, were
written by the Prophets: Therefore none of those Books are Canonical. All the
Books of the old Testament, that were Canonical, were acknowledged of the
Jews and Hebrews, and written in Hebrew: But the Jews received none of these
Books into ye Canon of ye Scriptures, though to them were committed the Oracles
of God, as Saint Paul says: neither were they in the Hebrew tongue, Ergo, they
are not Canonical. But to the end you may see how well the Church, of which
you boast, agrees with the testimonies of the Fathers, both ancient and
modern; Hier: prol: galeat: and E^i. ad Pauli. and in praefat. ^i. Reg: and in
praefat. in ^ro. Salom.
I will give you this taste briefly. S. Hierom says, The Church reads those
books, but receives them not amongst the Canonical Scriptures. The sum of
all which is confirmed by these testimonies following: whose particular
speeches to this purpose for brevity sake I omit, referring you to the places
themselves, as they are here following set down. As Rufinus in his exposition
upon the Creed: Cyril of Jerusalem in the 4. of his Catechism: Athanasius in
Synop. Sacr. Scriptur. Nazianzen in Carminis: Epiphan. li. de Mensur. and
ponder. Cyprian upon the Creed: Damas^en. ca. 49. Hugo de Sanct. Victor. de
Sacram. in prol. li. 1. ca. 7. Radulphus in Leuit. li. 14. c. 1. Lyra in prol.
in li. Apocry. Hugo Cardina. in prol. Iosu. All these contradict the opinion of
the Papists in this controversy: yea, Arias Montanus, a chief Papist, in his
Hebrew Bible, writes in the forefront, and principal leaf of the book; There
are added, (says he) in this Edition, the books written in Greek; which the
Catholic Church following the Canon of the Hebrews, reckons amongst the
Apocrypha.

The Council of Laodicea, Can. 59. Constantinop: in Trul lo Can. 2.
allured by a general Council of Constantinople in Trullo, did set down the
same Canon of the scriptures, which both the old Church had, and our church
does hold: and commands, Ne aliqui praeterea legantur, and in auctoritate^
recipia^tur: That none besides be read and received into authority. I omit many
several contradictions in all, or most of ye books which we reject, and they
allow, whereby they may be convinced not to be written by ye spirit of God:
which is always one and the same. See the 4. Esdras 10.20. and 2. Maccab. 2.4.
and 1. Mac. 1.6. and. 8. touching Antiochus: yea, we will confess with Bellarmin,
Bellar. de ver. Dei, li. 1. cap. ^.
That the scriptures may be proved, to be the Word of God, by the constant and
perpetual truth of the Prophecies: By ye wonderful harmony and consent of the
holy writers of the Scriptures: By the Spirit of God, which is a principal
witness unto us: By the scripture it self, 2. Tim. 3. Lastly, by ye many and
great miracles wrought by the Prophets and Apostles; which do testify for ye
truth thereof.

To the which touchstone, if the Scriptures whith we reject, were brought to
the trial, they would easily be convinced, to be but dross, and unworthy to
stand in the ranks of those that are Canonical. But how do you know which
are the Scriptures? and in them, which be Canonical, which be Apocrypha?


Papist. I know by the testimony of the Church which be the Scriptures: and
in them, which be Canonical, and which be Apocrypha.


Protestant. 8 How do you know which is the Church? And by what means may it
be known, that the Church has authority to determine, which be Scriptures,
and which of them be Canonical, and which be Apocrypha?


Papist. There be many notes and marks reckoned up by the learned of our side,
by which the Church may be known: But we insist chiefly upon these;
Antiquity, Unity, Universality, Succession, and the power of Miracles. And
for the authority of the Church, it is proved by the Scriptures.


Protestant. 9 This answer is common to all Heretics: for they allege,
sometimes the Author. open Imper. in Mat. Ho. 48.
Church; sometime Iren. adu Haere, lib. 3. cap. 2.
Traditions; sometime Aug. co^tr Maxim. Ari^ episc. li. 1.
Councels; sometime De Bapt. c. 6. li. 3.
Fathers; sometime In Ioh. ca 2. tract. 13
Miracles; sometime De unit. eccle c. 16.
Visions; and sometime Epist. 65. ad gener.
Succession of Bishops: yea, Act. 19.27
Demetrius pretended Universality. And the Act. 17, 18, 19.
Philosophers, Epicures, and Stoickes, Antiquity. And Vinc. Lir. ca. 6, ca. 4.
Vincentius Lirinensis disproueth Universality, by the example of the Arrians:
and Antiquity by the example of the Donatists. And for their In Chron. Suput.
Romans prat. Sigon de Regn. Ital li. ^.
Unity, let that appear in the several oppositions of their Popes, one
condemning the decrees of another; and decreeing one contrary to another. And
therefore, this is no sufficient reason, for a man to ground his faith and
Religion, if we believe the Stapleto^, Fortress, and Heart. ag. Ra. page 118.
Papists in the like cause: for it is a common objection by them, that because
Heretics allege the Scripture, therefore they are no suffieient rule.
Moreover, this answer passes the limits of the proposition; for it
presupposes the authority of the Church to be proved by the Scriptures, and
the Scriptures to be proved by the authority of the Church; which is, Ignotum
per ignotius; Idem per idem; A proof of a thing unknown, by a thing less
known, and so no proof at all. Therefore to proceed to the next part of the
division, what do you understand by Traditions?


Papist. I understand Apostilicall doctrine, commonly called unwritten
verities: and as D.B. P. in his book against M. Perkins, diuides them; Some
are Divine, some Apostolical, and some Ecclesiastical: all which (according
to the Council of Trent) are to be received with equal reverence, Conc. Trid.
Sess. 4.
and religious affection, as we do the Scriptures.


Protestant. 10 How do you prove Traditions, or unwritten verities to be
Apostolical doctrine, and that they be Divine, Apostolical, and
Ecclesiastical; and that they are to be received with equal reverence, and
religious affection, as we do the Scriptures?


Papist. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 15.
I prove it by the Scriptures interpreted by the Church. Saint Paul says, Hold
the Trations which ye have learned, whether it be by word, Conc. Trid. ^ess.
4.
or by Epistle; which by the Churches exposition, proves unwritten verities to
be received, with equal authority to the Scriptures: and to explane the same
D.B.P. aforesaid affirms, that Divine Traditions come from our Savior
Christ; Apostolical Traditions from the Apostles; And the Decrees of the
Church, he terms Ecclesiastical Traditions; which are likewise of equal
authority with the Scriptures.


Protestant. 11 This is a common fault with you, to use this point of
Sophistry, called by the Logicians, Petitio principij: for you will still take
it for granted, that you are the Church, though you never prove it. And this
is a necessary consequence, That if the truth be doubted of, the church must
needs be much more doubted of: because the Church is the number of men
professing the truth; And how can the professors of the truth be severed from
others, so long as the truth, by which they should be known, is in question:
Therefore the supposing your selves to be ye church, when your faith and
Religion should be tried, is fond and vain. But if S. Paul in that place by
(Delivered) and (Tradition) mean nothing but the doctrine delivered to them by
word of mouth, and yet comprised in Scripture too, then must you grant, that
you are deceived to think, that unwritten Traditions are approved by S. Paul's
Traditions. Now what the things were which S. Paul delivered by word, to ye
Thessalonians, is showed in the 17 of the Acts, saying, Now as they passed
through Amphipolis, and Apolonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a
Synagogue of the Jews; and Paul, as his manner was, entered in unto them, and
three Sabbath days he discoursed unto them out of the Scriptures, opening and
alleging, That Christ must have suffered and risen again, etc. In which
words it is opened, both what Paul delivered to the Thessalonians, by word;
and from whence. From whence? Out of the Scriptures. What? That it behooued
Christ to suffer and rise again. Besides, Saint Paul witnesses both to small
and great, that he said no other thing, than that which the Prophets and
Moses did say should come. Act. 26, 22
The Traditions therefore that Paul does exhort the Thessalonians to hold; is
the Tradition of the Gospel: as Saint Ambrose writing upon the same place,
calls it very well; which the reason also does prove, that Saint Ambrose
notes that Paul does there gather, saying, God has raised you to salvation by
our Gospel: therefore stand ye fast, and hold the Traditions which ye have
learned, whether it be by word, or by Epistle. Now I hope there is none so
impudent to deny, that the Gospel is written. But here another difficulty
incounters us: If it were granted by the Churches interpretation; that there
were doctrines or Traditions, Divine, Apostolical, or Ecclesiastical,
delivered by word of mouth: upon what sure grounds might we be assured, which
be the Traditions, that were so delivered by Christ, his Apostles, or the
Church.


Papist. The ancient Fathers and chief Papists, do plainly teach, that many
points of doctrine, wherein you vary from us: as, halowing the Font, the
blessing of the oil, the anointing the Baptized, Exorcismes, Fastes,
Festiuities, prayer for the dead, prayer to Saints, worshipping of Images, the
oblation of the Sacrifice, their Annealing, their Primacie of Rome, their five
pretended Sacraments, the merit of works, their satisfactions, the numbering
their sins to the Priest, their Real presence, their half Communion, etc.
(See the preface for Priests: and, See Master Middletons book; called
Papisto-Mastix, Sect. 5.) and almost all these things which you defend against
us, are proved by the Fathers to be delivered by Tradition.


Protestant. 12 This shows evidently, that you are guilty of the same fault,
that the Pharisees were, Mark. 7.9
by Christ's own reproof, saying, You cast aside the commandments of God, to
maintain your own Traditions: Mat 15.9.
teaching for doctrine, men's precepts. So that as Saint Peter has censured
you, 1. Pet. 2.18
Ye are not redeemed from the vain Traditions of your Fathers. Besides you
choose rather to make the Fathers to contradict themselves, (as I have showed in
the preface of this treatise) than to acknowledge with us as the truth is,
that the Traditions mentioned by the Fathers, are no parts or points of the
Catholic faith. But does your Church practice all those Traditions which are
delivered by the Fathers, to be either Divine, Apostolical, or Ecclesiastical?


Papist. Yes: and although she did not, yet is the Churches authority
sufficient to abrogate, or admit, which she pleases.


Protestant. 13 Indeed you take that liberty to your selves, without all
warrant, either of Scripture or Fathers: For S Hierome, which is one of the
Fathers alleged by you for Traditions, Dialo. co^tr: Lucif. ca. 4.
delivers it as an Apostolic Tradition; On the Lords day, and throughout
every Penticost, neither to pray on the knees, nor to fast. The temper of milk
and honey, given to them that were newly baptized, Tertul. de Coro. Milit. Nu.
3.
is confirmed by Tertullian, who likewise reckons up a number of Rites
grounded upon Tradition: As, that the baptized should abstain from washing, a
whole week after Baptism, with much crossing at every going out, at every
step, at every coming in, at putting on of apparel, at putting on of shoes,
at washings, at tables, at lights, at beds, at seats, etc. all these are
delivered as the Apostles Traditions: which yet the Papists themselves observe
not. And if these be not Apostolic Traditions, what warrant have we for any of
the rest? For, as for the Churches authority in abolishing of these; you may
say as much of the holy Scriptures: for you have said before, That Traditions
unwritten, Conc. Trid. Sess. 4.
were of equal authority with the Scriptures. But do you think the
authority of the ancient Fathers, to be a sufficient ground, to lead us to
accept of all the Doctrine delivered by Tradition: and that whatsoever is
delivered by them, is to be received without exception.


Papist. Yes, the joint consent of the Fathers, Sta. prine. doctr. li. 7. ca.
13. and li. 1^ ca. 5. Heart. ^ ag: Ray. ca. ^* diui. ^.
is an absolute Rule; being indeed the Churches exposition.


Protestant. 14 Then must you wholly relinquish all your doctrine and
Traditions unwritten: for all the Fathers do with joint consent yield all
their authority to the Scriptures; laying it for a Ground, that nothing
necessary to salvation, is to be believed without the authority of the
Scriptures; nay, that themselves, are not to be credited without the
scriptures, as shall manifestly appear by ye testimonies of these Fathers
following: yea, S. Augustine is so absolute for us in most of his books Aug:
Ep: 19 ad Hiero: Epi. 48, Vincent: Ep 111, Fortunatiano. Epi 112, to Paulina.
Cont. Fastu^ li 11, c. 5. Contr. Cres. gram: li. 2, ca: 11 and 32, De Bap:
co^t: Don li. 2. c. 2 De merit. and remiss. peccat. cont. Pelag. lib: 3, cap:
7. De nature. and gra. ca. 61, De gracia Christi co^tra Pelag. cap. ^^. De
nuptijs and concupisce^t: lib. 2, ca. 23.
; that he would have the Church, sought only in the scriptures; and heretics
confuted only by the scriptures. To whose only authority in many places he
professes, that he himself will be bound. So that you must either make these
Fathers contrary to themselves: Or else grant that Traditions are not of
absolute necessity to be received. But for that this is a maine point, which
the Papists insist on; I will clear the same evidently by four just
exceptions, which I refer to the indifferent censure of any. First, I will
prove, that the Fathers have attributed all sufficiency to the Scriptures,
and have submitted all their authorities unto them. Secondly, That the Fathers
have held diverse errors: upon which it necessarily follows, that if they
might err in one thing, they might err in another. Thirdly, that they are
often rejected by the Papists; yea, even the greater number sometimes: contrary
to their own rule; and therefore may with as great reason be rejected by us.
Fourthly, That there are many counterf^its bearing the names of ancient
Fathers; and that often times they are alleged by the Papists to abuse us: all
which particular exceptions I will briefly prove in order as they lie.

First, Saint Basil says, Tract. de fide.
it is a most certain argument of infidelity, and a most certain sign of
pride, if any man will reject any of those things that are written; or bring in
any thing that is not written: when our Lord says, My sheep, hear my voice,
and, a stranger they will not hear.

Tertullian says, De resurrect* carnis.
Take away from Heretics those things which they hold with Ethnikes, that they
may stay their questions upon the Scriptures only, and they are not able to
stand.

Saint Augustine says, De doctr. Christ. li. 2. ca. 9.
All things that concern faith and manners, or belief and life, are plainly
written in the Scriptures.

Chrysostom says, In 2. ad Thessa. Ho. 3
That every thing is clear and evident by the Scriptures; and whatsoever
things are necessary, they are evident.

In Eusng: Ioh. li. 12, cap. 68.
Cyril says, That such of the things done by Christ are written, as the
writers thought, to be sufficient for manners and doctrine.

Epist: 11, inter epist: August.
In the controversy betw^xt S. Austin and S. Hierome, touching Peter's reproof;
Hierome alleged more Fathers on his side, and made so great account of them,
that he desired Austin to suffer him to err with such men, if he thought him
to err. Epist: 19.
To whom Saint Austin replied, that peradventure he might find as many, if he
had read much: But I (says he) have Paul the Apostle himself, in stead of
these all, and above these all. To him I do fly; to him do I appeal, from
all the doctors, his interpreters who are of other minds. etc.

Epist: 126, ad Euagrium.
S. Hierome yielding his opinion to Euagrius, a mean man; after he had showed
the judgments of Origin, Didimus, Hipollitus, Irenaeus, Eusebius Cesariensis,
Emisenus, Apollinarius, and Eustathius says, To bring forth the witnesses it
was my part; let it be yours to judge of the credit of the witnesses.

Orig. Hom: 1, super Ie^em.
Origin confesses, That their judgments, without witness of the Scriptures,
were of no credit.

Hierom. in Psalm. 98.
Hierome writes, That all which they spoke, they were to prove by the
Scriptures: Hier. in Man. 23.
and says in another place, That which has not authority from the Scriptures,
as easily is despised as approved.

Saint Basil says, Basil in Ethicis defi^ 8.
If every thing that is not of faith be sin, as S. Paul affirms, and faith
come by hearing, and hearing ^y the word of God, Ergo, whatsoever is without
(or besides) the Divine Scriptures, because it is not of faith, it is sin.

Saint Hillary: Hillar^us ad Constan. August.
Seek thou for faith, Emperor? (says he to Constantius) hear it not out
of the late Scrolles, but out of Gods Books. Hear, I beseech thee that which
is written of Christ, lest under pretense thereof, things not written be
preached. And in another place pressing his adversary, Thou, Idem de Trinitat.
li. ^
says he, that deniest things written, what remains but that thou believe
things unwritten? You see that was counted for a passing absurdity in that age,
which since the Papists have established, as the surest way to discern truth.

Tertullian refelling the Heretic Hermogenes: Tert, ad Head praesci. ad
Haeres.
I adore (says he) the fullness of the Scriptures; let Hermogenes show me
where this (that he teaches) is written: If it be not written, let him fear
the curse provided for adders and diminishers. It seems this Father understood
the Text of Deuteronomie, and the Apocalypse, otherwise than D.B.P. in his
book against M. Perkins.

Iren. li. 3. ^ap. 1.
Irenaeus says, The disposition of our salvation, we knew by none other, than
by those, by whom the Gospel came unto us: the which at first they preached by
mouth; but afterward by Gods appointment, they did deliver it to us in writing,
that it should be the foundation and pillar of our faith.

The mountains of Israel, whereon God promised to feed his flock, Aug. de
pastor. ca. 11.
are, (says Augustine) The writers of the divine Scriptures: feeding there you
feed safely: whatsoever you learn thence, count it sauourie; whatsoever is
besides them, refuse it. Therefore whether it be touching Christ, or his
Church, o^ any matter else, which concerns our faith and life, them contr.
Litt: Petil: li. 3. ca, 6.
I say not if we, (says Saint Austine) but as ^o^^weth in Paul, If an Angel
from heaven teach any thing besides that, which you have received in the
Scriptures of the law^ and the Gospel; hold him accursed. But I will conclude
this point (wherein there is ^ multitude of witnesses against you, which, to
avoid tediousness, I omit): S. Augustine teaches Paulina, Epist^us:
Not to follow his authority, or to believe a thing, because he has said it,
but to believe the Canonical Scriptures. L^ (...) de pi^ rit, c^
We say therefore with him let us yield and consent unto the holy Scriptures,
which can neither deceive, nor be deceived. And again, I require the voice of
the Shepherd, Read me this matter out of the Prophets, De past^^. cap. 14.
read it out of the Psalms, read it out of the Law, read it out of the
Gospel, read it out of the Apostles writings. And so I end with this sentence
of his, I owe my consent, De nature and gratia, ca. 61.
without gainsaying, only unto the Canonical Scripture.

Now, let the indifferent Reader judge of the handling of this first part;
whether he will believe the Fathers, speaking for, and with the Scriptures: or
for Traditions, without and and besides the Scriptures. Surely had these
Fathers lived in this age, they had been condemned for Heretics, as we are,
for holding the same doctrine; so well does this new Popery agree with
Antiquity. And the Papists had need to have these places, and infinite others
to this purpose, Deuteronomy. 4, ^. and 12, 32. and 28.5^. Io. 20.31. 2, Tim. 3, 15,
16, 17.
to be purged by their Index expurgatorius, out of the Fathers, lest this
thief and fundamental point agreeing so directly with the Scriptures, prove
the downe^all of all Papistrie.

Now let us briefly proceed to the second Exception, to show the error of the
Fathers.

First, Cyprian condemned the Baptism of Heretics as unlawful, wherein a
Council of Carthage of 87. Bishops under him, erred with him.

^ag. de ciuitate Dei, lib. ^1. c. 17.
Origin thought, That the devils themselves should be saved at length.

Tertullian does (with Montanus) condemn second marriage.

In dialog: cum Tripho Iud.
Justin the Martyr, Hier. commen. in Esaias, li. 18, in praefat.
Irenaeus, Eusebius hist. Ecclesi. lib. 3. ca. 36.
Papias, De spefidel. vt cita ab Hierom.
Tertul^ian, Hier. scrip e^cl. in ver. papias.
Victorinus, Di^^nar. instit. lib 7, cap. 23.
Lactantius, Hierom. comment. in Esaias, lib. 18, in Psalm.
Apolinarius, Hierom. come^t in Ezech: lib. 11.
Seuerus, and Eusebius. Hist Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 23.
Nepos did err, in that they thought, that Christians after the resurrection,
should reign a thousand years with Christ upon the earth in a golden
Jerusalem, and there should marry wives, beget children, eat, drink, and
live in corporal delights.

Irenaeus ad Hier lib. 5 ca. 2^.
Irenaeus, Hilar. diuinar. instit. li: 7, ca. 14.
Hillarie, Lactant. in Matt. Can. 17.
Lactantius, Hieron. epist. 139, ad Cypr.
Hierom, and Just. M^rtyr. Respon. ad Orthod. q. 71.
Justin Martyr erred, for that they thought that the world should last but six
thousand years: which opinion Aug in Erur. Psalm. 89. and de ciuitate Dei, lib.
18. cap. 33.
S. Augustine does reprove as rash and presumptuous.

Hillarie erred touching the humanity o^ Christ, and did not speak of the
person of the holy Ghost as the church speaks.

Irenaeus erred, in affirming, That Christ died in the fiftith year of his
age, contrary to the Scriptures, Luke 3.23. And John the Evangelist remembers
three Passeouers after the Baptism of Christ, and in the third he was
crucified, as he affirms.

Thus you see the second Exception ius^fified: but I will forbear to enlarge
this part any further, because I am unwilling to discover their nakedness.

The third Exception is, That the Papists themselves reject the Fathers,
Bristowes motives.
notwithstanding the great brags they make of them, as th^ugh they were wholly
theirs; wherein I will be short, as I have been in all the rest. When we
affirm by Saint Hieromes testimony, that Pope Liberius subscribed to the
Arrians: Master Hardin answers, Jewel aga. Har. page 6^
that Hierome was deceived by a rumor, dwelling in the East.

The Rhemists except against Augustines exposition of these words, Upon this
Rock, Mat. 16, sect. 8.
etc. which he expounds not of Peter's person, but of Peter's faith: Princ.
doct li. 6. cap. 3.
Also Doctor Stapleton calls the same exposition Lapsus humanus, An humane
oversight. And yet the same exposition is confirmed by a Gregory Nissen, b
Cyril, c Chrysostom, d Ambrose, and e Hillary: All agreeing, that this Rock
is the confession of Peter.

Bellarmine reiects S. Augustines interpretation of S. Paul in this place, He
shall be saved, as through fire; which Austine interprets to be ye
afflictions or tribulatio^s of this life. But Bellarmin expounds it of
Purgatory.

The Rhemists reject S. Augustines reading, Heb. 11. ver. 21. who says, (...)
^t. in ^nesis, q. 162.
Jacob by faith worshipped God upon the end of his staff. But they translate,
Jacob adored the top of his Rod, to countenance their Idolatry.

^n confess. Aug. i. 2. c. 8. Tit. 5.
Torrensis the Jesuit in the division of the commandments, says, that 3 of
them concern our duty toward God, and 7 toward men. This doctrine is
embraced by ye Papists, upon Austin and Clements authority, contrary to al
these Fathers following: whose judgments they may truly be said to reject, in
preferring two before so many. As first by the Hebrews, as Li. de decal. (...)
duob. opusc. ^le legib. speci^ lib.
Philo, Antiquit. ^ude. li. 3. ca. 4.
Josephus, In Exodus 20.
Aben Ezra: next by the Grecians; In versib. de ^ecalog.
Gregory Nazianzen, In Exodus ^o. 8.
Origin, In Synop. ^et. Scriptur.
Athanasius, and In Mat. oper. ^mperf. Ho. 49.
Chrysostom. Lastly, by the Latins: In Epist. ad ^ph. cap. 6.
S. Ambrose, In ^pist. ad ^phes ca. 6.
S. Hierome. And one yet ancienter than they both, Aug. q. vet. Nou. Test. ^p.
7.
The Author of the questions of the Old and New Testament, who all affirm that
four Commandments concern our duty toward God, and six toward men.

Epiphanius is rejected by D. Hardin, Jewel, pag^ 548.
for breaking of Images.

Cyprian is condemned by Dureus, because he teaches that only Christ is to be
heard.

Their reiection of the Fathers is so commonly known to all that read
Controversies, See their I^dex expurgatorius.
as is evident by the infinite testimonies alleged by us, out of the Fathers,
against the Papists, that I shall not need to insist of more particularities:
in which few may yet be observed; that they reject the greater number (which
they term the Churches exposition) when they make against them. Stapleton and
Heart.


The fourth Exception is, that there are many counterfeits bearing the name of
Fathers, which are likewise often alleged by the Papists, to abuse us with
their names. For proof whereof there be nine volumes of S. Hieroms works,
whereof 3 are none of his: and yet vitae Patrum, a Legend, how wrongfully
fathered on him, Comment. in epi: 2. ad T^ mo. ca. 4. l^ cor. Theol^ li. 11.
ca. 6.
your Espencaeus and Canus both show. As also a barbarous and sottish fable of
the nativity of S. Mary as Canus calls it.

Likewise of ten volumes of S. Austins, there is not above one or two, that
has not more or fewer of such Pamphlets patched to it, both by the censure of
Erasmus, Censura theologoru^ Louanien^um in Appe^di c Tom^ secundi, and
cetero^um August.
and the Divines of Louain, who show, that sundry things bear Saint Austines
name, whereof some are unlearned, some lewd and heretical.

Sixtus ^ene^s. de ^^lc^ librotum inscrip. Stapl prin^* doctr. li. ^, cap. 14.
Sixtus Senensis, whom D. Stapleton does commend, has proved that books are
fathered falsely, not only upon Augustine and Hierome, but also upon Ambrose,
Cyprian, Athanasius, Eusebius, Emisenus, Iunilius, Cyril, Eucherius, Arnobius,
and Thomas of Aquine. And with this discourse he closes up the former volume
of his holy Library: In which he has showed, Bibliotheca Sanct^ lib. 2. and 4.
that Clemens, Abdius, Origin, Chrysostom, Hipolitus, and many mo, have had
their names defaced with the same injury.

I will omit diverse others for breuity; and although this may seem no just
Exception against the Fathers, yet it ought to make us cautious, how we trust
them to be the true Fathers; and not counterfeits: the rather for that the
Papists, have often alleged such counterfeit Fathers to credit their doctrine
with. For proof whereof, Torrensis the Jesuit cites such books for S.
Augustines as are known and granted to be none of his; ^n confess. ^ng. li.
^, ca. ^, Tit. 2, etc. assi^.
as namely, The Sermon of Saint Peter's chair, and other pretty Pamphlets of
the same litter. And although in the preface of his confessions to the Reader,
he makes an exception: yet our of that exception, he says, that although they
do not avail much to convince the opinion of Sectaries: Nevertheless, there
will be godly men and learned, who will permit and judge them to be Saint
Augustines own; and will both take delight and profit by trading them. And yet
amongst the^e books, there is one that teaches, contrary to Saint Augustine;
as namely. The book of visiting the sick: wherein the Bastard Austin allows
the worship of images for good, De visitat. Infirmor. li 2. ca. 1. De moribu^
Ecclesiae ca. 3^.
which ^he true Austin does note as an abuse, and says the Church misliketh
it. And yet this book alleged by the Jesuit for worshipping of i^ages is set
as a flower in his Austins con^^tions; though it be judged a bastard Austin by
the Divines of Louain. Censura Louaniensium. Non est August. princ. doctr. li.
^. cap. 15. Arnob. com in psalm. ^^. Hier. de Scriptori^. eccle. Biblio. sanct.
li. 4. Histor. T^ip. li. 5. c. 5. Coment. in ^sal. 105.


D. Stapleton alleges Arnobius upon the Psalms, to prove, that who goes
out of Peter's church shall perish; and that this is a counterfeit Father, Saint
Hierome and Sixtus Senensis dot show, for that the most ancient Arnobius was
elder, than that he might hear of the heresy of Photinus; whereas this
Arnobius that writes on the Psalms does mention Photinus and wrote by name
against his Heresy.

S. Basil is often alleged by the Papists, in many of their books, Basil de
Spir. sanct. ca. 27.
for Traditions not written. These words are urged as his: Of the doctrines
which are taught in the Church; we have some laid down in writing, some again
we have received by Tradition, from the Apostles in a mystery, that is in
secret: whereof either have like force to godliness; neither does any man
contradict them, that is but meanly acquainted with ye laws of the Church: for
if we go about to reject those customs which are not written, as of no moment;
before we beware, we shall condemn those things which are in the Gospel
necessary to salvation, yea, rather we shall bring the preaching of faith to a
naked name. And not long after in the same book, If nothing else has been
received without scriptures, Ibid. ca. 29.
neither let this be received: But if we have received many secrets without
writing, let us also receive this among those many. I think it Apostolic to
cleave to Traditions not written. Now this book is proved a counterfeit by
the reasons following: First, though it has Saint Basils name to it, Epist.
Eras. dedicat. ad Episc. Culmens. praefi^^. ca. 17.
yet the later part thereof whence those patches are taken, have neither S.
Basils style, learning, spirit, nor age; which Erasmus confessed when he
translated the book. Besides, this place of Basils, directly contradicts the
two places before mentioned of of S. Basil. Q. 14. par: 1
And this later allegation of the 29 Chap. conuinceth the Author to be but a
young Father in respect of S. Basil. For this bastard Basil in the same chapter
mentions Meletius, as a Bishop of ancient memory, dead long before his time:
Basi. despi. Sanct. ca. ^9
Insuper and Meletium illum admirandum eade^ fuisse sententia narrant quicum
illo vixerunt. Sed quid opus est vetera commemorare? Immo nunc qui sunt
Orientales etc. Moreover, Meletius (that admirable Bishop) was of the same
opinion, as they that lived with him report. But what need I repeat ancient
times? The East Bishops which are at this day, etc.

Now the true Saint Basil, not only lived at the same time with Meletius, but
was made Deacon by him, Socr: li. 4. ca. 26. Basilij epi. 56, 57, 58, 89. Socr.
lib. 5. ca. 8.
and wrote many letters to him, and departed this life before him, as the
Church story witnesses, affirming Helladius S. Basils successor, and Meletius,
were both present at the second General Council at Constantinople, under
Theodosius; and that must needs be when Saint Basil was dead. I will yet enlarge
this part out of ye Rhemes Testament, because I know you highly esteem the
book, and think it impossible, that so many learned Divines would abuse their
Readers with counterfeit Fathers to confirm their doctrine.

Anot. Phe. Test. ^. Tim. 4. sect. 13.
Your Rhemists allege a counterfeit Epistle of Alexander, to prove Holy water
to be 1400. years old, and it bears date when Traianus, and Helianus were
Consuls, which was never; which proves it to be a counterfeit.

Anot. The. Test. 1. Cor. 11. sect. 10.
You allege Chrysostom, and S. James Masses, for putting water into the wine
in the Sacrament: and that these Masses are forged, are thus proved: Bals. in
Can. 32. Conc. Constant. 6.
First Balsamon, Patriarch of Antioch, says, That the Liturgy of Saint James
was not extant in his time. And in the Liturgy that bears the name of
Chrysostomes Mass as it is set forth by Claudius du Sanctis, There is a
prayer for Pope Nicholas and the Emperor Alexius: whereof the one was near
five hundredth years, the other 7. hundredth years after Chrysostom.

For extreme Unction, you cite Augustine de visitatione Infirmor and Austin de
Tempore. Anot. The. Test. Cala. 4. sect. 2.
The first place is proved a counterfeit by the censure of Louain, In Censur.
general. Tom. 10.
as I have showed in the first example of these counterfeit Fathers: and the
other place de Tempore, by the same warrant. Oper. de Aug.


Saint Augustine, (or as some think, Anot The. Test. Acts 1 sect. 7.
Fulgentius) is alleged by your Rhemists to prove prayer and preises to the
blessed Virgin Marie, saying, Who can be able worthily to praise, or thank
thee: Receive our prayers, obtain us our requests; for thou act the special
hope of sinners; by thee we hope for pardon of our sins; and in thee, O most
blessed, is the expectation of our rewards, etc. What greater blasphemy can
there be, then to attribute that to the creature, which is only due to the
Creator? This is not to honor, but to dishonor that blessed virgin; in giving
those attributes to her, which to proper and peculiar to our Savior Christ.
Now for proof that this is a counterfeit Austine, he adds the tehimonie of
Isiodorus, who lived 200. years after S. Austine; which proves, that it can
neither be Saint Augustine nor Folgentius. Besides this, Augustine or
Fulgentius, in the 39. sermon, doubts of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary,
and yet when he may seem to make for their superstition, he must be urged as
the true Austine. So little conscience make they of the abusing their Readers;
if it may hold them in blindness, or give any color to their errors. The
questions of the Old and New Testament, are none of Saint Austins: for in the
21 question, it is affirmed that Melchisedech was the holy Ghost: which saying,
the true Austine, in his book De Haeres. refuteht as an heresy. Bellar. de
Sacr. Can. i. 2. ca. 10.
This Bellarmine confesses, and yet the authority of this book is often
urged by the Rhemists and other Papists. But above all their forgeries, Annot.
The. sest. Act. 1.
those touching the assumption of our Lady are notable: where for proof
thereof, Saint, Denis, S. Damascen, Athanasius, and S. Barnard, are alleged.
In which they affirm, that S. Denis writes these and these things; where
neither the Author is S. Denis, neither writes he the things which they
allege. Now for proof that this Denis is a counterfeit, Dionysius Areopagita
(who they here call S. Denis) was dead many years before the works which bear
his name could be written: for there is De divine. ^ominib. c. 4
cited in them a saying of Ignatius, out of an Epistle which he wrote to the
Romans as he was going to suffer martyrdom: Eusebius. in ^ronic. Methodi^ in
Mar^rio Dion. ^reopag.
in the time of Traian the Emperor. Now Dionysius died Ignat. epi. Ephesians.
in the time of Domitian, certain years before. And when Dion. A^op. Episc.
^thenarum
Ignatius wrote it, Onesimus was B. of Ephesus, who succeeded Timothy. Your
counterfeit Timoth. ^isc. Ephe.
alleges it to Timothy, B. of Ephesus, either after his decease, or before
it was written. Besides it is set down in yt Annotations that she lived 63
years, being 25 years after Christ's Ascension, as it is in their Tables of S.
Paul, when she is supposed to be assumpted. Now in the same Table, After the
Acts of the Apostles.
it is showed by their own account, that it was 51 years after Christ's
Nativity, and 18 years after his Ascension, before Dionysius Areopagita (whom
the term S. Denis) was converted by S. Paul; which Acts 9, 5 Galat. 1.18.
Acts 9.26. Galat. 1, 22 Acts 13, 4. Gal. 2.1. Acts 15.4. Acts 16, 5. Acts 17, 34
the Scriptures also witness, as any that will weigh the particular texts shall
evidently perceive: So that he could not be one of the brethren, to witness her
assu^ption: She being assumpted (taking the largest computation) three years
before he was converted; being at that time no Christian. He might be proved a
cou^terfeit by other reasons, which I omit. Now touching the things which are
by the Rhemists fathered on him, he says no more thereof, but that among the
Bishops, inspired of the holy Ghost, Hierotheus excelled all the rest (save the
Apostles) in praising Christ's goodness; when himself and Timothy, and many
of their holy brethren, came together to behold the body, which received God,
and which the Prince of life was in. As for the miracles (falsely forged by the
Rhemists, and fathered on him) of ye Apostles brought together; S. Thomas
coming the 3 day after, the Angels singing Hymns three days, the burial of
the virgins body, the desire of Thomas to see it, the Sepulch^e opened for his
sake, and the body assumpte^ into heaven, he says not one word of these
conceits. Nay he rather says against them; for he notes, namely, That James
was also present, the brother of the Lord, and Peter the chiefest and
ancientest top of the Apostles. And it is not likely he would have noted two,
if they had been all present: here is no less than seven lies in less than
six lives.

Now let us see how Damascen and your Portesse agrees: For Damasce^ says, The
Angels sung almost three days. The Portesse, three whole days. Damascen
says, The rest of the Apostles, would show to one of them, who was absent, the
body. The Portesse says, Thomas, who was absent, would worship the body. Now
what thee Damascen was, let your own doctors tell you; who except against him
for his tale of Gregory the Pope, ^anus loco^m Theol, (...). 11. ^. Hessels
^nsure de ^stor. sanct. ^. 3. ^erm. de funct: in (...).
and Traiane the Emperor. Thus Damascen reports, That Gregory while he went
over the market place of Traian, did pray for Traians soul to God: and behold,
a voice from heaven; I have heard thy prayer, and I pardon Traian: but see thou
pray no more to me for ye wicked. These be good places to prove prayer for the
dead: and yet it is against popish doctrine, that prayer can deliver any out of
hell. And if he had been in Purgatory, the Pope could have dispatched that of
himself without praying. The next is Athan in Euang. de deipara; who speaks
not one word of your miraculous fault. And yet is the same Athanasius rejected
for a bastard, in your own edition. In edit. Petr. Nannij Louan. praefat. ad
episcop. Atiebat.
The last is five sermons of S. Barnards, in all which likewise, there is not
one word of that miracle. So that unless they were disposed to lie for the
whetstone; it is to be wondered, how they dare thus abuse their Readers both
with the names of counterfeit Fathers, and false forgeries. If I should collect
all such like stuff, it would grow greater than this small Tract. But let the
Christian Reader judge of the rest, as he proves these to be truly brought
against them. And if any desire further proof of the Rhemists sincerity in
alleging Fathers, let him observe these places, viz. The constitutions of
Clement, Luke 4. Sect. 1. Ignatius, Matt. 4. Sect. 2. and 1. Peter 2. Sect. 6
Dionysius Areopag. Act. 8. Sect. 6. Hypolitus Mat. 24. Sect. 5. Policarpus,
Act. 6. Sect. 1. Miltiadi Fabian Act. 8. Sect. 6. S. Andrew, S. Martial, Hebr.
10. Sect. 11. The Masses of S. James, Basil, and Chrysostom, 1. Cor. 11. Sect.
10. Clicton for Civil, Ioh. 11. Sect. 1. and Paulinus, Ioh. 9. Sect. 2. All
these are counterfeit Fathers, and urged by the Papists under the names of true
Fathers, to countenance their corrupt doctrine. And therefore no marvel if
popish leaders instruct their followers, to get us into the plain field of
their Motives, out of our weak and false castle of only Scripture, as
Bristowe the Licentiate terms it. Brist. Motiu. 48.
And it is no marvel that they have such store of the Fathers, and that our
new masters (as they term us) cannot compare with these Fathers in the
doctrines they deliver, when they bring us only the names of fathers. I could
give instance likewise, how the Fathers are often contrary one to another; yea,
contrary to themselves. Thus I hope it is plainly proved, by these four just
exceptions, that the Fathers judgments are no infallible rule for a man to
build his faith on: though it be imbellisht with the churches exposition. And
yet we reverence and honor them, as men that have brought great light to the
understanding of the Scriptures. But what do^ you understand by intituling the
ancient Fathers with the name of the church?


Papist. I mean, Har^^g. Rai.
that the joint consent of the Fathers in all doctrines delivered by them is
the doctrine of the Church.


Protestant. 15 What do you mean by the joint consent of the Fathers.


Papist. I mean by the joint consent of the Fathers, that, which all, or the
most part of them, do deliver for truth; wherein if there be any difference,
the greater number is to be followed: for a few may be deceived more easily
than many.


Protestant. 16 This rule seems to be very uncertain; for you know, that
king Ahab was deceived, by the consent of false prophets; 2. Chron. 1^ 5, 11.
even 400. against Micaiah: yea, when the Fathers, in the great Council of
Nice, were about to decree, that Bishops Priests and Deaco^s should not use
their wives; Paphnutius alone, Sozom. li. 1. cap. 2^.
rose up in the midst of their Council, and freely contradicted it, and
prevailed. Besides, in the third Exception before, it is plainly showed, that
the greater number of Fathers, are by your selves rejected in the division of
the commandments; and in the controversy between S. Austine and Hierom
touching Peter's reproof, par. 1. wherein your selves grant, Torrensis confess.
Aug. lib. 2. cap. 1. tim. ^.
that Austin judged more soundly. What is therefore then to be done, that a
certain and sure ground may be found out?


Papist. Then a better and more sure way is that, which by the faithful
Pastors of the Church is decreed in a general Council, which cannot err.


Protestant. 17 Indeed, I must confess, it is a sure way to build our faith
upon those Councels which cannot err: But how shall we be assured that they
cannot err?


Papist. We are assured by the Scriptures, That the Church cannot err; as is
evident by these places following. Mat. 18.20.
Our Savior Christ says, That when two or three are gathered together in his
name, that he will be in the midst. And, Ioh. 16, 13.
he promises to send, unto his Church, the holy Ghost, which shall lead them
into all truth. 1. Tim. 3.
And S. Paul calls it the Pillar and ground of truth. Upon which places, and
many other, which for breuity I omit; we conclude, that the Church cannot
err: which, to speak as the Schoolmen do, we call the Church
representative; because the whole Church is there represented in a gerall
Council.


Protestant. 18 Take heed what you do: Will you bring the Church (contrary to
the judgment of many learned Papists, mentioned in the preface of this book)
to take her authority from the Scriptures, and to be tried by them, whether it
may err? If you do, it will be the utter ruin and destruction of your
Religion: for the Scriptures will convince the Council of Constance of error;
in taking away the cup from the Laity, contrary to S. Paul's express
commandment, saying, 1. Cor. 11.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup. And contrary to the Institution and commandment of Christ himself,
saying, Drink you all of this. Mat. 26.27.
And Saint John witnesses, that our Savior Christ says, John 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you have
no life in you: and many other testimonies which I omit. It will convince the
Council of Nice of error, in decreeing for the worship of Images, contrary to
the second commandment. But what shall I need to descend to particularities;
it will convince your late Council of Trent, and all other Councels; in all
those points of doctrine, wherein you vary from us: if any Papist dare
undertake to bring the controversies between us, to that trial.

And surely, since they will seem to bring Scriptures, to prove the
authority of the church; and, that the church cannot err: I see no reason why
they should refuse to make them judge of all differences between us. But I
marvel they urge these places of Scripture, to prove that the church
representative cannot err: seeing they are not able to show, that any one
ancient Father has so understood them: or, that the whole church is
represented in a general Council. Name one Father that is ancient, and not
counterfeit, for your credit sake, that has interpreted these places of
Scripture, or any other in that case, as you do. If you cannot, the world may
justly hold you for wranglers, and abusers, both of Scriptures and Fathers.
But let us a little examine the force of those Scriptures, which if they were
all granted, make nothing against us, if they be rightly understood. The first
is, When two or three are gathered together etc. This place is as pregnant for
two or three faithful men, assembled in Christ's name, as to a National or a
Provincial Council: Neither does it give any greater privilege to a
General Council, than it does unto them; Bellar. li. 1. de Conc. ca. 12.
though it be alleged by Bellarmine, as the ground for the authorizing of
Councels. All which promise notwithstanding, your selves grant, That both
National and Provincial Councels may err.

The next place is the sixteenth of John, where the holy Ghost is promised to
the Apostles, to lead them into all truth: which spirit of truth is promised
to the church, and to every particular member thereof, for whom our Savior
Christ prays, saying, Sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is truth. Ioh.
17.17.19, 20.
And again, I pray not for these alone, but for them also that shall believe
in me through their word. But what makes this for general Councels, more
then the whole church, or every faithful member thereof? For although this
proves, that the holy Ghost shall ever remain with the church, and with
every true member of the same: yet must we not hereof conclude, (though it be
as pregnant for every faithful particular man, as for the whole) That either
every member of Christ, or every Pastor that is the Apostles successor,
cannot err: Neither is this to be restrained to general Councels, or to the
Pope: neither must we think, that any visible Church may challenge all
privileges, that the Apostles had, as necessary to the conversion of the
world. Rhem. Test. John 16.
But your Rhemists will tell you, that to teach all truth, and to preserve in
truth, and from error, the holy Ghost is promised and performed, only to the
Church, and the choice governor and general Councels. Upon which the Papists
conclude, that if the Church cannot err, the governors of the church cannot
err. Is not this substantial reasoning? The whole church cannot err; Ergo,
the Pastors and preachers cannot err. Deal plainly and directly; Do you
hereby conclude that all Pastors cannot err: or that no Pastor can err? For
to say, that no Pastor can err, were apparent madness, and to say that all
Pastors cannot err, stands you in no stead: neither is this a good argument,
The whole Church cannot err; that is, all and every faithful cannot err:
Ergo, all Pastors cannot err. This is no kind of consequent: for some of the
faithful may be directed to the truth, and they no Pastors nor preachers; and
many preachers may be preserved from error, and they no Bishops; and many
Bishops may kept in the faith, and they not assembled: And a great number of
those that be assembled, may be righty affected, and yet not the most part of
them. And the greater side may be well disposed, and yet not the Bishop of
Rome; without whose confirmation you hold no Council lawful. And therefore
this argument is very childish, The whole Church cannot err: Ergo, General
Councels cannot err; and specially the Pope: (of whom we shall speak more
particularly hereafter) neither has the holy Ghost filled with the
unmeasurable abundance of grace, any but Christ: John 3.34 John 1.16.
for God gives not the spirit by measure to him; of whose fullness we all
receive. And it may well be gathered from the Scriptures, 2. Cor. 10.13 Ephesians.
4.7.
that though the holy Ghost be given to the Elect, yet he has given it by
measure, as I may say with Saint Paul: not to this end, that they may not err,
but that they may not err to death. For what thing soever is received of
another, it is received according to the capacity of that which receives it.

The last is the 1. Tim. 3.15. The Church is the pillar and ground of truth,
therefore it cannot err. If this argument were granted, would it follow
hereupon, that general Councels could not err? but this is sufficiently
refuted before. And you know that Peter was a pillar of truth, and yet he
erred and was reproved by Saint Paul: Gal. 2.
yea, your Divines of Paris, Articuli Parisienses.
but lately resolved, that Peter erred in faith when Paul reproved him. And
the very drift and scope of the place shows, That Timothy is not sent by
Saint Paul to the church, to learn his duty, but to the Scripture. These
things write I unto thee, (says he) hoping to come shortly; but if I tarry
long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house
of God, which is the church of the living GOD, the pillar and ground of truth.

This church then, which Timothy was conversant in, is the church of Ephesus,
called by S Paul, The pillar and ground of truth: But this church of Ephesus
has condemned the doctrine of the Popes supremacy; Conc. Flor. Sess. vlt.
Chalcocondylas de Reb. Turc. lib. 6.
to which other churches of the East have likewise condescended. Therefore, if
that be true still, which the Church teaches, because S. Paul calls it the
pillar and ground of truth; then the doctrine of the Popes supremacy is
wicked, and Papistrie is heresy: yea even this church, notwithstanding it was
called the pillar and ground of truth, is now left desolate to Mahomets wicked
impiety.

But let us see by some few testimonies of the Fathers, how they have expounded
this place, and whether they have applied it to general Councels as the
Papists do, and not rather to the whole Church consisting of the faithful, as
the Protestants understand it.

S. August. says, Aug. in Psalm 47. in pr^ef
We may not understand the second of the Sabbath, to be any other than the
Church of Christ, yet the Church of Christ in the Saints; the church of Christ
in those that are not overcome with the tentations of this wicked world: for
they are worthy the name of firmament. Therefore the church of Christ is called
the firmament, in those that are firm, which is, says he, the Church of the
living God, the pillar and firmament of truth. Aug. de Bap li. 7. cap: 3 Tom.
6.
The like saying has S. Augustine in many other places, but specially where he
writes against the Donatists.

Saint Chrysostom expounds this place of the verity it self, Chrysostom. Ho^ 11,
in 1. Tim. 3.
and not of the Pastors or Councels, as the Papists do: For (says he) the
verity of the church is both the pillar and the firmament. And if you will see
that the Fathers have understood the church, as the Protestants do; read S.
Augu. Enchirid. ^ Laurent. ca^ 56.
expounding the Articles of ye Creed, where he says that the Church is here to
be taken for the whole, and not for that part only, which is a stranger upon
earth.

Aug. in Psalm. 137.
Again, he says, There is a Church beneath, there is a Church above, the
Church beneath in all the faithful, etc.

Ibid. Psalm. 90. Conc. 2.
Likewise, the whole church every where diffused is the body of Christ, and he
is the head of it: Not only the faithful which are now, but also they that
were before us, from the beginning of the world, and they that shall be after
us, to the end of the world, do all pertain to this body. The church is the
body of Christ, not the church which is here or there, but which is here and
every where, thorowout the world, etc. And often times in his writings he
affirms the Catholic church to consist of all the predestinate, De ciuitat.
Dei, li. 21. ca. 25. de Bapt. ^i. 6. ca. 3. In John Tract. 45.
which are the members of Christ's mystical body, and that no wicked men
perteine unto it, but only the good, holy and just. But to conclude this point,
with one whom you have ever reputed your own.

Anselmus super hunc locum, says, The house in which God dwells, is the
whole congregation of the faithful; who are to be taught diversely: and the
same Church is in the perfect, a pillar; that is, sublime, straight,
inconcussible, supporting and lifting up the younger sort: and in the same
perfect, it is the firmament of truth, because both by words and examples it
confirms, in the hearts of the weak, the verity of faith and Gods
commandments. Thus you see the Church is by these testimonies understood to be
the congregation of the faithful, and not general Councels, or Pope. And it
is truly gathered out of these words of Anselmus; which are to be taught, that
the church consists as well of the Laity as the Clergy. Now if you will see
how the church may be known, Chrysostom says, Hom. in Mat. 49,
Before it might be showed many ways, which was the church of Christ; But now
it is no way to be known, but only by the Scriptures. S. Augustine says, (as
we may truly say of the Papists) Let the Donatists (says he) show their
church, De vnitat. eccles. ca. 16.
not in the rumors and speeches of the men of Africa, nor in the Councels of
their Bishops, nor in their discourses of any writer whosoever, nor in signs
and miracles that may be forged; but in the prescript of the law, in the
predictions of the Prophets, in the verses of the Psalms, in the voices of the
shepherd himself, in the preachings and works of the Evangelist, that is in
all the Canonical authorities of the sacred Scriptures. And binding himself
to the same condition, he adds, But whether they hold the Church, Ibidem.
let them show no otherwise than by the Canonical books of the holy scriptures,
because we our selves do not say, we must therefore be believed, for that
we are in the church of Christ; or else for that Optatus, Ambrose, and
infinite other Bishops of our communion have commended the church which we
hold; or because our Church has been published in the Councels of our
Colleagues.

Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 16.
Chrysostom says, Even so touching this new Jerusalem which is the Church,
they that were spiritual Christian men, leaving the bodily church, which the
wicked by violence had invaded, departed out from them. Or as S. John
expounds it, they rather departed out from us: for he seems not (indeed)
to depart from the church, that bodily departs, but he that spiritually
leaves the foundations of ye Ecclesiastical truth. We have departed from them
in body; they have departed from us in mind: we from them in place; they from
us by faith: we have left with them ye foundations of the walls; they with us
the foundations of the scriptures: we are departed from them in the sight of
man; they are departed from us in the judgment of God. But now after yt the
spiritual church is come forth, ye bodily church is left forsaken: that is to
say, from the people that seemed to be a christian people, and was not; this
people is gone forth, that seemed not outwardly, but was so indeed:
notwithstanding as we have said before, they are rather departed from us, than
we from them. Now let ye indifferent Reader judge by Chrysostomes judgment,
whether the Papists or we, by this description may be truliest reputed the true
church: for I think it is evident to all, that they have the foundations of
the walls, and we ye foundations of ye Scriptures, which they so blasphemously
speak of: we are departed from them in the sight of man; but they from us in
the sight of God: and who they were that seemed to be a christian people, and
were not; let that be tried by the Scriptures. And, if you will know what
authority ye Fathers give to the church, S. Aug. says, Cont. Cresc^ li. 2. ca.
21. Idem oper. imperf. in Mat. Ho. 49
The church may not prefer her self before Christ; neither may we believe
the true churches themselves, unless they say and do those things yt are
consonant to the scriptures.

The church may not prefer her self before Christ, Idem contr^ Crescon. li 2
cap. 21.
for so much as he always judges rightly; and ecclesiastical Judges, as
being but men, are often deceived. Many be the testimonies that might be
brought to this purpose: but to proceed, we make the same just exceptions
against general Councels, yt we did against the Fathers.

First, we will prove that they are contrary one to another.

Secondly, that they have erred.

And lastly, that they are rejected by the Papists.

Canon 59.
The first Exception I prove thus; (for I will be brief) The Council of
Laodicea, (though a provincial Council, Constant. in Trullo, Can. 2.
yet allowed by a general Council of Constantinople) did set down the same
Canon of the Scriptures, which both the old church had, and our church does
hold; and commands, Ne aliqui praeterea legantur, and in auctoritatem
recipiantur. That none besides be read, and received into authority.

Canon. 47. Sess. 3.
The third Council of Carthage which therein the Council of Trent subscribeth to,
did add the books of the Maccabees, and the rest of the Apocrypha, to the
old Canon, contrary to the said Councels of Laodicea and Constantinople.

Can. 6.
The Council of Nice appointed bounds and limits, as well for the Bishop of
Romes jurisdiction, as for other Bishops: contrary to which the Council of
Lateran gave the Souereignty of ordinary power, Can. 5. apud Innocent. 3.
to the church of Rome, Conc. Con^tant. as it is extant, Nice 2. Act. 6. Tom. 6.
over all Churches.

The Council of Constantinople condemned the setting up of Images: contrary to
which The Council of Nice, Aen. Sylu. de Conc. Basil. contr. Flor. and Perrar.
Conc. Constant. Sess. 4. and 5.
accurseth those that worship not holy images. I will enlarge this part no
further, though I could show, that some Councels have decreed, That the
Council is above the Pope: some that the Pope is above the Council.

The next is thus proved: First, this is an infallible rule, That Councels
decreeing things contrary (as is instanced in these few examples before) It
must of necessity follow, that the one of them must err: yet will I prove it
by some more particulars.

The second Council of Nice, decreed, Act. 5.
That Angels and men's souls are bodily and circumscriptible: and yet this
Council, notwithstanding this gross error, was confirmed by the Council held
at Constantinople; which Pope Agatho has allowed for a general Council.

In the Council of Neocesaria confirmed by Leo the 4. second marriage is
forbidden. Canon 7.
The Canon says, he is commanded to enjoin penance for second marriage.

The Council of Toletan says, Tolet. 1. Can. 17.
He that has not a wife, but in stead of his wife, a concubine, is not for
this cause to be repelled the communion. This Council was confirmed by Leo, ^s
it may appear, Canon 21.

In the sixth general Council, Can. 72.
the marriages betwixt Catholics and Heretics are judged to be void. Now
whether these be gross and manifest errors, I refer it to the censure of any
indifferent Reader. But these absurdities they are forced to give way to, or
else to overthrow that maine pillar of Popery, That the Church cannot err.
The last part which I promised to show, is; That Councels are rejected by the
Papists. This is proved, for that many things are rejected by them in both the
said Exceptions: But I will instance some few more.

Andradius the defender of the Tridentine Council, in his first book,
rejects the Council of Chalcedon, one of those first four Councels (which
Gregory professes to receive, as the holy Gospels) saying, This Council
erred, in that it did rashly, and without reason ordain; That the Church of
Constantinople, should be above the Church of Alexandria and Antioch.

Conc. Chal. de Laicis, ca. 20. Praefat. in li, de pont.
Bellarmine says, That in the Council of Chalcedon, there is something good,
and something evil, and that we may receive the one, and refuse the other. And
in another place he dispenses with himself to reprove, in the sam^ manner,
the Council of Constantinople, for having attempted somewhat, that did not
^lease the Church of Rome. Bellar. de Conc. and eccles. li, 10. ca. 60.70.
Pighi. Hier. eccles. li. 6. cap. 4. and 5. and 7.
And he rejects wholly seven general Councels. Read likewise what Pighius
has written of purpose ^o discredit the sixth and seventh Synodes. And ^e
impugneth the Council of Constance and Basil.

Now though we have proved the three par^icularities proposed, wherein our
lawful and ^^st Exceptio^s against Councels are evident: ^et let us see whether
our assertion in this point ^e justified both by the Fathers, and chief and
^earned Papists.

Saint Augustine says, That general Councels are often amended, the former by
^he later: and if our adversaries object, That ^hey are amended but not from
errors; What ^eede amending where no fault is? The con^itions, which S.
Augustine repeateth in the ^^rst, indureth to the last, Si quid forte a
verita^e deuiatum est, If in ought they swarne from ^he truth. And it is
manifest by the drift of ^he place, writing against the Donatists, Epist. 7^.
(...) Iubai.
that maintained the authority of the Council hol^en by S. Cyprian against the
truth, that he speaks manifestly of Correction of errors, and not of things
indifferent, as the Papists ^lose to maintain their error; That general
Councels cannot err.

In Epist. ad procopi.
The Arrians prevailed so by Councels, that it made Gregory Nazianzen, to
despair, that ever any good would be done by Councels

Saint Augustine rehearsing two Episcopal judgments, Epist. 16.7.
that passed against the Donatists, in the Councels at Rome and Arle, he
shows how Councels might bind us: But, (says he) let these be counted the
judgments of men, and let it be said, They might either deceive, or be
deceived, and perhaps corrupted.

Saint Augustine having showed, that the Council of Ariminum, being deceived
by the subtilty of a few, decreed against the Council of Nice, which had
decreed against the Arrian Heretics, Cont. Maxi. li. 3. ca. 14.
concludes thus against Maximinus; But now, neither ought I to produc^ the
Council of Nice, nor you the Council o^ Ariminum, for a prejudice: for
neither am I bound to the authority of this, nor you to the authority of
that. Thus you see he confesses that his adversary was not tied to the
authority of the great Nicen Council: comparabl^ to the which no Council was
ever yet. Yea, S Hillarie was nothing afraid to be condemne^ in many Councels.
Hillar. cont. Auxent. and Arrian.
Now let him gather wha^ Councels he will against me (says he) and openly
proscribe me for an Heretic, as he had often done. The Arrians in 26 years,
Eusebius. li. 7. cap. 5.
gathered and framed sundry Councels for their purpose at Tyrus, Jerusalem,
Philippi, Sirmium, Ariminum, Sozom. li. 4. ca. 9.
Selucia, Constantinople, and two at Antiochia. In the Council of Millan,
above three hundred of the West Bishops consented, that Athanasius should be
thrust from his Bishopric. There was but five against three hundred, that
openly and plainly withstood it. And Leo writes of the famous Council of
Chalcedon, Tanquam refutari nequeat quod illicite voluerit multitudo; In Epist.
52. ad Anatholium.
As though that might not be refuted, which a multitude has unlawfully
decreed. Yea, Panor. de Elect. and electi potestate, c. significasti.
your own men have been of the same opinion with us. Panormitane, the best of
your Canonists; yea, a reverend Archbishop, and a renowned Cardinal says, A
Council may err, as otherwise, a Council has erred about marriage to be
contracted between the Rauisher, and the Ravished: and the saying of Hierome,
as being of the sounder opinion, was after preferred, before the Statute of the
Council. And the argument which Papists make, That the church should fail in
faith, if Councels should err, he rejects as frivolous, saying; Panor. ibid.
It hinders us little, if it be said, that a Council cannot err, because
Christ prayed for his Church, that it should not fail. For though a general
Council represent the whole universal Church, yet to speak truth, the
universal Church is not there precisely, but by representation; because the
universal Church consists of all the faithful. And this is the Church which
cannot err, etc.

Pighius Hiera^. eccl. li. 6. ca. 4. and 5.
Pighius says, it is certain, that Councels are not the universal Church. In
none of all the general Councels shall you find, the fathers to have arrogated
thus much to themselves, as to say they represented the Catholic Church;
besides these two last Councels of Constance, and Basil, which we now impugn.
And that General Councels may err, he says, Li. 6. ca. 13.
It is certain, that not only these Councels (of Constance and Basil) which
we now disprove, have shamefully and absurdly erred, but also many others. And
again, We find that General Councels, even of holy Fathers, have erred in
decrees of faith: for example of General Councels; The Council of Ariminum,
universal no doubt, and also the second Council of Ephesus, and that likewise
universal: These I say are witnesses, That even general Councels, and those
lawfully gathered may err. The Bishops that were present at Ephesus,
commplained after in the Council of Chalcedon, Chalced. Conc. Act. 1.
that they were threatened and forced. Now if Bishops may be forced, they may
likewise be circumuented, as they were in the Council of Ariminum; or deceived
in opinion, as they were in the Councels of Carthage, Constance, and Basil, by
the confession of learned Papists themselves. And if they may by all these
ways be perverted when they are assembled, Ergo, they may make both an
erroneous and an injurious conclusion. Wherefore, since it appears evidently
by this little that has been said, That General Councels are no infallible
rule, to build our faith on: What must we then do, to find out a sure
Ground, whereupon to ground our Religion?


Papist. The last, and only means, without all exception, is the Pope; whose
faith cannot fail, neither can he err iudicially. So that whether with the
Councels, or without the Councels, That which he determines and teaches is a
certain truth: That which he condemns is a manifest Error.


Protestant. 19 This answer does manifest to all that are not wilfully
blind, that what brags soever you make of Fathers and Councels, (who, as
Campian boasted in his ten Reasons, were al as sure on your side, as Pope
Gregory the thirteenth) that yet yet the Pope is the man, upon whom you ground
your Religion: neither esteeming Fathers, Councels, or the learned of your own
side, further than they may stand and concur with the Popes good pleasure;
which by this little Tract may evidently be deduced: For first, you ground your
Religion on the Word; the Word on the Fathers; the Fathers on Councels; and the
Councels on the Pope: So that in all the controversies between us and you, we
must stand to the censure of your Pope, who must be both Judge and party. And
if he give judgment on our side I will never trust him. But to overthrow this
pillar of Popery thoroughly, I will prove, that the Pope has erred iudicially:
^h^. Test. ^uk 22. ^ect. 11.
For albeit they confess, that the Pope may be an Heretic, yea, that Liberius
the Pope might yield in persecution; Marcellinus the Pope, for fear, might
commit idolatry; Honorius the Pope might fall to heresy, and more than all
this, that some Judas might creep into the office, as their Rhemists confess:
yet they distinguish between the person and the office. And as their last
shift and refuge having been driven by force of reason and examples, to
acknowledge thus much, They now insist upon this last anchor, as their last
hope to avoid shipwreck, That the Pope cannot err iudicially; that is, in
their Consistories, Courts, Councels, decrees, deliberations, or consultations
kept for decision and determination of such controversies, doubts, or Questions
of faith, as shall be proposed to them. Now what wrangling and shifting is
this, to ask for the place where, and the time when, the Pope decreed for
error? For if he may err at home, he may likewise err abroad. If the Pope be
an Heretic in his chamber, he cannot be a Catholic in his Consistory. And
if the Pope may believe, defend, and preach an error, what need we care
whether his sentence, be conclusiue, or perswasiue, definitive or
interlocutorie. And if you think that this idle distinction, can free your
Pope from his errors, because thy have not been definitiuely pronounced in
their public Consistories: we could name infinite Bishops and churches that
have not erred in this precise manner: For how can you prove that ever the
Bishops of York or Durham in England, of Poycters or Lions in France, of
Valeria or Corduba in Spain, of Rauenna or Rhegium in Italy, of Corinth or
Athens in Greece, of Miletus or Sardis in Asia, gave definitive sentence
against the faith, in their public Consistories? Infinite others might be
objected, against whom it could never be proved, that they have erred in this
kind: and therefore this cannot but be a strong Bulwark whereon you depend and
boast, That it cannot be proved, that the Bishop of Rome has erred,
iudicially, or definitiuely. For if Popes have erred in writing and teaching,
they were as right Heretics as ever were Arrius, Sabellius, Nestorius,
Eutiches, and such like; which never gave Definitive sentence against the
faith, in Courts and Consistories, but only taught or wrote, against the
truth. But this new Popery was not then, nor many years after found out;
though the quaint Jesuits, have of late refined their late Popery, to give a
color to the Popes privilege.

And albeit this were sufficient, yet will I briefly proceed and prove, that
the Pope has erred Definitiuely or Iudicially; as his Decretals which are
Definitive sentences shall evidently prove.

In Chronic. Supputat. Romanor. po^t. de Reg. ^tal. li. 6.
First Sigebert, Martinus Polonus, and Sigonius do witness that Pope Stephen
the 6. decreed in a Council, That they who were ordained Bishops by Pope
Formosus, were not ordained lawfully, because the man was wicked by whom they
were ordained. And he did not only deprive, and vnordaine them who were
ordained by Formosus, but he decreed too, as Sigebert notes, Ordinationes eius
omnes irrita^ esse debere decernit.
That all the ordainings of Formosus, ought to be void: And this, Page 42. 7*
Council Raven An. Do 898. Sigon. de Reg. Ita^ li. 6.
Master Heart against Doctor Raynolds confesses to be an error in faith. And
John the ninth in the Council of Rauenna, condemned Stephen and his Council,
and therein their new ordainings are forbidden, and matched with new Baptizings.

Pope Coelestine the third did set forth a decree, that, when of married
persons, one falls into heresy, the marriage is dissolved; and the Catholic
party is free to marry again: Mat. 19.9.
flat against the Scriptures.

And Alfonsus, Alfon. a Castro aduer. Haeres. li. 1. ca. 4.
a famous patron of the Papacy, does show, that he defined it. For, that
Pope Coelestine did err (says Alfonsus) about the marriage of the faithful,
of whom one falls into Heresy, It is manifest to all men: Neither was this
error of Coelestine such, as ought to be imputed to negligence alone; That
we may say he erred as a private man, and not as a Pope, who in defining of
any serious matter, should ask counsel of learned men. For this definition of
Coelestine was extant in the old Decretals, which I my self have seen and
read. Super quart. decretal. c. quanto de ^iuortijs. ^ Ide^ siquidem de
co^^ers. infid. c. audabilem. Gratia did. 9. c. in ^omi. ^drian in 4: ^ent. de
con^irma. ca. vlt. Gerson and Almain Pa^isie^ses The^logi. Decret. li 4. ^e
diuort. ^uanto. ^ Ibid. praedecessor. Decretal. li. ^. de de^o^sa duoru^ (...)
licet praeter.
And this is confirmed by Cardinal Hostiensis, who notes the very paragraph of
the Chapter, in the which it was, and speaks of it as a Decretall. And that
the Pope may err in judgment of faith, Gratian, Adrian, Gerson, and Almaine,
the Divines of Paris affirm. Innocentius the third, when he decided the cause,
confessed, that one of his predecessors had decreed otherwise; which, says the
Gloze, was Coelestinus: whose resolution was in the old Decretals, and it was
evil that Coelestinus said.

Alexander the third, in a matter of great importance, said, Quamuis aliter a
quibusdam praedecessoribus nostris sit aliquando iudicatum. Though some of our
predecessors have heretofore otherwise given judgment. And if you object (for
you will ever find some shift) that these were matters of marriage, and not of
faith: as though the seuering of those, whom God has joined, did not touch
the faith.

^e conse. ^istin. 2. Ego Beren.
Nicolaus the second, in a Council of 114. Bishops, appointed Berengarius to
confess, That the very body of Christ is in truth, and sensually broken, and
bruised in pieces with the teeth of the faithful. And this confession the Pope
received, allowed, and sent to the Bishops of Italy, Germany, and France, as
Catholic; which your own Gloze says, Ibid. c. dentibus.
is a greater heresy than ever Berengarius held, unless you understand this
of the outward forms of Bread and Wine, and not of the body of Christ.

Honorius the Pope did hold and teach the Monothelites heresy, 1. Tim. 3 16
Luke 22.42
who (whereas Christ is made our Savior and Redeemer, by that he does consist
of two natures, God and man; and as of two natures, so of two wills agreeable
to the natures) they say that Christ has but one will only, and by consequent
but one nature. The sixth general Council has handled the cause of the
Monotholite heretics, in 18. actions, as they are termed. In the first
action, the 8. and the 11. the heretics allege in their own defense, that
Pope Honorius taught as they do. In the 12. and 13. his writings are examined,
his heresy discovered, himself condemned and cursed. In the 16. 17, and 18.
Honor. ha^retico Anthema.
the sentence which was given against him, and the curse are repeated often,
again and again with acclamation of the Council: yea, the principal point of
his Decrees, Vid: Rayn^ ver. Heart ^ diu. 2. page 293.
set forth to teach the Church, was the Monothelites heresy: this is confirmed
by chief Papists.

Abbas Vrs^erg. Ann. 1080. ^a^ciculus ^er sciendar. ^n vita and ^est.
Hilde^randi.
Pope Gregory the 7. was condemned by the Bishops of France and Germany, as the
ancient disciple of the Heretic Berengarius, and swaruing from the true faith:
And in special words; This is Hildebrands Decree, in which he erred from the
Catholic doctrine and faith. Now let the indifferent Reader judge between you
and us, whether the Pope be a competent judge. But how may it appear, that to
him is committed so great a charge, and that his sentence is so absolute, that
all authorities of Scripture, Fathers, and Councels, must submit themselves to
his Censure?


Papist. The absolute authority of his Holiness is proved by many places of
Scripture; as, Thou art Peter, Mat. 16.18.
and upon this Rock will I build my Church: and, the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it: ^uk. 22.32.
and, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not: and, Thou being
converted, strengthen thy brethren: and, Feed my sheep: ^oh. 21.17
Feed my lambs. And many other places of Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels
do confer this special privilege upon Peter and Peter's Successors: By
which means, all Controversies whatsoever may be determined.


Protestant. This is strange Divinity, and stranger Logic: Christ said, Thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. Ergo, the Church is
builded only upon Peter and the Pope. The gates of hell shall never prevail
against the Church. Ergo, Peter and the Pope. are the Church, against which the
gates of hell shall not prevail. I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith
fail not: Ergo, whatsoever is determined by the Pope is not subject to error.
And Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep. Ergo, he made him supreme head of
the Apostles: Or thus, Christ did charge Peter to feed his sheep: But the
Apostles were sheep of Christ; Ergo, he had the charge of feeding them also,
and so had absolute authority. Now to make you see the folly of this manner of
reasoning, observe this argument, and you shall by that means easily discern
the weakness of your own reason; Christ did charge his Apostles to preach
the Gospel to every creature: But Peter was a creature; Ergo, they had charge
of preaching to him also. And this must needs ouersway your reason, if a man
would play with words: For Christ said not to Peter, feed al my sheep: but he
said to ye Apostles, preach to every creature. And if these consequents be
good, then is it an easy and a safe way to decide all differences, and we
might well have spared all these pains: for it will necessarily follow, that
if the Pope cannot err in any point of doctrine or discipline of the Church,
then the Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels, are superfluous: Act. 15.
Neither is that Gloze to any purpose, that the Rhemists make; That the various
means of determination, trial, and declaration of the truth, is necessary
for the recovery of Heretics, and for the contentation of the weak; who not
always giving over to one man's determination, will either yield to the
judgment of all the learned men, and Blshops of all Nations, or else remain
desperate. For since there is so variable censures of Councels: Aene. Sylu. de
Council. Basil. contr. Flor. and Ferrar. in Conc. indict. Council. Constable. Sess.
4. and. 5.
some holding the Pope to be above the Council; and some holding the Council
to be above the Pope; If this point be soundly proved, That Peter's See has so
the assistance of the holy Ghost, that it cannot err: all other causes of the
necessity of Fathers, or learned Bishops of all Nations, is superfluous: for
if the privilege of not erring belong to the Pope and his successors; why is
it made common to them, with the rest of the Church? If it appertain to the
whole Church, why is it appropriated to the Pope? But why do they bring
Scriptures to prove this special privilege, to belong to the Pope: Seeing
Canus and Bellarmine, two great Champions of the Romish Church do both
confess, that It is not in the Scripture, but by Tradition, that the Pope has
this supremacy. Locor. Theolo. li 6. c. 8.
First Canus does grant, That it is not written in the Scriptures, that the
Pope succeeds Peter in the supremacy. And Bellarmine the great Jesuit
says, That whereas Canus thought, that the stories have sufficient ground to
convey Peter's right unto the Pope; because they say, Peter set his chair at
Rome, and there died: yet says he, Controu. 4. q. 5. de pont. finitae. 26.
Maij. An. 1578.
if learned men shall not allow of that, Another ground may be, that the
Church received it, though not by Scripture, yet by Tradition. And to put the
matter out of controversy, he defines, that indeed it is a Tradition, not of
Christ, Licet Romanos Episcopos Petro succedere in sacris libris no^ habeatur
Scriptum: ab Apostolis tamen Ecclesiae quasi per Manus Traditum est. Romanum
pontificem esse Petri successorem in pontificatu totius orbis habetur
extraditione Apostolica: etri.
but of the Apostles: and lest we should doubt of which of the Apostles, he
names the man, Peter; even a tradition of Peter. And therefore if you will
follow the judgment of this learned Jesuit, which you all receive with so
great applause, then renounce the unlearned follies of your Rhemists and
others, who violently wrest the Scriptures, to prove the Popes privilege. For
when you urge these places, Thou art Peter, and on this rock, etc. and, I have
prayed for thee Peter; and, Peter, feed my sheep; You presume much of the
simplicity of your hearers: otherwise you would never reason so absurdly. For
though Stapleton, and some others upon the 16. of Matthew. by these words; Thou
art Peter, etc. allege the first Popes of Rome, most holy martyrs, to prove
the Popes Supremacy, by the Scriptures: and do reckon up Anacletus, Alexander
the 1. Pius the 1. Victor, Zepherinus, Marcellus, Melchiades, Locor. Theolo.
li. 6. c. 8 Bellar. cont. 4. q. 5.
Julius, and others; yet does Canus and Bellarmine prove, that it is grounded
on Tradition; and Canus does cite for witnesses thereof, the first Popes of
Rome, most holy martyrs. And the same Popes which are alleged by Canus, to
prove the Supremacy, to be an unwritten truth; the very same Popes are
alleged by Stapleto^, to prove, that, It is written: even Anacletus, Victor,
Zepherinus, Marcellus, Melchiades and Julius: yea, the very same Epistles are
alleged by Stapleto^, which are alleged by Canus. Now if they be rightly
cited by Canus, how may we trust Stapleto^? if rightly by Stapl. how may we
trust Canus? if rightly by both, what trim Popes are they, ye with one breath
do say, That the same thing is both written and unwritten. But the Jesuit
deals more warily: who seeing the danger of naming special men and places,
does shrowde himself in the general terms, of Councels, Popes, and Fathers.

Thus you see how the Lord does sheath the swords of the Madianites in their
own sides. Judge. 7.22.
But let us see how ye Fathers understood these Scriptures that are brought to
privilege the Pope from erring, and set down their sayings at large, though
we have briefly before in the 14. Question, part 3, urged their authorities.
Aug. de ver. Domini secundu^ Mat. sermon. 13.
S. Augustine expounds the first place thus; Thou art Peter, (says Christ)
and upon this Rock, which thou have confessed, upon this Rock, which thou
have acknowledged, by saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, will
I build my Church; that is, upon my self, the Son of the living God, will I
build my Church; I will build thee upon me, not my self upon thee. S. Hillary
says, Hillar. de Trin. li. 30
This only is the immovable foundation, This only is the happy rock of
faith, which was confessed by Peter's mouth, Thou art the Son of the living God:
Then upon this rock of confession, stands the building of the Church.

Ambr. in 2. ca. epist. ad Ephe.
Saint Ambrose says, The Lord says to Peter, Upon this rock will I build my
Church; that is in this confession of the Catholic faith. Faith therefore is
the foundation of the Church: for it was not spoken of Peter's flesh, but of
faith, That hell gates should not prevail against it: but that confession
conquered hell.

Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in Mat.
Chrysostom says, Upon this Rock will I build my Church; that is, upon this
faith and confession.

Bed. in ca. 21. Johan.
Bid likewise, Upon this Rock which thou have confessed, will I build my
Church. That Rock was Christ, upon the which foundation, even Peter himself
was to be builded.

1. Cor. 3.
These Fathers mean as Saint Paul does, saying, Another foundation can no man
lay, than that which is already laid, which is Jesus Christ.

Others there are of the Fathers, that apply this rock to Peter; but not as
though he alone were the foundation, but including the rest with him. Hiero.
lib. 1. aduer. Iouin.
As for example; Saint Hierom says, Thou will say the Church is built on
Peter: notwithstanding the self same in another place is done upon all the
Apostles, and they all receive the Keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the
steadfastness of the Church, is equally settled upon them.

Origin says, If only upon Peter, Origin. in 16. Math. Tract. 1.
thou think the whole Church to be built, what will thou say to John, and
every of the Apostles? shall we dare say, that against Peter only, the gates
of hell shall not prevail? And that also upon this Rock I will build my
Church: For if this speech, To thee will I give the Keys of the kingdom of
heaven, be common to all; why then should not all that which goes before and
follows after, as spoken to Peter, be common to them all?

The next place is, I have prayed for thee Peter, etc. What then? shall we
conclude hereof, that Peter and his successors cannot fail in any point of
faith, wherein they give definitive sentence; and, that the Pope cannot err
iudicially? No, but hereby is meant a lively Christian faith, which is not our
private exposition (as they commonly object against us) but the judgment of
Austin, Aug. de correp. and gratia ca. 8. Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in Mat. and 72. in
John. Prosper de vocatione gent. c. 24. Theoph. in Luke 22.
Chrysostom, Prosper, and Theophilact; who all do understand by faith in that
place, a lively Christian faith, and say, That Christ prayed, that Peter might
continue therein to the end: which grace, neither they nor any Father says,
that all the Popes have: Nay, your Doctors, Turrec. in sum, de eccle. ca. 12.
Can. locor. Theo. li. 6. cap. 1. Bellar. cont. 4 par. 2. q. 1. In annot. Luke
22. Bed. in Gal. 2 Theophil. in Luc. 23. Chrysostom. in Mat. Ho. 83.
Turrecremata, Canus, Bellarmine, and your Rhemists confess the contrary: As I
(says Bid, speaking in the person of Christ) have by prayers protected thy
faith, lest by temptation of Satan it should have failed: so thou also
remember, to lift up and comfort thy weak brethren, by example of thy
repentance, lest peradventure they should despair of pardon. And our Savior
Christ did by these words, put him in mind of his fall, to cool the heat of
pride and vainglory, if I may so say with Theophilact and Chrysostom.

Fulk. in Rhem. Test. in Luk 22. Sectin.
And S. Basil cites this text, to prove, that we ought to pray for them, that
are sought in temptations. In these words you see, are taught the duty of
Peter, and of every Christian man, in the like case; and no prerogative either
for Peter, or his successors. And upon that place, Feed my sheep, the Fathers
build no prerogative of Peter, but rather do interpret it of his love and duty;
as S. Augustine, Aug. 123. in Ioh Tract. Cyril. li. 12. ca. 46. in Ioh.
Chrysostom. in Ioh. Ho. 87.
Cyril, and Chrysostom do expound ye place; where, to a threefold denial, is
rendered a threefold confession, lest his tongue should be less serviceable to
love, than it was to fear. And there is a reason given according to the
Scripture, why Peter should love more, because he had offended more; for to
who^ more is remitted, he ought to love more, as Cyril says. So that out of
the judgment of these Fathers, Peter's offense to be greater than the rest, may
better be proved, than any prerogative to Peter or the Pope: Fulk. in The.
Test. in Ioh. 21, sect. 4.
see their testimonies more largely set down by D. Fulke against the Rhemists:
yea, this point is so clear, that it is confirmed by the testimony of chief
and learned Papists themselves.

Alfonsus says, Alfons. li. 1. ca. 4, cause. 24. q.
Every man may err in faith, even the Pope himself: and the same is
confessed, by the best of your side, both Canonists and Divines. De Flect. C.
Significast.


Panormitane says, A Council may condemn the Pope of Heresy, as appears in
in the 40. did. ca. Si Papa. where it is said, That the Pope may be an
Heretic, and judged of Heresy.

Alfonsus says, The Pope may err in faith: Alfons. li. 1. cap. 7.
as the truer opinion is, even of them that favor the Popedom very much,
Among whom is Innocentius, the 4. of that name, Bishop of Rome, writing upon
the first Chapter de trinitate.

Arboreus, Theosoph. li. 4, cap. 32.
a Doctor of Paris and one of your chief Sorbonistes says, The Pope may err
in faith: And he seems to me to be in foul Error, that thinks otherwise.
Surely they but flatter the Bishop of Rome, that make him free from falling
into Heresy and Schism.

Gerson, the Chancellor of Paris says, The Pope may swerve from the faith,
Gerson. in Tract. An liceat in causa fidei a pontifice appellare. Panor. apud
Syl. de fide 9.

Syluest. de ecclesi. 4.


as well as an other Bishop.

Panormitan says, Thus must the Gloze be understood, which says, that the
Church cannot err, is not the Pope, but the congregation of the faithful;
that is such as hold firmly that doctrine, which S. Peter, with other people,
taught.

And the Popes own Gloze upon his Decrees, does describe the Church which
cannot err, Can. 14. q. 1 Can. A recta in gloss.
to be the Congregation of the faithful; saying, I ask thee, O Pope Lucie, of
what Church thou understand that, which thou tellest us in this place, to
wit, That the Church cannot err: for if thou understand it of the Pope
himself, it is very certain that the Pope may err. I answer therefore, that
the Church is here taken for the congregation of the faithful: and such a
Church cannot err.

Lyrain Mat. ca. 6.
Lyra says, Many Popes have proved Apostates. But what need I to descend to
particulars, to prove that the Pope may not only err in doctrine, but also be
an heretic? since it is a ruled case by your Schoolmen and Canonistes: As, in
dial. p. 1. li. 6. ca. 1.
Occam, In summa. lib 5. Tit. de Haeret.
Hostiensis, Summa de eccles. li. 2. ca 93. and 112.
Turrrecremata, De Schismat. pont.
Zabarella, De concord. Catho. li. 2. cap. 17.
Cusanus, Summa part. 3 Tit. 22, cap. 7.
Antoninus, Aduers. Haer. li. 1. ca. 2 and 4.
Alfonsus, Locor. Theol. lib. 6, cap 8,
Canus, De visib. Monar. li 7.
Sanders, Contro. 4. p 2. qu. 1.
Bellarmine, Canonist. in distinct. 40, si Papa Archid. and Johan. Andrae. in
fidei de Haereticis in Sext. Caietan de authoritat. Pap. and Conc. cap. 20. and
23.
and others, Did. 40. si Pa,
yea, the Canon law it self, Synod. Roma. quint. sub Symacho.

Math. Paris. in Henrico 3. sub. Anno 1253.

Mathaei Chroni. in An. 1409.


yea, A Council, a Roman Council confirmed by the Pope do grant it.

But to conclude this point, wherein it may seem, I have been too tedious:
Six hundred prelates, 124. Divines, and almost three hundred Lawyers, with the
whole College of Cardinals, in your general Council of Pisa, deposed two
Popes, Gregory the 12. and Benedict the 13. Naucler. Chronogr. genera. 47. Anno
1409.
as Schismatikes and Heretics. Your Council of Constance, whereas you say were
Genebrard. li: 2. Chronograph. Anno 1414.
4. Patriarchs, 29. Cardinals, 47. Archbishops, 270. Bishops, 564. Abbots and
Doctors; in all above 900. deposed the same Benedict (persisting in his
Popedom notwithstanding the former sentence) as being Schismaticum and
Haereticum etc. A Schismatike, Conc. Constant. Sess. 37
and an Heretic swaruing from the faith, and a wilful notorious, and manifest
subuerter of the Article of our faith, One holy Catholic Church. Now, can
there be any doubt, that these Popes were never comprised in that prayer,
which Christ made for Peter? Or that hell gates have not prevailed against them?
When Pope Marcellinus did offer sacrifice to idols, as appears in ye Synuessan
Council, Pope Liberius subscribed to the Arrians, as is testified by S. Hier.
and confessed by Nicholaus Cusanus, and Alfons. de Castro, both Papists, and
great schoolmen. Pope Syluester the 2. was a Necromancer and a Co^iurer, as
Stella, Platina, Petrus Praemo^strate^sis, Nauclerus and Antonius do witness.
And Pope Anastatius was a Nestoria^ Heretic, Li: 1. de Haerca* 4
as is witnessed by Alfons. de Castro. And many such instances might be proved
out of their own stories. Thus you see, in what sense soever ye Papists
understand the Church, it is proved, That it may err. Wherefore, are you not
singular men, to abuse both the scriptures, Councels, and Fathers, yea, and
your silly seduced followers, with such co^clusions? Are these good consequents
at Rhemes: Peter was set over the Church, or made Pastor of the Lords flock:
Ergo, none but Peter? Even so may you reason with much more warrant from the
scriptures, to prove the supremacy to be in Paul; For he says, 1, Tim: 1.^^
The glorious Gospel of the blessed God which is committed to me. Ergo, to none
but Paul. Yea, he says, 2, Cor: 11, 26
The care of all Churches were committed to him. Ergo, to none but him. This
had been a pregna^t place for the Papists, if it had been spoken of Peter;
according to such inferences as they make. And to urge you a little further: It
is your manner in the Rhemes Test. to say often, All the Fathers say this and
this, and I know you brag much of them, That you can prove all the doctrine
you hold, by them: I pray produce their joint consent to prove, That all
controversies are to be determined by the Pope; Or that he cannot err; Or,
that he must summon Councels; Or that they are of no authority, unless they be
confirmed by the Pope. All this is Catholic doctrine with the Papists: and yet
I think they cannot name any one Father that is ancient (and not counterfeit)
to confirm thus much; or to auowe any of these points. Is it not strange
therefore, that you should reject the Scripture, which is the only rule of
faith, to build your Religion on such uncertainties, as in this small Tract
has been declared and showed? This, Gerson, a learned Papist saw, and
therefore he says, Gers prim^l part. de exa. doctrine. considerat. 5.
That there is more credit to be given to one man, learned in the Scriptures,
and having them of his side, than either to the Popes sentence, or to the
decrees of a general Council. This made Cardinal Caietane say, In praef.
comment in libr. Moyse.
That God has not tied the exposition of the Scriptures unto the senses of the
Fathers: And that if he fall upon a new sense agreeable to the Text, though
it go against the stream of the Fathers, he does advise the reader not to
mislike it. Andrad. defensi fidei Trid. li. 2.
This made Andradius the defender of the Tridentine Council, to defend Caietan
against Canus; saying, That experience forces us to confess (unless we will
be unthankful to most excellent wits) that very many things in Moses and the
Prophets, are in this our age, expounded more exactly, (through the diligence
of learned men) than ever they were before. And concludes, that the holy
Ghost, the only and faithful interpreter of the Scriptures, would have many
things to be known to us, which our ancestors knew not. And has wrought by
means (unknown to us, known to him) that the Fathers noted good and godly
mysteries, out of very many places of the Scripture, whereof the right and
natural sense, has been found out by the posterity. Thus you see, that if
we be deceived, Scriptures, Popes, Councels, Fathers, and learned and chief
Papists have deceived us, who have taught the same truth that we defend.


Papist. Well: What colors soever you bring, of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels,
Popes, and learned men of our own side, yet this is an undoubted position,
that unless you maintain, that the Church cannot err; and that thereby you
understand the definitive sentence of the Pope, you bereave your selves of all
means, to settle your selves in the unity of faith: neither have you any
means to end controversies. For leaving every man to his own private
exposition, whiles one expounds the Scriptures one way, and another another
way, This sense is plain in the exposition of the one: That sense is
contradicted by the opinion of the other; there can never be end of these
differences. And therefore there must be some Tribunal on earth, where truth
may be found at all times, and of all men, that be willing to seek for it:
Otherwise there should be no stay for Religion, nor end of contention; every
man pretending his faith to be truth, and no man having authority to decide
which is truth: which were most absurd. And therefore since you must of
necessity yield to have a Judge for avoiding so great inconveniences: who can
be fitter than the Pope, and the Church?


Protestant. This is Redire ad vomitum; and for the avoiding of a less fault
to fall into a greater: Since it is proved, in every sense, where you have
taken the Church, That it may err. And therefore how much better were it, that
there should be continual disagreement, about matters of Religion, than to
maintain false doctrine. Saint Jude says, It was needful for me to write
unto you, Jude ver. 3.
to exhort you, that you should earnestly contend, for the faith which was once
given unto the Saints. 1. Cor. 11.19
And Saint Paul says, There must be Sects amongst you, that they that be
perfect may be known. For as we must respect Unity, so we must take heed,
that it be Secundum Iesum Christum, According to Jesus Christ, An unity in
verity: For better a diversity in unity, than an unity in Popery. And
therefore we are commanded, 1, Ioh. 4. 1, These. 5.
to try the spirits, whether they be of God. Try all things, and hold fast
that which is good. Ephesians. 5.
Be not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is. Be renewed in
your mind, Romans 12.
that you may discern what the good and acceptable and perfect will of GOD is.
Phi. 1.9.
This I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in
all judgment, that you may discern the things that are best. 1. Cor. 2.
He that is Spiritual discerns all things. These exhortations were not
given by the Spirit of God in vain; which of necessity must follow, if you
debar all Christians (other than Clergy men) to be discerners of truth. And
it is evident by the Scriptures, that there is a limitation, how far the
Bishops and Clergy, are to be obeyed, and what they are to teach. For S. Paul
says, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. 1, Cor. 7.
So that he requires no more of the Corinthians, than to follow him as he
follows Christ. And this made him so diligently to distinguish the precepts
of Christ, from his own Councels, To the married I command, not I, but the
Lord: and to the rest I speak and not the Lord. And our Savior Christ, when
he gave commission to his Apostles, He bids them, Mat. 28.19, 20.
Go teach all nations: but what? To observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you. And therefore Chrysostom alleging the words of Saint Paul;
Chrysostom. in 1. ca. 2, Epist. ad Tim. Hom. 2.
Obey your Overseers or Prelates; does thus limite them: But if he pervert
any point of faith, though he be an Angel, obey him not. And straight after,
We must not obey Paul himself, if he speak any thing of his own, or as a
man; but we must obey) the Apostle bearing Christ about, that speaks in him.
It is not lawful (says Tertullian) to devise any thing of our selves, Tertul.
de praescrip. advers. Haeret.
nor to follow that which others have devised: we have the Apostles of the
Lord for our Authors, who devised nothing of their own heads, but delivered
faithfully to the nations the doctrine which they received of Christ.
Therefore, though an Angel from heaven should preach otherwise, we should
count him accursed. Chrysostom. operis imper. Ho. 20. in 7. ca. Mat.
Every teacher is a servant of the Law, because he may neither add of his
own sense unto the Law, nor according to his own conceit take any thing from
the Law, but preach that only which is found in the Law. And these
instructions both of Fathers and Scriptures, were to little purpose, if we
were not by them taught, how to eschew the evil and follow the good. And
surely if the Vicars Consistory and Seat, In Luc. 12.
were infallible, as the Rhemists affirm; what need we respect or study to
know, the infinite Testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers, brought to this
purpose? But this does not prove that they are privileged and exempted from
Erring. For the Scriptures which were written for our instruction, do plainly
convince, that both Priests and Prophets have erred: For God by the Prophet
Malachie describes what the Priests should do, and what they had done. The
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mala. 2.
and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the
Lord of hosts. But ye are gone out of the way (O ye Priests) ye have caused
many to fall by the Law, ye have broken the covenant of Leui, says the Lord of
hosts. And this proud privilege, which the Popes now challenge, was claimed
by the wicked Priests in Ieremies time. Come, Iere. 18, 1^.
(say they) let us imagine some devise against Jeremy: for the Law shall not
perish from the Priest; nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the
Prophet. But God assures them by his Prophet, Ezech. 7.2^
for their arrogant presumption; That the Law should perish from the Priest,
and counsel from the ancient. What gross idolatry Vriah the Priest
committed, to please King Ahaz, 2, King. 16.10.11. Esaias ^8.
the Scriptures will tell you And Esaias says, The Priest and the Prophet have
erred, they have gone away, they fail in vision, they stumble in judgment.
And we know there have been many Bishops, and those orderly succeeding, if
you look to their dignity, not to the doctrine, who have been heretics, as
Berillus, Paulus, Samosatinus, Photinus, Nestorius, Dioscorus, Petrus Apameus,
Sergius, Cyrus, Theodorus, Macarius, And many others, Canonically succeeding in
Seats and Churches of no small account. And if these fell into pestilent
heresies; that which was often and easy then, is contingent and possible
still: And succession which saved not them from erring, cannot defend our Popes
from the like danger. And therefore are we forewarned, and taught by the
Scriptures, to beware and take heed of such men: For S. Paul says, Act^ 20.
Out of your selves shall arise men, speaking perverse things, to draw
disciples after them. And the Lord when he says, Beware of false Prophets,
Mat. 7.
notes, that there shall be Prophets by their calling, which shall be found
false in their teaching: As Saint Peter also witnesses; 2, Pet. 2.
There were false Prophets among the people (of the Jews) even as there shall
be false teachers amongst you. And to what purpose are these, with many other
testimonies? but to teach us that we must distinguish godly teachers, not by
office, but by doctrine. And if there were not an ability in us, in some sort
to discern them, in vain were we taught to beware of them: neither had the
men of Berea been so highly commended for the trial of their Pastors doctrine,
Acts 17.11
if it had either been unlawful, or not their duty so to have done. But it
seems the Papists insist much upon the outward quiet of their Church, holding
out this Buggebeare, That the Church cannot err: assuming thereby to be lords
of scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and all when they list: But what heretical
Church, may not have the same quietness upon the same persuasion? and yet it
preuailes in none, but those that can be persuaded; That this false privilege
of not erring, belongs to the Church, taking the Church in the same sense which
the Papists in this Tract understand it; of Fathers Councels, and the Pope. And
who knows not, that notwithstanding your late Council of Trent, and diverse
other Councels, and learned books of all sides; That yet the controversies are
not ended, being indeed the never ending knotte of Religion: For though this
persuasion, That the Church cannot err, may sometimes breed an outward
quietness in the Church; yet it has no force to establish men in the unity
of Truth, since it may both deceive, and be deceived, as is in this Treatise
proved: Nor to end controversies, because all believe it not: nor to abolish
heresies, which many times it may favor, as is evident by some few examples,
both of Popes and Councels before alleged. For further example, put the case;
That some of the Church are persuaded, according to Christ's Institution, and
the practice of the Church of Corinth, that the Laity are not to be robbed of
the Cup, but are to receive the Eucharist in both kinds: and hereby call the
privilege of the Churches not erring into Question, how shall this be decided?
Shall it be sufficient for the Church or Pope to say I cannot err? and for
proof thereof, to call all his Cardinals, Abbots and Bishops to auow the same,
though it be contrary both to Scriptures, Fathers, and the long continued
practice of the Church of Christ: having never been prohibited as unlawful,
until the Council of Constance, which was 1400. years after Christ. But
Controversies may be ended, and heresies abolished, either by conuincing those
out of the Scriptures, that maintain them; as diverse heretics were, before
either Pope or Council were thought of: Or by the authority of the
Magistrate, commanding for truth, and inioining their silence and obedience; ^
Chro. 14.^, 3, 4, 5.
according to the examples of Asa the King of Judah; who commanded his people
to do according to the Law, ^ Chro. 29.
etc. And Ezechiah who restored the worship of God, and diverse other Kings in
the old Testament, 2. Chro. 17* ver, 3, 4, 5, 8. and ca. 19 ver. 4, 8, 9* 10,
11 etc 33. v. 11, 12 13, 15. and c^ 34. v. 3, 4, 7, 29.30, 3^ 32, 33. and c^
35. v. 1, 2, 3 4.5, 6.
as Iehoshaphat, Manasses, Josiah, and others, yea, Solomon did dedicate the
Temple in his own person and 1. King. 8. and ca. 2. v. 3
cast out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, and placed Zadok, in his
room. And Saint Austine in many places shows, Kings are charged with Gods
Law, in respect of commanding it to others. In the times of the Prophets (says
he) All the Kings, which in the people of God, did not forbid and overthrow
those things, Aug. Epi. 5
which were brought in against the commandments of God, are blamed: and they
that did prohibit, and subvert such things, are praised above the rest.

And for that part of the objection, that we leave every man to his private
exposition, (which though therein we are wrongfully charged by our
adversaries) yet the truth is; we challenge not to our selves (as the Papists
do) the true interpretation of the Scriptures, as if they were appropriated
unto us: But we submit our selves, and our interpretations whatsoever
(according to the General and received doctrine of the Fathers in that point)
to be compared and tried by the Scriptures: Or (to avoid your cauelling) if
you will, to the Church, which are men speaking by the Scriptures. Neither is
this part of the objection of so great weight or consequence, as it may seem
at the first blush. For most of the differences between us and the Papists,
are not touching the sense of the Scripture; seeing it is confessed by learned
Papists (as I have proved in the preface of this book) that most of the
doctrines wherein they vary from us, are grounded on Tradition. And all men of
reason know, that where there is no Text, there needs no Interpreter. All the
danger therefore, lies in the last part of the objection; when men's corrupt
affections, may take those things for truth which are not; and reject those
which are: a thing impossible to be prevented, since every man understands
according to the capacity and conceit whereof himself is. And herein
likewise is the doctrine of Christ verefied, as Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 4.3
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: For no man can
come unto me (says Christ) except the Father which have sent me draw him.
John 6.44.
1. Cor. 3.4, 6
Yea, Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but God must give the increase. For
though the Sun be of most excellent brightness, yet none can see it, but
those which have eyes: even so is it of the Scriptures, which as Saint Peter
says, They that are unlearned and unstable, 2. Pet. 3.16.
do pervert to their own damnation. But shall we leave the Trial of the
Scriptures (to which all the Fathers refer us) either because many pervert
them; or, for that the devil alleged them; or, for that it is common to all
Heretics to make challenge and boast of them? No: for all Heretics have been
(by the Scriptures rightly understood) confuted and confounded: yea, even the
devil himself, Mat. 3.7.
as Christ's own example teaches us, was convicted by the same weapon,
wherewith he thought to have vanquished our Savior. But to make this plain
by example, what Lawyer will offer to defend a badde cause, but he will bring
Law for his purpose: and shall this debar or prejudice the other that
pleades against him, That he shall not by Law convince the Errors, and
Sophistries, or Quirkes and Quiddities which are brought against him? Nay,
rather any man of judgment, (having heard both parties) will readily
distinguish, and say; The one makes a a show of Law, but the other has Law
indeed.

And even thus it rests in those controversies, that are between us and the
Papists, touching the Sense of the Scripture only: and not for those
differences which the maintain by Tradition: Petr. ^ Soto. adu. Brent. Canisi.
in catechi. ca. 5. Lindan in pan. li. 4. ca. 100. Peresius par. 3. The. Test.
Gal. 2. sect. 4
which by the judgment of their own men, as I have already showed, are the
greater number. And albeit the Rhemists would insinuate, That the controversies
between us are, whether the Judge, or the Evidence be of greater authority,
yet that shift will not serve them: for all men of judgment know, that that
is not the question between us. But the difference is, whether the Judge, or
the Law be of greater authority: where every wise man will grant, the Law
to be supreme; whereunto the Judge is to obey, and according to which to give
his sentence: or else by the Law, his erroneous judgment is to be reuersed.
Neither is there other Judicial authority in the Church, than in the common
wealth: which is to determine controversies according to the Law, and the true
meaning thereof. And if there be question of the Sense of the Law, The
Lawmakers mind is to be discussed by his words, and the circumstances and
occasions of making the Law. And even so the meaning of the Scripture is to be
taken only out of the Scripture, as Clemens says, ^i^. 37. ca. ^elatum.
You ought not to seek a strange and foreign sense without the Scriptures,
that you may confirm it by any means by the Scriptures: But sense of truth
you must take out of the Scriptures themselves.

Saint Augustine, Confess. Aug. praef. ad lecto.
whose doctrine your selves do acknowledge, to be grounded on the laws, the
manners, the judgments of all the Catholic Church; whom you call, a witness
of the sincere truth and Catholic Religion, such a witness as no exception
can be made against: who assures you as you say, not only of his own, but
also of the common, the constant faith and confession of the ancient Fathers
and the Apostolic Church: This Augustine has written four books of
Christian doctrine, wherein he purposely entreats how men should understand
the Scripture, and expound it. The sum of all his Treatise does aim at this
mark, That Aug. de doct. Christ. li. 1. ca. 2.
the meaning of the Scripture must be learned out of the Scripture by the
consideration of things and words in it: That Ca. 35.
the end whereto, Ca. 37.
the matter whereof it is all written, be marked in general: Ca. 35. and 40.
and all be understood according to that end and matter: Li. 2. ca. 8
that all be read over and over: Ca. 9.
and those things chiefly noted, which are set down plainly, both precepts of
life and rules of belief, because that all things which concern belief and
life, are plainly written in it: That obscure and dark speeches be lightened
and opened by the plain and manifest: that to remove the doubt of uncertain
sentences, the clear and certain be followed: that Ca. 11.
recourse be had unto the Greek and Hebrew copies, to clear out of the
fountains if the translation be muddy: that Li. 3. ca. 2 and 3.
doubtful places be expounded by the rule of faith which we are taught out of
the plainer places of the Scripture: that Ca. 1.
all the circumstances of the text be weighed, what goes before, what comes
after, the manner how, Ca. 10.
the cause why, Ca. 17.
the men to whom, Ca. 18.
the time when every thing is said: to be short, that Ca. 27.
we seek to know still the will and meaning of the Author, by who^ the holy
Ghost has spoken: if we find it not, yet give such a sense, as agrees with
the right faith, approved by some oath place of scripture: C. 18.
If a sense be given, the uncertainty whereof cannot be discussed, by certain
and sure testimonies of scripture; it might be proved by reason, but this
custom is dangerous; the safer way far is to walk by the scripture, the which
(being shadowed with dark and borrowed words) when we mind to search, let
either that come out of it, which has no doubt and controversy; or if it have
doubt, let it be determined by the same scripture, through witnesses to be
found and used thence whersoeuer: that so (to conclude) Li. 4. ca. 3
all places of the scriptures, be expounded by the Scriptures, the which are
canonical, as being the Canon, that is to say, the rule of godliness and faith.
All which rules we confidently embrace. And we constantly affirm, that neither
he, nor any other ancient Father, did ever attribute the expounding of the
Scripture (for the true sense thereof) to any Pope or bishop whatsoever. And
although D. Stapl. except against these Rules of S. Austin, (which is common to
all Papists by special privilege, when the Fathers make against them) as I
have already partly proved; and shall appear to any yt for a clearer
manifestatio^ thereof, will take a view of their Index expurgator.) yet does S.
Austin justify himself, De doctr. Christia. li: 1 a Prolo.
saying, If they who know these precepts, cannot see the things which are
obscure and dark in the scriptures of God, the fault is in themselves not in
the precepts: as if I should point with my finger at a star, which they would
gladly see; and their eyesight were so weak, that although they could see my
finger, yet could they not see the star, at which I point: Let them (says
he) cease to blame me, and let them pray to God that he will give them
eyesight. And to the end I may give some proof of every thing I affirm, and
to give a taste of the vile practice of the Papists: It shall not be amiss to
set down their own words, namely the judgment of the University of Doway,
approved by the Censors of the Council of Trent, concerning the book of
Bertram, according to the Decree of the Council; the Title, Vt liber Bertram,
etc. How the book of Bertram, Index expurg. 8. page ^1.
Priest, of the Body and Blood of our Lord, being amended, may be^ tolerated.

Although we make no great account of this book, and therefore we would not
greatly care, if either it were no where extant, or utterly lost: yet seeing it
has been already oftentimes reprinted, and has been read of most men, and
being prohibited by name, has been made known to all men: seeing also the
heretics do know of the prohibition thereof, by diverse Catalogues: and that he
was a Catholic Priest, and a Monk of the Abbey of Corbey, and was well-beloved
and reverenced not so much of Carolus Magnus as of Carolus Caluus, and does
help the story of that age: And seeing that in other ancient Catholic
writers, we bear very many errors, and extenuate them, excuse them, and very
often times by devising some pretty shift we deny them, Excogitato Commento.
and do feign some commodious sense unto them, when they are opposed aginst us
in disputation or in conflicts with the adversaries: we do not see, why
Bertram does not deserve the same equity and diligent Recognition; lest the
Heretics should Iangle against us, that we burn up and prohibit Antiquity
which makes for them: and therefore it is no marvel that so few things seem to
make for them, when we Catholics do so irreverently hiss out, and destroy
antiquity, which but in show dissenteth from us. Moreover we fear least this
book, not only by Heretics, but also by unruly Catholics (by means of the
prohibition thereof) may be read more greedily, alleged more odiously, and do
more hurt being inhibited, than if it were permitted.

And upon these considerations they take order, and show how this book at the
next printing, shall be falsified by adding, putting out, changing of the
Words and Sentences, and by perverting the whole scope and meaning of the
Author.

The last part of the objection is, that there must be some Tribunal on
earth, to judge which is truth: And in this Question, they reele sometime to
the Church, and sometime to the Pope, who they will have to be Judge of
truth; and that the Church, which sometime they entitle to the Pope, and
sometime to General Councels, are to be judge of the Scriptures. To this I
answer, That absolute Judge of truth can no man be; for God is truth, and of
God I trust no man may be Judge. The Son of God says of himself, John 14.
1. John 5.
I am truth; and S. John testifies, The spirit is truth. Therefore ye can be
no Judges of truth, unless you will be Judges of God. And, the Father has
committed all judgment to the Son; and, my judgment, John 5. and 8.
says Christ, is Just. Christ says, My sheep, hear my voice, They be no
judges of his voice, which is the Scriptures. A Judge of the Law, is no
obseruer of the Law, as S. James insinuates: and since the whole Church is
bound to obey the Law of God, Iam. ca. 4.
they be no judges of the law. S. Austin says, It is inferior to us, Aug. in
Psa. Idem de vera religio. ca. 31.
whatsoever we be Judges of. And again, The eternal Law of God, therefore, it
is lawful for clean hearts to know; it is not lawful for them to judge. Idem
co^fes li. 13. ca. 23.
And again, We must not judge of so high authority, neither of the book
which is thine, because we submit our understanding to it. Contr Crescon. li.
2, c. 31
And lastly, To the Canons of the scripture pertain certain books of the
Prophets and Apostles, the which in any case we may not dare to judge. And this
is ye reason, There may be no judge of Truth, where no danger of Error is. And
S. Austin says, Idem epist. 19. ad Hier.
It is wickedness to make a doubt (speaking of the scriptures) whether there be
any error in the^ or not. Therefore there may be no judges of them, but ye whole
Church must be subject to the^, and with all humility believe them. And yet
will ye Papists assume unto themselves, to be Judges of the scriptures; and
appoint which shall be Canonical, and which shall be Apocrypha? A Judge we grant
must have two things, before he be competent, namely, skill to discern, yt he
miss not the truth; and power to command, that his judgment may take place.
Now if he want either of these, he is no fit Judge. And that ye Pope has
neither of these, thus I prove. For the first I have proved he may err, and
therefore no man is bound to his judgment further tha^ it is agreeable to the
truth. And to add one proof more, the Council of Basil says, This
privilege, Conc. Basil. epist. Syno. 8
not to err, has not been granted by a common, or perpetual law to any: not
to the Angels, for many of them fell: not to our first parents, for they were
deceived: not unto the chief Bishops, for many of them are read to have fallen
into error and Heresy. And as it is absurd to refer the judgment to one
man: so is it also to entitle the church of Rome to be The Catholic Church;
since their chief Schoolmen and lights of the Papists, Petr. a Soto. contr.
co^fess. Wittenburg. ca. de Council. Alfo^s. a Castro aduer. Haer. li. 1. c. 8.
Co^f. Petric. cap. 24. and contr. Bre^t. li. 2. Disput. adu. Luther. tom. 6.
deauthoritat. and potest. universe. eccles. ca. 5. Ibid. ca. 1.
Sotus, Alfonsus, Hosius and Verratus, do witness, that any particular Church
may err. But that the Church of Rome is a particular Church the same Verratus
affirms, nor can the rest deem it.

And as he may err, so has he no power to command princes or others; but
only to propose the commandments of God unto them, as every Bishop must and
may by virtue of his vocation. Further authority by violence to compel, or by
corporal and external means to punish, no Prelate nor Pope has by the Law of
GOD: since that belongs to the Sword, which the Prince, and not the Pope
bears, Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
as Saint Paul witnesses, and also Peter: from whose right the Pope makes
claim to this superiority. But me thinks I still hear them object, that all
this while we appoint not who shall be Judges, or at least, Discerners of
Truth: And to that we answer, Let him that makes the claim undertake the
proof; for we find no place nor person to whom the Son of God has referred
us, for the right understanding of his will, but only to himself and the
Scriptures. And that you may know this is not our private opinion, (a slander
which you often object) learn what Optatus and S. Aug. has set down in this
case. Christ (says Optat.) has dealt with us as an earthly father is wont
with his children, Lib. 5. coni. Permenia. Donat.
who fearing lest they should fall out after his decease, does set down his
Will in writing under witnesses; and if there arise debate among the brethren;
they go to the testament. He, whose word must end our controversy is
Christ: let his Will be sought in his Testament. Which reason of Optatus, S.
Aug. urging against the Donatists, as he does often; We are brethren (says he
to them) why do we strive? Aug. in Psalm. 21. exposi. 2
Our Father died not intestate: he made a Testament, and so died. Men do
strive about the goods of the dead, till the Testament be brought forth: when
that is brought, they yield to have it opened and read: The Judge does
hearken, the Counselors be silent; the Crier bids peace; all the people is
attentive, that the words of the dead may be read and heard. He lies void of
life and feeling in his grave, and his words prevail: Christ does sit in
heaven; and is his Testament gainesayd? Open it; let us read, we are brethren:
why do we strive? let our minds be pacified: Our Father has not left us
without a Testament. He that made the Testament is living for ever. He does
hear our words, he does know his own word. Let us read: why do we strive?
Were not this a silly speech of S. Austin, if Traditions were to be received
with equal Reverence to the Scriptures? or that Councels or Popes had such
absolute authority? But it seems, S. Austin ascribed more to this Testament,
than to any Pope or Council whatsoever. And to conclude this point: Optatus in
the Question of the Catholics with the Donatists, whether one should be twice
baptized: Li. 5. contr. ^ermen. Do^at.
You (says he) say it is lawful: We say it it not lawful. Between your (it
is lawful) and our (it is not lawful) the peoples souls do doubt and waver.
Let none believe you nor us, we are all contentious men. Judges must be sought
for: if Christians, they cannot be given of both sides, for truth is hindered
by affections. A Judge without must be sought for. If a Panime: he cannot know
the Christian mysteries. If a Jew: he is an enemy to Christian baptism. No
Judgment therefore of this matter can be found in earth: a Judge in Heaven
must be sought for. But why knock we at heaven, when here we have the
Testament of Christ in the Gospel. Belike Optatus and S. Austin were not so
wise in those days, as our Jesuits and Papists are now: for they could easily
have put doubts and scruples, touching the sense of the Scriptures, and could
skilfully have enforced such objections as these, and in all doubts could
easily have assigned their Pope as an Absolute Judge. But it is evident by the
judgment of these two Reverend Fathers, that we can have no fit Judge on
earth: Ioh. 12.
God must therefore judge us by his word; To which all the Fathers do submit
themselves and their writings, as is before proved and alleged. Yea, we are
warranted by the Prophet Osea, to judge our Mother (as it is in the vulgar
Translation) and to contend with her that she is not the spouse of Christ: Hos.
2.
nor he her husband: that she may take away her fornications and adulteries
etc. as it is more at large in the Text. Thus have you seen briefly, A view of
the weakness of the Grounds whereon the Papists build their Religion: which in
a word is, The Popes good pleasure. And notwithstanding I have in this small
Tract laid down our just Exceptions, both against Fathers and Councels: yet
would I have none rashly to censure, that we reject all the Fathers and
Councels: for we embrace them, as wholesome means, by which great light has
been brought to the Church of God, both in the Exposition of the Scriptures,
and the abolishing and confuting of Heresies. But we reject with great reason
ye partiality that is now used in calling of Councels: which must now only be
done by the Pope: and of which he only must be President and Judge: contrary
to the order of the first 4. General Councels, which Gregory professes to
receive as the 4. holy Gospels: Neither is any thing of force that is now
decreed in Council, unless it be confirmed by the Pope: though in the first 4.
Councels the Pope was neither President by himself nor his Legates: neither
needed they his confirmation Besides, the whole order of Councels are now
inuerted by the Popes, contrary both to ye institution of the Apostles in the
first Council holden by them, ^ct. 15.22, ^3.
and to all antiquity. For now none must have determining voices but the
Bishops: and they must swear, and take this oath before they sit in Council:
the form whereof thus follows. ^ecret. li. 2. ^r. 24. ca. 4.
I (R.N.) will be faithful from henceforth to S. Peter, and to the holy Church
of Rome, and to my lord ( Boniface the Pope) and to his successors, chosen
Canonically, and I will be an helper to defend, against all the world, the
Popedom, or papal superiority, and the rules of the holy Fathers: So God me
help and the holy Gospel. According to that detestable clause annexed to the
Decrees of reformation in the Council of Trent, Ses. 7. in prooe. and Se^ 25.
de. Reformat. ca. vlt.
Salua semper in omnibus authoritate sedis Apostolicae; Provided always, that
the Popes authority be safe, and no way prejudiced. So that still he will
always have a non obstante, notwithstanding any law to the contrary, to break
through all laws, to do what he list. But to conclude, we acknowledge
according to the Scriptures, That there are two sorts of judgments in the
Church of God: The one private, and the other public: private, to all the
faithful and spiritual, 1, Cor. 2.15 and 10.15. Ioh. 4.1.
as God calls them, who are willed to judge of that which is taught, and to
try the Spirits whether they be of God. Public, to the asssmbly of the
Pastors and Elders: Act. 15.6. 1. Cor. 14.
for of that which Prophets teach, let Prophets judge: And the spirits of the
Prophets, are subject to the Prophets. In all which ye Scripture is the rule,
by which ye Church must be directed: neither has she other authority, than the
ministry of giving judgment: For the Sovereignty of judgment must rest on
Gods word. Mat. 22.10 Iam. 4.12.
For Christ is our only Doctor and Lawgiuer. The Lord open your eyes, that you
may see the Truth, and be thankful to God.


FINIS.
An Abstract of the chief Points of this book.
FIrst, That all the Fathers do with general consent attribute all sufficiency
to the Scriptures: making them the Rule of faith, and the absolute means to
determine all doubts and controversies; preferring them before the Church, and
all other writings of men whatsoever: and further, that the Church is no
otherwise to be showed or known, but by the Canonical Scriptures: and that
themselves, and their opinions, without the Scriptures, are not to be
believed, but rejected. See the Preface: and page 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 45. 46.
47. 52.

2 That the Scriptures are to be expounded by the Scriptures: and that we are
not tied for the exposition thereof to any Father, Council, or Pope. And that
no Papist can show the consent of the Fathers, that the scriptures are to be
expounded by any Father, Council, or Pope. See page 88. 89. 90. 91.

3 That the Fathers agree with us, taking the greater part, in approouing those
Scriptures, which the Protestants do, to be Canonical, and in rejecting those
which we do for Apocrypha. See page 4. 5.

4 That the Fathers take the word Tradition sometimes for the Scriptures;
sometimes for the Customs and Ceremonies of the Church: and the Papists, which
urge them for matter of doctrine unwritten, and to be of equal authority
with the Scriptures, do deprave the Fathers, making their doctrines contrary
one to another, yea, contrary to themselves. See the Preface.

5 That chief Papists, and pillars of Popery, have confessed, that many and
most of the doctrines wherein they vary from us, are grounded upon Traditions.
And that it is extreme madness to think, that the whole and entire body of
Euangelical doctrine is to be fetched out of the Apostolic writings, and out
of that little Book of the New Testament. In which doctrine, they go wholly
against the stream of the Fathers, and also discover their abusing of the
simplicity of their followers, when they make them believe the greatest
difference between them and us, is, touching the sense of the Scriptures:
whereas by this their confession, this consequent necessarily follows; That
where there is no Text, there needs no Interpreter. See the Preface.

6 That the Papists have uttered open blasphemy, in their books against the
Scriptures, in taxing them of insufficiency, in tearming them a Nose of wax,
Inkie divinity, dumb Judges, no better than Aesops Fables, without the
authority of the Church: That they take their authority from the Church; That
sometimes they are to be expounded one way, sometimes another; That the
Scriptures must follow the Church, and not the Church the Scriptures: preferring
the authority of the Church above and against the Scriptures. All which
blasphemies are refuted, not only by the direct texts of Scripture, but by the
general consent of the Fathers. See the Preface.

7 That the Papists urge the credit of the Fathers, for the receiving of
Traditions: and though there be many Traditions, which by the Fathers testimony
have the same authority to prove them to be Apostolic, that the others have:
Yet the Papists receive the one, and reject the other. See page 12. 13.

8 That the Fathers have held diverse errors: upon which it necessarily
follows: that if they might err in one thing, they might err in another:
And that their judgments are often rejected by the Papists, and therefore may
with as great reason be rejected by us: and consequently are no perfect Rule to
build our Religion on: which even the Fathers themselves confess. See page 20.
21. 22 23. 16. 17.

9 That there be many Counterfeits, that have usurped the names of ancient
Fathers: whereby it is hard to discern when a true Father, and when a false
speaks. And though some of these Fathers be censured for counterfeits, even by
the learned Papists themselves, and their Universities: yet do they allege
them against us in many of their books, (especially in the Rhemes Testament)
to give countenance to Popish errors. See page 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30.
31. 32. 33.

10 That the consent of the Fathers cannot be showed, (nay, scarce any ancient
Father) that all controversies are to be determined by the Pope: or, that he
cannot err: or, that he must summon Councels: or, that they are of no
authority, unless they be confirmed by the Pope. And yet are these doctrines
held Catholic by the Papists, and reputed the chief pillars of Popery. See
page 75.

11 That al those places of Scripture, which are brought by the Papists, either
to prove the Popes prerogative; or, the authority of the Church; or, that the
Church cannot err, are by the Fathers (writing purposely upon the same places)
expounded according to the Protestants sense given; and contrary to the sense
which the Papists give. So far are the Papists from proouing the general
consent of the Fathers, in expounding these Scriptures, which they commonly
object against us, (as, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church: and, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: Or, the promises
of the holy Ghost to be sent to the Church, to lead it into all truth: Or, To
thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of Heaven: Or, The Church is the
pillar and ground of Truth: Or, Tell the Church: Or, if he hear not the
Church, let him be to thee as an heathen, or as a Publicane: Or, whatsoever
thou bindest in earth, shall be bound in heaven: Or, any other place of
Scripture to the said purposes) to be on their side; as namely, that those
Texts should be meant of the Pope, General Council, or the Church of Rome.
See page 66. 67. 68. 69. 70.

12 That General Councels have erred, have been contrary one to another, have
been rejected by the Papists themselves; and so are no sure Rule to build our
faith on. See page 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55.

13 That the Popes, whom they would have to be supreme Judges in all
Controversies, have erred iudicially; have been heretics (as maintaining the
heresy of the Monothelites; subscribing to the Arrian heresy; to the
Nestorian heresy) have offered sacrifice to idols, have been Necromancers,
and Coniurers. See page 58. 59. 60. 61. 62.

14 That the Pope can be no competent Judge: and whereunto the Fathers refer
us. See page 93, etc.

LEt me request thee, Courteous reader, to take no^ice, that the Texts of
Scripture, and testimonies of the Fathers (cited by me in this Treatise) should
all have been set down in a different letter, from the rest of the matter
wherewith they are ranked; accordingly as you see performed in the Preface, and
in the later half of the book. Now, by means of my absence, and want of
direction given, in this point, it could not be discerned by the Printer, how
far the words of the Text and Testimonies (so to be distinguished) might
reach. And therefore I cannot but free him from that blame; as likewise ( 2. or
3. literal escapes only excepted) from imputation of any the faults hereunder
specified: some of them being committed, in my Copy; and the rest, through
difficulty and darkness of the hand, might easily be mistaken.

In the Text.
Page 5. line 7. for, allured: read allowed. page 8. l. 17. Trations,
Traditions. p. 11, l. 19. Priests: proof. p. 29. l. ^6. adds: alleges. p.
29. l. 17. tehimony: testimony p. 31. l. 2. for, 25: 15. p. 33. l. 7. fault:
fable. p. 40. l. 9. ch^ice: chief. p. 72. l. 8. cannot: which cannot. p. 89.
l. 1. sense: the sense.

In the Margent.
Page 7. for, De Bapt. c. 6. li. 1. read, De Bapt. cont. Don. li. 3. page 7.
prat. read pont. page 8. 1. These. 2. These. page 12. 1. Pet. 2.18. 1. Pet.
1.18. page 20. Aug. in Frut. Aug. in Enar. page 14. de fulta: de falsa. page
35. li. 1. cap. 22. li 1. cap 23. page 36. Tim. Tit. page 52. Epist. 16, 7.
Epist. 167. page 59. (against Pope Coelestine) C. laudab. de conuers. Infidel,
is omitted.


